CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF HAPEVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
CITY CHARTER 
RELATED LAWS 
And 
THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Ordained and Published 2006 
by Order of the 
Mayor 
and 
City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
HAPEVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Alan Hallman 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jo A. Cranford, Alderman 
Laura Murphy, Councilman at Large 
Ed Ray, Councilman, Ward I 
Lew Valero, Councilman, Ward II 
City Council 
____________ 
Mike Rast 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Murray J. Weed 
City Attorney 
____________ 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1981 Code, as supplemented through November 7, 2000, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1981 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The Code has been divided into two parts, The Charter and Related Laws and The Code of Ordinances. Part I has been subdivided into subpart A, The Charter, and subpart B, Related Laws, and Part II has been further subdivided into subparts A, B and C, being General Ordinances, Environment, Health and Sanitation, and Planning and Development. The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged within each subpart in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter, Article and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of three parts separated by a dash. The figure before the first dash refers to the chapter number; the figure before the second dash refers to the article number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the article. Thus, the second section of chapter 2, article 2 is numbered 2-2-2, and the sixth section of chapter 5, article 3, is section 5-3-6. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and article, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 9-2-1 and 9-2-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 9-2-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, or in the case of chapters placed at the end of the title embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the chapter, article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS CRL:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CRLCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX CRLi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared to be useful to either city personnel or the general public. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Mary Grace Tavel, Senior Legal Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Alice Shepard, Deputy City Clerk, Mike Rast, City Administrator, and Murray J. Weed, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hapeville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 2006. 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
CITY OF HAPEVILLE 
ORDINANCE NO. 2006-09 
AN ORDINANCE TO ADOPT A CODIFICATION OF THE CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF HAPEVILLE, GEORGIA INCLUDING THE CITY CHARTER; ZONING REGULATIONS; AND ALL OTHER ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF HAPEVILLE ADOPTED AND AMENDED PRIOR TO JANUARY 1, 2006; TO FURTHER READOPT ALL ORDINANCES ENACTED AFTER JANUARY 1, 2006 THROUGH JULY 11, 2006 FOR PURPOSES OF PROVIDING SUPPLEMENTS TO THE NEWLY BOUND CODE OF ORDINANCES; TO PROVIDE SEVERABILITY; TO PROVIDE PENALTIES; TO PROVIDE FOR REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES; TO PROVIDE FOR ADOPTION AND EFFECTIVE DATE; TO PROVIDE FOR CODIFICATION; AND TO PROVIDE FOR OTHER LAWFUL PURPOSES. 
    BE IT AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville and under the authority thereof: 
Section 1. 
    That the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered Ordinance No. 2006-09, which said section, reads as follows: 
    "Section a. The document entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia," a copy whereof accompanies this ordinance and is incorporated herein and made a part hereof, is hereby adopted and is intended to be, and shall be treated and considered as, a new and original comprehensive ordinance. 
    Section b. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature of Hapeville, Georgia, enacted on final passage on or before July 11, 2006, and not in the code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. Ordinances adopted in year 2006 from January 1, 2006 to July 11, 2006 shall be considered as adopted as official supplements to this codification and are not repealed by this Section. 
    Section c. The repeal provided for in section b hereof shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this ordinance; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance of the city promising or guaranteeing the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall this repeal affect any rights or franchise granted by any ordinance of the city to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc. any street or public way in the city; nor shall this repeal affect the present annual appropriation of the city, nor shall this repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing charges, fees, or taxes now due or accrued; nor shall this repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section d. The provisions appearing in this code, so far as they are the same as provisions or ordinances existing at the time of the effective date of this code, are intended, and shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
    Section e. Any and all additions or amendments to the code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and the city council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into the code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section f. A copy of the code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone authorized by the city, to insert in the designated places all amendments and ordinances which indicate the intention of the mayor and city council to make those provisions a part of the code, when those provisions have been reprinted in page form, and to extract from the code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the mayor and the city council. A copy of the code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine it and shall be considered the official Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
    Section g. As pages of the code are replaced because the matter contained on them shall have been repealed, amended or otherwise shall have been superseded or rendered obsolete or inoperative, the city clerk shall retain copies of the complete code so superseded, rendered obsolete, or otherwise rendered inoperative in a file so that the former provisions of the code may be readily available and easily found. The purpose of this section is to permit anyone desiring to do so to ascertain the precise status of any section of the code as any given date. 
    Section h. In case of the amendment of any section of the code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in the city charter of the code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section i. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of the code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner whatsoever which may cause the law of Hapeville, Georgia to be misrepresented thereby. 
    Section j. This ordinance and the bound Code of the Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia were physically present in Council Chambers and were identified to a certainty before adoption. 
    Section k. This ordinance ant the bound Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia are a public record. 
    Section l. This ordinance and the bound Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia is accessible to members of the public who are or may be affected by it through the Office of the City Clerk who shall maintain an official copy of the same. 
    Section m. This ordinance hereby and herewith gives notice of the public accessibility of this ordinance and the bound Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia." 
Section 2. 
a.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Ordinance are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the Mayor and Council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
b.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Mayor and Council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the Mayor or Council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance is mutually dependent upon any other section paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Ordinance. 
c.  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Ordinance shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the Mayor and Council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the Ordinance and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the Ordinance shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
Section 3. 
    Penalties provided for violations of this Ordinance are set out in Section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
Section 4. 
    All Ordinance and parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith and are hereby expressly repealed. 
Section 5. 
    This Ordinance adoption shall become effective upon its adoption by the Mayor and Council. 
Section 6. 
    The preamble of this Ordinance shall be considered to be and is hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set out herein. 
Section 7. 
    The Ordinance shall be codified in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia and the City of Hapeville. 
Section 8. 
    It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this Ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia and the sections of this Ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention. 
SO ORDAINED, this 11th day of July, 2006. 
CITY OF HAPEVILLE, GEORGIA 
___________ 
Alan Hallman, Mayor 
ATTEST: 
___________ 
Mike Rast, City Administrator 
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
___________ 
Murray J. Weed, City Attorney 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2002-03 Included 5 2010-01 Included 5 2010-02 Included 5 2010-03 Included 5 2010-05 Omitted 5 2010-06 Omitted 5 2010-07 Omitted 5 2010-08 Included 5 2010-09 Included 5 2010-10 Omitted 5 2010-11 Included 5 2010-12 Included 5 2010-13 Omitted 5 2010-14 Included 5 2011-01 Included 5 2011-02 Included 5 2011-04 Included 5 2011-05 Included 5 2011-06 Omitted 5 2011-07 Included 5 2011-08 Included 5 2011-09 Included 5 2011-10 Included 5 2011-11 Included 5 2011-12 Included 5 2011-13 Included 5 2011-14 Included 5 2011-15 Included 5 2004-19 Included 6 2012-01 Included 6 2012-03 Included 6 2012-05 Omitted 6 2012-06 Included 6 2012-07 Included 6 2012-08 Omitted 6 2012-09 Included 6 2013-02 Included 6 2013-03 Included 6 2013-04 Included 6 2013-05 Included 6 2013-06 Omitted 6 2013-07 Included 6 2013-08 Included 6 2013-09 Omitted 6 2013-10 Included 6 2013-11 Included 6 2013-12 Included 6 2013-13 Included 6 2013-14 Included 6 2014-01 Included 6 2014-02 Included 6 2014-03 Included 6 2014-04 Included 6 2014-05 Included 6 2014-06 Included 6 2014-07 Included 7 2014-08 Included 7 2014-09 Included 7 2014-10 Included 7 2014-11 Included 7 2014-12 Included 7 2014-13 Included 7 2015-01 Omitted 7 2015-02 Included 7 2015-03 Included 7 2015-04 Included 7 2015-05 Included 7 2015-06 Included 7 2015-07 Included 7 2015-08 Omitted 7 2015-10 Omitted 7 2015-11 Included 7 2015-12 Included 7 2015-13 Included 7 2015-14 Included 7 2015-15 Included 7 2015-17 Included 7 2015-18 Omitted 7 2015-19 Included 7 2015-20 Omitted 7 2016-01 Omitted 7 2016-02 Omitted 7 2016-03 Included 7 2016-08 Included 7 2016-10 Included 7 2016-11 Omitted 7 2016-12 Included 7 2016-14 Included 7 2016-15 Omitted 7 2016-18 Included 7 2016-19 Included 7 2016-20 Included 7 2016-21 Included 7 2016-22 Omitted 7 2016-23 Included 8 2016-26 Included 8 2016-29 Included 8 2016-33 Included 8 2016-34 Included 8 2016-35 Included 8 2016-36 Included 8 2017-03 Omitted 8 2017-04 Included 8 2017-05 Included 8 2017-06 Omitted 8 2017-09 Included 8 2017-10 Included 8 2017-11 Included 8 2017-12 Omitted 8 2017-15 Included 8 2018-02 Included 8 2018-01 Included 9 2018-03 Included 9 2018-04 Included 9 2018-05 Omitted 9 2018-06 Included 9 2018-07 Included 9 2018-08 Included 9 2018-10 Included 9 2018-11 Included 9 2018-12 Included 9 2018-13 Included 9 2018-14 Included 9 2018-15 Included 9 2018-16 Included 9 2018-17 Omitted 9 2018-18 Included 9 2018-19 Omitted 9 2018-20 Included 9 2018-21 Included 9 2019-01 Omitted 9 2019-02 Omitted 9  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS 
Subpart A - CHARTER 
ARTICLE I. - Incorporation, Powers, Boundaries 

Sec. 1-101. - Incorporation; name. 
    The City of Hapeville, Georgia, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Hapeville (hereinafter at times referred to as the "city"). The city shall be the legal continuation and successor to the city as heretofore incorporated; shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the city; and shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1-102. - General powers. 
(a)  The city shall have all the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities vested in the city now or hereafter granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution, by the General Laws of the State of Georgia, and by this charter. The city shall exercise and enjoy all powers of self-government not specifically prohibited by the Constitution, the General Laws of the State of Georgia, or by this charter, including all powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the city and of its inhabitants, and all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted as fully and completely as if these powers were enumerated in this charter. 
(b)  The city may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold any property, real and personal as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of any of its property; and may have a common seal and alter it at will. 
(c)  No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1-103. - Specific powers; certain powers enumerated. 
(a)  The city may acquire, construct, operate and maintain, by condemnation or otherwise, inside or outside the city limits, public ways, streets, sidewalks, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, sanitary landfill, sewers, drains, sewage treatment or waterworks systems, electrical or gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, flood control, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, areas and facilities, and any other public improvement. The city, by ordinance, may establish and enforce rules and regulations necessary to preserve order, peace, and dignity on any property or facilities so acquired inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  In addition to the powers now or hereafter granted to municipalities by law, the city shall have all powers enumerated in Appendix A of this charter which is hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  The City of Hapeville shall have and be authorized to exercise all redevelopment and other powers authorized or granted to municipalities pursuant to Chapter 44 of Title 36 of the O.C.G.A., the "Redevelopment Powers Law," as now or hereafter amended. These powers shall include, without being limited to, all redevelopment powers, the power to issue tax allocation bonds and incur other obligations without such bonds or obligations constituting debt within the meaning of Article IX, Section V of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and the power to enter into contracts with private persons, firms, corporations, and business entities for the period specified in such "Redevelopment Powers Law." 
(Ga. Laws 1990, Act No. 743, § 1) 
Sec. 1-104. - Construction of powers. 
    The powers of the city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Sec. 1-105. - Boundaries; official map. 
(a)  The corporate boundaries of the city shall be the same as those of the City of Hapeville as provided by law and existing on the effective date of this charter, or as hereafter lawfully changed. The city clerk shall maintain a current map and written legal description indicating the boundaries of the city. Photographic, types, or other copies of the map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The boundaries of the city are described in Appendix B of this charter which is hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
ARTICLE II. - The Mayor and Council 
CHAPTER 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 2-101. - Creation; number; term of office. 
    There shall be a mayor and council composed of the mayor and three (3) council members and one (1) alderman elected as provided in Article III of this charter for four (4) year terms of office. 
Sec. 2-102. - Qualifications of office. 
(a)  To be eligible for election as mayor, a person, at the time of qualification, must: 
(1)  Have attained the age of 21 years; 
(2)  Have resided in the city for not less than one (1) year immediately preceding the date of qualification for office and must continue in such residence during the term of office; 
(3)  Be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Meet any other requirements as may be established by general state law. 
(b)  To be eligible for election as a council member from a designated ward, a person, at the time of qualification, must: 
(1)  Have attained the age of 21 years; 
(2)  Have resided in the city for not less than one (1) year immediately preceding the date of qualification for office, and be a resident of the ward from which he qualifies for at least 30 days prior to qualification and must continue in such residence during the term of office; 
(3)  Be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Meet any other requirements as may be established by general state law. 
(c)  To be eligible for election as councilman-at-large and as alderman-at-large, a person, at the time of qualification, must: 
(1)  Have obtained the age of 21 years; 
(2)  Have resided in the city for not less than one (1) year prior to the date of qualification and must continue such residence during the term of office; 
(3)  Be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Meet any other requirements as may be established by general state law. 
Sec. 2-103. - Conflict of interest; interest in contracts. 
    It shall be unlawful for the mayor or any member of the council to be interested, either directly or indirectly, in any contract with the city on any public work or improvement, or in furnishing supplies of any kind for the use of the city, or in any transaction in any way involving the expenditure of the money of the city, except as may be approved in advance by the unanimous consent of the other members of the mayor and council. 
CHAPTER 2. - Powers of the Mayor and Council 

Sec. 2-201. - Legislative powers. 
    The municipal government of the city and all powers of the city shall be vested in the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall be the legislative body of the city. 
Sec. 2-202. - Execution of powers. 
    The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to provide for the execution of all powers, functions, rights, privileges, duties and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees granted by this charter or by state law. 
Sec. 2-203. - Independent audits. 
    The mayor and council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for more frequent or continuing audits as it deems necessary. Audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. The mayor and council may also provide for special independent audits of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the city. 
Sec. 2-204. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The mayor and council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office or agency of the city or any joint or independent commission, board or authority of the city. For this purpose, the mayor and council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence in the same manner as the Superior Court of Fulton County. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued in the exercise of this power by the mayor and council may be held in contempt by a majority vote of all members of the mayor and council and punished as provided for contempt of municipal court. Appeal to the Superior Court of Fulton County from a council contempt conviction shall be allowed as for any conviction in the municipal court. 
CHAPTER 3. - Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem 

Sec. 2-301. - Mayor; powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall have general supervision over its affairs. 
(b)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  See that the laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully carried out and executed within the city; 
(2)  Examine, audit and approve all accounts against the city before payment; 
(3)  Exercise the power of veto as provided in section 2-405 of Chapter 4 of this Article; 
(4)  Keep the council members advised from time to time of the general condition of the city; 
(5)  Recommend such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city; 
(6)  Preside over the meetings of the council, and call the council together at any time when deemed necessary by him; 
(7)  Vote on all matters when there is an equal division of the council members; 
(8)  Perform such other duties as required by the council. 
Sec. 2-302. - Mayor pro tem; election; term; duties. 
    The alderman-at-large elected as provided in Article III of this Charter shall serve as mayor pro tempore, and in the absence or disqualification of the mayor, he shall perform all the acts and duties vested in the office of mayor by law. In the event of a vacancy in the office of the mayor by reason of death, resignation or other cause, the alderman-at-large shall serve as mayor until a successor to the office of mayor is selected and qualified. 
CHAPTER 4. - Organization and Procedure 

Sec. 2-401. - Annual organizational meeting. 
(a)  The first meeting in January of each year shall be the annual organizational meeting of the mayor and council. 
(b)  At this meeting, any newly elected or reelected members of the mayor and council shall each qualify to take office by taking the following oath of office: 
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will truly perform to the best of my abilities the duties of (mayor or council member, as the case may be) by adopting and enforcing such measures as in my judgment shall be best calculated to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Hapeville and the common interest thereof." 
(c)  At the annual organizational meeting, the mayor and council shall make any appointments and selections as may be required by this charter or by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-402. - Rules, quorum; voting; journal of minutes. 
(a)  The mayor and council, by a motion approved by a majority vote of all members, may adopt any rules of procedure and order of business or amendments thereto that are consistent with this charter and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  A majority of the members of the mayor and council, including the mayor, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, but a number less than a majority may adjourn from time to time. All actions of the mayor and council shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the council members present unless otherwise required by this charter. 
(c)  A journal of minutes shall be maintained, and every official action of the mayor and council shall be recorded therein. The journal shall be a public record. Any council member may require the recording of yeas and nays of each member in the journal for any votes taken by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 2-403. - Meetings; regular and special. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall fix the date and time of regular meetings of the mayor and council by ordinance and there shall be at least one (1) regular meeting each month. 
(b)  Special meetings of the mayor and council may be held on call of the mayor or a majority of all council members other than the mayor. Notice of a special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or otherwise notified as fully as is reasonably possible in advance of the meeting. This notice to council members shall not be required if all council members are present when the special meeting is called. This notice of a special meeting may be waived by a council member in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in the council member's presence or with his or her prior knowledge. Except by majority vote of the council members attending the special meeting, only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, and no action at a special meeting shall be valid unless the requirements of this section are met. 
(c)  All meetings of the council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible prior to the meetings. 
Sec. 2-404. - Introduction, consideration and enactment of legislation. 
(a)  Every official act of the mayor and council which is to become law shall be by ordinance and shall begin with the words: "Be it, and it is hereby ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville." All other acts of the mayor and council shall be by resolution or shall take such other form as prescribed by rules of the mayor and council. 
(b)  The manner and procedure for introduction of ordinances shall be determined by rules of the mayor and council, provided that no ordinance shall be adopted on the date of its introduction, except by unanimous vote of the council to waive any further readings. 
Sec. 2-405. - Revision of legislation; veto. 
    The mayor shall have the revision of all ordinances, motions, orders or resolutions passed by the council. He shall have four (4) days after the same shall have been passed by the council in which to file in writing with the city clerk his veto of such ordinances, motions, orders or resolutions to which he shall dissent; but the council within 30 days thereafter shall have the power to pass such ordinances, motions, orders or resolutions, notwithstanding such veto by an affirmative vote of three of the four members of the council, at a meeting of such body, to be taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the minutes. 
Sec. 2-406. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The mayor and council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing the adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)  Any requirements for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance. 
(c)  A copy of each adopting code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk. 
(d)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. 
ARTICLE III. - Election and Removal 
CHAPTER 1. - Conduct of Elections 

Sec. 3-101. - Applicability of general laws. 
    All municipal general or special elections and primaries shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia. 
(Ga. L. 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 3-102. - Regular elections; terms. 
(a)  After January 1, 1991, the general municipal election for the City of Hapeville shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in 1991 and on such day in each odd-numbered year thereafter. 
(b)  The three (3) council members, two (2) of whom are from wards and one (1) of whom is at-large, whose terms of office expire December 31, 1990, shall continue to serve out their terms of office and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Their successors shall be elected at the general municipal election which shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November in 1990, and they shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for terms of office which expire December 31, 1993, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. All successors thereafter to the three (3) council members whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected in the general municipal election held immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four (4) years each and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(c)  The mayor and alderman-at-large whose terms of office expire December 31, 1991, shall continue to serve out their terms of office and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Their successors shall be elected at the general municipal election which shall be held in 1991, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for terms of office of four (4) years each and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. All successors thereafter to the mayor and the alderman-at-large whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the general municipal election held immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four (4) years each and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ga. Laws 1980, p. 3769; Ga. Laws 1984, p. 4599; Ga. Laws 1990 Act No. 739, § 1) 
Sec. 3-103. - Manner of election. 
(a)  The city shall be divided into two (2) wards, designated respectively as wards No. 1 and No. 2. The boundaries of wards No. 1 and No. 2 shall be as specifically described and set forth in Appendix C of this charter. 
(b)  The mayor shall be elected from the city at-large. 
(c)  Two (2) council members shall each reside respectively in wards No. 1 and No. 2 and shall be elected from the city at-large. 
(d)  One (1) council member, to be known as a "councilman-at-large," may reside at any location within the city and shall be elected from the city at-large. 
(e)  One (1) council member, to be known as "alderman-at-large," may reside at any location within the city and shall be elected from the city at-large. 
(f)  All municipal elections shall be non-partisan and the names of candidates shall be listed alphabetically upon the ballot without party label. 
Chapter 2. - Vacancies and Removal from Office 

Sec. 3-201. - Occurrence of vacancies. 
    A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member occurs when a duly elected person fails to qualify, or when a person who has been duly elected and qualified either dies, resigns, becomes disabled, or is removed from office, as provided by this charter. Vacancies shall be filled as is provided by section 3-202 of this charter. 
Sec. 3-202. - Filling of vacancies. 
    In the event the office of the mayor or any council member shall become vacant by death, removal, disqualification, resignation or other cause, the remaining members of the mayor and council shall within 30 days order a special election to fill the vacancy or vacancies for the unexpired term or terms. Every special election for such purpose shall be held and conducted in all respects in accordance with the provisions of the code relating to general elections. 
Sec. 3-203. - Impeachment. 
    The mayor and council shall have the sole right to try all impeachments. When sitting for the purpose they shall be under oath or affirmation. When the mayor is tried the judge of the City Court of Atlanta or any judge of the Superior Court in this State shall preside, and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present, and judgment shall not extend further than removal from and disqualification to hold any office of honor, trust or profit in the City of Hapeville; but any party so convicted shall be liable to indictment and trial and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed by law. 
ARTICLE IV. - Organization and Administration 
CHAPTER 1. - General Provisions 

Sec. 4-101. - City offices, departments and agencies. 
    Except as provided by this charter, the offices, departments and agencies of the city shall be created and established by ordinance, and the offices and departments shall be responsible for the performance of the functions and services enumerated therein. The operations and responsibilities of city departments and agencies may be distributed among any divisions, or bureaus, and shall consist of any officers and employees as may be provided by ordinance or administrative regulations consistent therewith. 
Sec. 4-102. - Administrative organization. 
    The mayor and council may, by ordinance, organize, combine, consolidate, or discontinue any offices, departments, agencies, or divisions of the city government as it may from time to time deem desirable and consistent with this charter. 
Sec. 4-103. - Boards and commissions. 
(a)  The mayor and council may, by ordinance, unless otherwise provided by law, create boards and commissions which may perform the duties prescribed, including, but not limited to, making studies, conducting research and investigations, holding hearings and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions and for any other purposes authorized. 
(b)  The mayor and council may provide by ordinance, unless otherwise provided by law, for the manner of appointment, makeup and composition of boards and commissions, their periods of existence, and for the compensation of their members and employees, in whole or in part. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the members of boards and commissions in the performance of their official duties. The mayor and council shall have the authority to annually appropriate money derived from taxation, contributions, or otherwise for and to boards and commissions to provide for their operation, either in whole or in part. 
(c)  Any vacancy in the office of any member of a board or commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment. 
(d)  Any member of a board or commission may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of all of the council members. 
(e)  Each board and commission may establish bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances, or applicable state law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for its internal organization, election of officers, and for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the city clerk and approved by the mayor and council prior to their being effective. 
CHAPTER 2. - City Officers 

Sec. 4-201. - City clerk; appointment; duties; compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall annually appoint a city clerk who shall hold office for one (1) year, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be clerk of the mayor and council, shall attend all meetings of the mayor and council, and keep the minutes, books and files of each; shall collect all fines, taxes and other money due the city; shall attend to the issuance of all licenses and permits; shall sign and issue all executions and other writs and processes for the collection of taxes due the city; and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(c)  The compensation of the city clerk shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 4-202. - City attorney; appointment; qualifications; duties; compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall annually appoint a city attorney who shall hold office for one (1) year, or until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The city attorney shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be legal counsel to the city and shall perform any other duties as may be provided by ordinance. 
(d)  The compensation of the city attorney shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
Sec. 4-203. - City manager or administrative assistant authorized. 
    At such time as they in their discretion shall see fit, the mayor and council may by ordinance provide for the employment of and employ an administrative assistant or a city manager who shall perform such duties and services as may from time to time be prescribed by the mayor and council and for such compensation as the mayor and council may authorize. The revenue of the city from sources otherwise provided in this charter may be expended for purposes of paying such salary and expenses as the mayor and council may provide for the city manager or administrative assistant. 
CHAPTER 3. - Personnel 

Sec. 4-301. - Merit system. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall establish by ordinance a system of personnel administration based upon merit principles. The system shall be divided into a classified and an unclassified service which shall comprise such positions as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall adopt by ordinance rules and regulations to govern the classification of positions, appointment, promotion, transfer, layoff, removal and discipline of employees, employee qualifications, terms and conditions of employment, retirement and benefits, and other measures that promote the hiring and retaining of capable, diligent, honest, career employees. 
Sec. 4-302. - Personnel board; appointment; qualifications; duties. 
(a)  There shall be a personnel board, consisting of three (3) members, appointed by the mayor and council for six-year staggered terms of office. Vacancies in unexpired terms shall be filled by the mayor and council by appointment for the remainder of the term. A member of the board may be removed only for cause after being given a written statement of the charges against the member, and, if he requests, a public hearing on the removal. A certified copy of the charges and transcript of the record shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(b)  Each member of the board shall be qualified elector of the city. No member of the board shall hold or be a candidate for any elective public office or position. The mayor and council may compensate members of the board for their services. Members of the board shall elect a chairman and such other officers as desired who shall serve for a term of one (1) year. 
(c)  The functions and duties of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  Advise the mayor and council and the official responsible for personnel administration on problems concerning personnel administration. 
(2)  Review and submit recommendations on personnel rules and regulations on any other matter concerning the administration of personnel in the municipal service, and report to the mayor and council, at least once each year, its findings, conclusions, and recommendations. 
(3)  Perform such other duties as required by the mayor and council. 
(4)  Hear an appeal, or delegate to another entity the hearing of an appeal, of any officer or employee when the right of appeal is given by effectuating ordinance, policy, or procedure enacted pursuant to the authority of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-17, § 1, 8-2-1994; Ord. No. 2018-02 , § 1, 1-23-2018) 
Sec. 4-303. - At-will employment. 
    The provisions of sections 4-301 and 4-302 and the use of the term "merit" as well as the creation and use of a personnel board are not in any way intended to waive or modify for local application the at-will provision of employment in the State of Georgia codified in O.C.G.A. § 36-7-1 or as such code is hereafter amended nor is it the intention of the City to create a contract of employment for definite period. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 1, 12-21-2004) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 94-17, § 2, adopted Aug. 2, 1994, provided that § 4-303, the personnel board of appeals, be stricken in its entirety. The user's attention is directed to § 4-302(c)(4) for updated provisions concerning such subject matter. 
ARTICLE V. - Finance and Fiscal 
CHAPTER 1. - Taxation and Other Revenue 

Sec. 5-101. - Ad valorem tax; grant of authority. 
    For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the city government and for other corporate purposes, the mayor and council shall be authorized to access, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to taxation for state and county purposes under the laws of this state and to provide for the manner and method in which such taxes shall be collected. 
Sec. 5-102. - Sanitary tax. 
    The mayor and council shall have power and authority to levy and collect a sanitary tax against all real estate owned, held and possessed in the City of Hapeville. Said sanitary tax shall be fixed or assessed by the mayor and council, by resolution or ordinance and may be collected either monthly, quarterly, semi-annually or annually, in the discretion of the mayor and council and when said sanitary tax is levied it shall be a lien on the property against which it is assessed and shall be collected by the issuance of executions against said property and/or the owners thereof. 
Sec. 5-103. - Utility liens. 
    Any water and sewer bill due the City of Hapeville for more than 60 days beyond the final payment date, may be proper resolution or ordinance of mayor and council, be declared a lien on the real estate served by the water meter through which passed the water unpaid for as provided herein, and such liens shall be entered in a special docket maintained in the office of the city clerk for that purpose; and further, such liens may be executed, levied upon, and satisfied the same as otherwise provided in this charter for executing liens for delinquent taxes, street and sewerage assessments, and shall bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per annum on the unpaid balance from the date of entry in said lien docket until and through the date of payment or until such lien is otherwise satisfied as prescribed by law. 
Sec. 5-104. - Occupation and taxes. 
    The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to levy and collect any occupation taxes that are not prohibited by the constitution and general laws of Georgia. These taxes may be levied, collected and compelled in accordance with state law and local code not in conflict with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 2(5-104), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 5-105. - Regulatory fees. 
    The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to levy and collect regulatory fees so long as such fees are based upon customary governmental investigations or inspections of such businesses and professions so as to protect the public health, safety, or welfare or in the course of enforcing a state or city building, health, or safety code and the same approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 2(5-105), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 5-106. - Excise taxes; wholesale and retail dealers. 
    The mayor and council shall have the authority to impose, assess, levy and collect an excise tax upon the sale, transfer or dispensing of wine by wholesale and retail dealers within the city. 
Sec. 5-107. - Insurance premiums taxes and licenses. 
    The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to impose and collect license fees and taxes on life insurance companies in the manner provided by an act of the General Assembly of Georgia approved February 20, 1964 (Ga. Laws 1964, p. 122), as now or hereafter amended; and on fire and casualty insurance companies in the manner provided by an act of the General Assembly approved April 12, 1968 (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 3706), as now or hereafter amended. 
Sec. 5-108. - Service charges. 
    The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for water, sewer, sanitary and health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, these charges or fees shall be collected as provided in section 5-112. 
Sec. 5-109. - Special assessments. 
    The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the authority to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, drainage structures or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under any terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, these charges shall be collected as provided in section 5-112. 
Sec. 5-110. - Installment payments may be authorized. 
    The Mayor and Council of Hapeville shall have power and authority within its discretion by proper ordinance or resolution to allow the payment of all taxes to the City of Hapeville to be paid in installments on such dates as the mayor and council by ordinance or resolution may designate, and shall further have power and authority to give such discounts as within its discretion may be proper for the payment of such taxes on the dates named in the ordinance or resolution. 
Sec. 5-111. - Interpretation; other taxes. 
    The mayor and council shall be empowered to levy any other tax now or hereafter authorized by state law and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this chapter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Sec. 5-112. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The mayor and council, by ordinance, may provide for collection of delinquent taxes, fees or other revenue due the city pursuant to authority granted by this charter or by the constituting and general laws of Georgia or by any other authority not precluded by the constitution and general laws of Georgia. This authority shall include providing for the dates when the taxes, fees or other revenues are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes, fees and other revenues, personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes, fees or other revenues imposed; providing for the assignment or transfer of executions and collection of transferred executions; providing for the billing and collecting of principal, interest and costs of delinquent executions as an addition to and a part of the annual ad valorem tax bill, where such local activities are otherwise allowed by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 2(5-112), 12-21-2004) 
CHAPTER 2. - Borrowing and Indebtedness 

Sec. 5-201. - General obligation bonds. 
    The mayor and council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or by the constitution and general laws of the state. This bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with state laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time the issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 5-202. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the mayor and council as now or hereafter authorized by state law. 
Sec. 5-203. - Short term notes. 
    The mayor and council may issue short term notes as now or hereafter authorized b state law. 
Sec. 5-204. - Improvement bonds. 
(a)  In order to facilitate the financing of any municipal improvements authorized by law, the mayor and council shall have authority to issue bonds of the city in the aggregate amount of assessment for the improvement then unpaid, which bond or bonds and the interest thereon shall in no event become a liability of the city or of the mayor and council issuing them. 
(b)  These bonds shall mature at a date and bear an interest rate as the council may determine by ordinance but in no event shall the rate of interest exceed that which the assessments are to bear. 
(c)  These bonds shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the clerk of council, and shall have the impression of the corporate seal of the city thereon, and shall be payable at a place designated by ordinance. 
(d)  These bonds shall be designated as "improvement bonds," and shall, on the face thereof, recite the nature and location of the improvement for which they have been issued, and shall recite that they are payable solely from assessments which have been levied upon the lots and tracts of land abutting upon or being the situs of the improvement made. 
(e)  These bonds shall be sold at not less than par, and the proceeds thereof applied to the payment of the costs and expense of the improvement for which the bonds are issued, or the bonds, in the amount that shall be necessary for that purpose, may be turned over and delivered to the contractor, in respect to the improvement at par value, in payment of the amount due on the contract, and the portion thereof which shall be necessary to pay other expenses, incident to and incurred in providing for the improvements, shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as the mayor and council by ordinance shall direct. 
CHAPTER 3. - Fiscal Control 

Sec. 5-301. - Fiscal year; municipal budget preparation and submission. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall establish a fiscal year for the city and all its agencies by ordinance unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedure for the preparation and submission of an annual operating budget and of a capital improvement program and capital budget of the city. 
Sec. 5-302. - Municipal appropriations; ordinance required. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall annually appropriate, by ordinance, the funds necessary to operate all the various agencies and departments, and to meet the expenses of the city for the next fiscal year as provided in the municipal budget. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall not appropriate funds for any given fiscal year which, in aggregate, exceed a sum equal to the amount of unappropriated surplus expected to have accrued in the city treasury at the beginning of the fiscal year, together with an amount not greater than the total municipal receipts from existing revenue sources anticipated to be collected in the fiscal year, less refunds as estimated in the budget report and amendments thereto. 
(c)  All appropriated funds, except for the mandatory appropriations required by law and those required to meet contractual obligations or the continued appropriation and authorization of state or federal grants, remaining unexpended and not contractually obligated at the expiration of the municipal appropriations ordinance, shall lapse. 
Sec. 5-303. - Supplementary appropriations. 
(a)  In addition to the appropriations made by the municipal appropriations ordinance and amendments thereto, the mayor and council may make additional appropriations which shall be known as supplementary appropriations ordinances, provided no supplementary appropriation shall be made unless there is an unappropriated surplus in the city treasury or the revenue necessary to pay the appropriation has been collected into the general fund of the city treasury. 
(b)  In no event shall a supplementary appropriations ordinance continue in force and effect beyond the expiration of the municipal appropriations ordinance in effect when the supplementary appropriations ordinance was adopted and approved. 
Sec. 5-304. - Deficits. 
    If at any time during the year expenditures exceed revenues and a deficit is created, it shall be the duty of the mayor and council, before appropriating any other sum for any other purpose, to appropriate a sufficient sum to immediately discharge any such deficit which has occurred. 
CHAPTER 4. - Purchasing, Contracting and Disposition of Property 

Sec. 5-401. - Contracting procedures. 
    The mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures to be followed in the making of contracts which shall bind the city. All contracts and all ordinances which shall make or authorize contracts shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. The mayor shall sign and authorize all contracts. The city clerk shall authenticate all contracts. The original of all contracts shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 5-402. - Purchasing procedures. 
    The mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures for all purchases of services and real and personal property by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-16, 8-2-1994) 
ARTICLE VI. - Municipal Court 

Sec. 6-101. - Municipal court created; presiding officer. 
(a)  There is hereby created a municipal court for the trial of the offenses and offenders against the laws and ordinances of the city. The municipal court shall replace the former recorder's court. All discussions, judgments, rulings, sentences, and actions of the municipal court shall be made and are those of the municipal court. The municipal court shall be presided over by the city municipal court judge. The municipal court judge shall be elected by the mayor and council in the same manner that it elects other officers of the city. 
(b)  The judge's salary shall be fixed by the mayor and council, and the judge shall take such oath as may be prescribed by the mayor and council. The judge shall be subject to removal, with or without any stated cause, upon a majority vote by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Any vacancy in the office of the municipal court judge by reason of death, resignation, removal or other reason shall be filled by appointment of the mayor and council. In his disqualification or absence, the municipal court judge pro tem or judge pro hac vice may hold the court, and may exercise all the powers conferred by law or this charter upon the judge. 
(d)  The mayor and council by appropriate ordinance shall have the power and authority to provide for the appointment of the judge pro tem, and to provide for judges pro hac vice to serve in the absence or disability of the city judge, and to provide such salary and/or remuneration as they deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-101), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-102. - Penalty for violation of laws, ordinances. 
    The judge or any authorized presiding officer of the municipal court may punish for any violation of a city ordinance or law by fine not exceeding $1,000.00; by imprisonment not to exceed six months; by work in the work gang on the public streets, or on such public works as the authorities may employ the work gang, or by any one or both of these punishments in the discretion of the judge or presiding officer of said court. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-102), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-103. - Authority of municipal judge as justice of the peace and municipal court judge. 
    The judge shall to all intents and purposes be a justice of the peace and municipal court judge, so far as to enable him to issue warrants for offenses committed within the city, which warrants may be executed by any member of the police force of the city, and to commit the offenders to jail, or to admit them to bail, in bailable cases, for their appearance at the next term of the court of competent jurisdiction to be held in and for said county or own his or her own motion and within his or her own discretion to bind the case over to the state or superior court where the offense would constitute a violation of state law. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-103), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-104. - Sentence for contempt. 
    When sitting in a court as a municipal court judge, the judge shall have the power to punish for contempt by fine not exceeding $100.00, by imprisonment in the manner prescribed in section 6-102 not exceeding 30 days, or by one or both, or any part thereof, in the discretion of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-104), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-105. - Warrants; form, scope, execution; judge's authority to hear evidence, grant bond. 
(a)  The judge shall be authorized to issue warrants for any offense under any law or ordinance of the City of Hapeville or this state and when the offense is against state laws and not covered by municipal law or ordinance, may hear evidence and commit to jail or take bond for appearance before the grand jury or a state court having jurisdiction to try the same. If the offense charged in the warrant to be one against any law or ordinance of the City of Hapeville, the arresting officer shall carry the same before the municipal court, where same shall be disposed of as other cases of arrest not under warrant. 
(b)  All warrants issued by the judge, or the municipal court, shall be directed to the "Chief of Police of the City of Hapeville, any policeman or marshal thereof, and to all and singular the sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, and constables of the State of Georgia," and any one of said officers shall have the authority to execute warrants. 
(c)  Judge or judge pro tem of the city shall have the right and authority to sign all warrants, summonses, receipts, executions or other processes, which the judge of the municipal court has authority to sign, when the judge of the municipal court is absent, incapacitated, or in any way unavailable, provided such warrants, summonses, receipts, executions, or other processes are returnable only to the judge of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-105), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-106. - Witnesses. 
    The judge or any officer of the municipal court authorized by ordinance shall have power and authority to subpoena witnesses to attend the municipal court, under the same rules and regulations that regulate and govern the superior courts of this state, to compel attendance, and to punish any witness who has been duly subpoenaed and fails to attend, under the provisions heretofore, provided for contempt. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-106), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-107. - Ministerial officers of municipal court; attendances, duties. 
    The ministerial officers of the municipal court shall be the policemen of the city to whom all means and final processes shall be directed. Officers of a sufficient number shall attend the sessions of the court for the purpose of executing the orders of said court, and shall do and perform such duties connected with the court as may be required of them. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-107), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-108. - Certiorari; costs; bond required; failure to give bond. 
(a)  Any persons convicted before the judge or other presiding judge of the municipal court shall have the right to petition the Superior Court of Fulton County for issuance of a writ of certiorari or by appeal in traffic cases, provided all costs are first paid and bond and security given in double the amount of the fine imposed, to answer the final judgment rendered in the case. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the defendant who desires to obtain a writ of certiorari or by appeal in traffic cases therefor from the superior court from doing so; provided, however, that the applicant failing to give bond and security may, in the discretion of the judge, be placed in jail to await the final judgment of the appeal. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any person convicted in the municipal court of a violation of any ordinance of the city from petitioning a writ of certiorari directly to the superior court in accordance with provisions of state law such cases. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-108), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-109. - Hearing on certiorari; notice; costs; forfeiture of bond. 
    The judge of the superior court who grants certiorari or by appeal in traffic cases may hear the appeal after giving notice to each party, or his attorney, of the time and place of hearing, the judge being required to certify and send up to the superior court a complete and accurate history of the case, as his answer to the petition for certiorari, and the defendant having the right to traverse the answer as provided by law. 
    The mayor and council may pass ordinances regulating the costs for appeals and certiorari; and for the forfeiture of all bonds. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 3(6-109), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - General Provisions 

Sec. 7-101. - Terms of present officers. 
    All present elected officers of the city shall hold their offices until the expiration of their present terms, and until their successors are elected and qualified, except as herein provided. 
Sec. 7-102. - Ordinances and regulations. 
    Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city and its agencies now lawfully in effect not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall remain effective until they have been repealed, modified or amended. 
Sec. 7-103. - Contracts and obligations; proceeding. 
(a)  All contracts, orders, leases, bonds and other obligations or instruments entered into by the city or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof, as obligations and rights of the city. 
(b)  No action or proceeding of any nature (whether civil or criminal), judicial or administrative, or otherwise, pending at the effective date of this charter by or against the city or its departments and agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this charter. 
(c)  The existing agency and departmental organization of the city shall continue in effect upon the effective date of this charter until such organization is changed or reorganized as provided by ordinance of the mayor and council and administrative regulations consistent therewith. 
Sec. 7-104. - Section captions; rules of construction. 
(a)  The captions of the several sections of this charter are informative only and are not to be construed as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" in this charter is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is to be permissive. 
(c)  In the construction of this charter, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the adopting body: 
(1)  City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
(2)  County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Fulton, Georgia. 
(3)  Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
(4)  Governing body or governing authority. The words "governing body" or "governing authority" shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
(5)  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
(6)  Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
(7)  Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "mayor," "city council," "city clerk," they shall be deemed to refer to officials of the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
(8)  Council or city council. The words "council" or "city council" shall mean or refer to council members of the governing authority, excluding the mayor. 
(9)  Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
(10)  State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 7-105. - Severability. 
    If any provisions of this charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this charter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this charter are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 7-106. - City officers and employees. 
    All elected or appointed officers and employees of the city immediately prior to the adoption of this act shall continue in their positions until the end of their terms of office or if no term is provided then as otherwise provided by this charter or ordinance. 
Sec. 7-107. - General repealer. 
    All laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
Sec. 7-108. - Specific repealer. 
    The following acts creating, reenacting or amending the charter of the City of Hapeville are hereby repealed: 
Year Act No. 1891 448 1895 214 1910 534 1912 367 1914 329 1924 292 1927 239 1929 280 1937 171 1938 354 1939 359 1943 247 1947 116 120 345 1950 747 1953 364 825 1955 213 1956 268 1957 279 282 1959 HB387 1961 190 236 1962 873 1964 919 989 1966 554 1968 1249 1969 376 1971 45 1972 962 1074 1075 1456 1974 1179 1268 1979 141  
APPENDIX A. - Specific Powers Enumerated 

Sec. 1. - Authority to contract with industrial or development authority. 
    The City of Hapeville, by and through its governing authority, shall have the power to contract with any duly created industrial or development authority, or both, for the operation, maintenance, and use of any public project, public building, or other public facility, including, and not limited to, parking lots, garages, or other parking structures, or projects, buildings or facilities, essential for the public purposes of development and promotion of civic and cultural growth, public welfare, trade, commerce, education, amusement, recreation, or other public purposes in the City of Hapeville. 
Sec. 2. - Authority to contract with water and sewer authority. 
    The City of Hapeville, by and through its governing authority, is authorized to contract with any duly created water and sewer authority for the purposes of operating, maintaining, and providing water and sewer services to the City of Hapeville and its citizens. 
Sec. 3. - Appropriations for relief of poor and for charitable purposes. 
    The mayor and council shall have power by appropriate action to appropriate money for the relief of the poor and for charitable purposes as they may deem proper. 
Sec. 4. - Nuisances on vacant lots-Definition. 
    Any property in the City of Hapeville on which weeds, debris, trash or waste matter has been allowed to accumulate to such extent that the presence of such matter on the vacant property creates conditions likely to cause a fire or, spreading of fire, or an imminent danger to the health or welfare of the adjacent community by the spread of disease or epidemic, shall be subject to be declared a nuisance and abated in the manner herein set out. 
Sec. 5. - Same-Abatement. 
    Proceedings for the abatement of the nuisance declared in the above section shall be as follows or as otherwise provided by state law: 
The Director of Community Service shall cause summons to be issued form the municipal court of the City of Hapeville, directed to the owner, if known, if the owner is a resident of the City of Hapeville, or if the owner is a nonresident but said property is under the management of an agent, to the agent of the owner to show cause why the nuisance should not be abated. Said notice to set out the particulars in what manner said vacant lot constitutes a nuisance, and the same shall be personally served on the owner, if a resident, and upon his agent if he is not a resident, and if the owner is unknown and his residence is unknown, with no resident agent in charge of said property, then by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the City of Hapeville five days before the date of the hearing, such summons and notice shall state the time and place of the hearing to be had in the municipal court of the City of Hapeville or by such other process duly adopted by ordinance of the Mayor and Council. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 4(app. A, § 5), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 6. - Same-Judgment against offender. 
    If on said hearing before the judge it shall be adjudged that the said nuisance should be abated the judgment of said judge shall provide that unless said nuisance be abated within 30 days by the party proceeded against, the Director of the Community Service or his assistants shall be authorized service to enter upon said vacant property and abate said nuisance by the cleaning off and removal of the matter thereon constituting the nuisance, which shall be done by said city authorities at the expense of the owner and charged against the property and judgment for costs of court. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 4(app. A, § 6), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 7. - Same-Costs and expenses, collection. 
    In the event the director of public service or his assistants abate said nuisance, the actual cost and expense of said city in clearing away and removing said matter declared to be a nuisance shall be declared a charge and a lien upon the said property on which said nuisance was abated. Said charge and lien shall be fixed in the following manner: Upon the abatement of said nuisance the director of public service shall render a written statement to the owner of said property if known, or to the owner's agent if the owner be a nonresident, or if the residence of the owner be unknown, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Hapeville, by being published one time, showing the actual cost of abating said nuisance and demanding the payment of said expense, and if the same be not paid within thirty days from the date of said notice, the director of public service shall certify to the mayor and general council a statement showing the actual cost of abating said nuisance and the cost of advertising, and the mayor and council are authorized by ordinance to declare said charge and expense a lien against the real estate on which said nuisance was abated, which lien or charge may be enforced by execution, levy and sale in the manner as executions now authorized under the provisions of the charter of the City of Hapeville for street improvements. The property owner shall have the same rights and defenses to the said execution, as now exist in defense of executions issued under assessments for paving of streets. 
Sec. 8. - Same-Cleanliness and safety of premises, authority to provide. 
    The Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville shall have the authority and power, in the interest of health, sanitation, the public safety and welfare, to provide for the cleaning, cleaning off and making and keeping sanitary and/or free from fire or other hazards, any and all real property, either vacant or improved, within the corporate limits of the City of Hapeville; to provide for the removal from such property all debris, grass, weeds or other growth, or other unsanitary or combustible matter or materials; to provide for the height and trimming of hedges, shrubbery and other growth; to fix and to impose penalties upon owner and occupants of property in respect to such requirements; to provide for the performance of such services by the city and for the assessment and collection of charges therefor; for the creation and assessment of liens against property and the owners and occupants thereof so served and for the collection and enforcement of such liens the same as assessments for taxes, paving of streets and sidewalks, and other liens of the city are now executed and enforced; and further that the said Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville be and they hereby are authorized and empowered to adopt such ordinances and/or resolutions and/or other acts of a like nature to enforce this provision of the city charter. 
Sec. 9. - Authority to assess for cost of improvements. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall be authorized to make special assessments with or without petition against benefited property within the corporate limits of the city for: 
(1)  Constructing, reconstructing, paving, widening, installing curbs and gutters, and otherwise building and improving streets; 
(2)  Constructing, reconstructing, paving, widening, and otherwise building or improving sidewalks in any public street; 
(3)  Constructing, reconstruction, extending, and otherwise building or improving water systems; 
(4)  Constructing, reconstructing, extending, and otherwise building or improving sanitary sewer lines; and 
(5)  Constructing, reconstructions, extending and otherwise building or improving sewage disposal systems. 
(b)  Assessments may be made on the basis of: 
(1)  The frontage abutting on the project, at an equal rate per foot of frontage; or 
(2)  The area of land served, or subject to being served, by the project, at an equal rate per unit of area; or 
(3)  The value added to the land served by the project or subject to being served by it, being the difference between the appraised value of the land without improvements as shown on the tax records of the county, and the appraised value of the land with improvements according to the appraisal standards and rules adopted by the county at its last revaluation, at an equal rate per dollar of value added; or 
(4)  The number of lots served, or subject to being served, where the project involves extension of an existing system to a residential or commercial subdivision, at an equal rate per lot; or 
(5)  A combination of two or more of these bases. 
    Whenever the basis selected for assessment is either area or value added, the mayor and council may provide for the laying out of benefit zones according to the distance of benefited property from the project being undertaken, and may establish differing rates of assessment to apply uniformly throughout each benefit zone. 
    For each project, the mayor and council shall endeavor to establish an assessment method from among the bases set out in this section which will most accurately assess each lot or parcel of land according to the benefit conferred upon it by the project. The council's decision as to the method of assessment shall be final and conclusive and not subject to further review or challenge. 
(c)  The procedures for execution of the power and authority granted herein shall be as prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council. 
Sec. 10. - Territorial jurisdiction. 
    For all police purposes, such as peace, good order, health, morals, the control and regulation over the water pipes, valves, hydrants, meters and accessories used in supplying of water wherever extended, or through which water is served and supplied by the City of Hapeville Waterworks outside the city limits of Hapeville, and for the full distance of all said water pipes, and for the full length of said mains, and for all pipes and service connections extending therefrom, and for a distance of 300 feet on all sides of said mains or pipes, the City of Hapeville shall have jurisdiction of the enforcement of all ordinances, rules and regulations of said city, having for their purpose the exercise and control over the water service supplied by said city; and furthermore, the city shall have the right to make laws, rules and regulations for the control of water services wherever supplied inside or outside of the limits, and to fix penalties for the violation thereof. Any person guilty of the violation any of the ordinances, rules and regulations of the City of Hapeville enacted for said purposes as aforesaid within the jurisdiction as above extended shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the City of Hapeville in the same manner as for offenses committed within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2004-23, § 5(app. A, § 10), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 11. - Rules and regulations. 
    The Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville be, and they are, hereby authorized and empowered to make rules and regulations not inconsistent with law for the regulation of its waterworks system, and also to require the owner of any improved real estate within the corporate limits of said city to provide suitable water closet accommodations upon such improved premises, whenever in their judgment and discretion such improvements are necessary or proper to preserve the health or protect the sanitary interests of the citizens of any neighborhood or community of said city; and to prevent the use of water from wells and any and all places in said city for domestic purposes, whenever in their discretion they deem it necessary or proper to preserve the health of the citizens of any neighborhood or community within the corporate limits of said city. 
Sec. 12. - Payment of certain supplemental retirement benefits. 
    The mayor and council shall have the authority, by ordinance, to provide for the payment, from the general fund of the city, of any supplemental benefits, contributions, or other payments, deemed just and equitable by the mayor and council to assure fair and equitable treatment of all past or present employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 85-1, 7-16-1985) 
APPENDIX B. - Corporate Boundaries 

Sec. 1. - Corporate limits-Original; jurisdiction beyond. 
    The corporate limits or boundaries of said city shall be four (4) straight lines, each one mile in length, which shall enclose one square mile, two of said lines being parallel to the main tracks of the Central Railroad of Georgia, and the other two at right angles thereto, and the exact location of said square mile shall be determined, located and governed by a central point; said central point shall be the center of said square mile, and is located and described as a point in the center of the Central Railroad of Georgia, main track, nearest Hapeville depot, and exactly opposite the center of the said depot. For police and sanitary purposes and the abatement of nuisances, the authority of the said city shall extend one-half mile beyond the limits here named in every direction. 
Sec. 2. - Extension of 1910; redefined. 
    The corporate limits of said City of Hapeville as hereby amended shall embrace and include the following territory, to-wit: All that tract or parcel of land described as follows: Beginning at the original Northwest corner of land lot ninety-nine (99) of the fourteenth (14th) district of originally Henry, now Fulton County, Georgia, and running thence East along the original North line of land lots ninety-nine (99) and ninety-four (94) to the original Northeast corner of land lot ninety-four (94); thence South along the original East lines of land lots ninety-four (94) and ninety-five (95), to the present corporate limits of said City of Hapeville; thence Southeasterly along the present corporate limits of said City of Hapeville and beyond, following a straight line to the right-of-way of the Southern Railway Company; thence Southwesterly said right-of-way to the right-of-way of the Central of Georgia Railway Company; thence Northwesterly along said right-of-way to the original East line of land lot ninety-six (96); thence South along said East line to the original Southeast corner of land lot ninety-six (96); thence West along the original South lines of land lots ninety-six (96) and ninety-seven (97), to the original Southwest corner of land lot ninety-seven (97); thence North along the original West line of land lot ninety-seven (97), to the present corporate limits of said City of Hapeville; thence Northwesterly along the present corporate limits to the extreme Western corner of said corporate limits; thence Northeasterly along present corporate limits of said City of Hapeville to the center of Virginia Avenue; thence West along the center of Virginia Avenue to the center of Whipple Avenue; thence North along the center of Whipple Avenue to the Southwest corner of The Piedmont Cotton Mills property; thence East along the South lines to The Piedmont Cotton Mills property fourteen-hundred and fifteen (1,415) feet, more or less, to the Southeast corner of The Piedmont Cotton Mills property; thence North along the East line of the cotton mills property nine hundred and seventy-one (971) feet to the original North line of land lot one hundred and twenty-seven (127) thence East along said original North line of land lot one hundred and twenty-seven (127), fourteen hundred and eighteen (1,418) feet to the Northeast corner of said land lot one hundred and twenty-seven (127); and thence North along the original West line of land lot ninety-nine (99) to point of beginning. 
Sec. 3. - Extension of March 1953. 
    Extend so as to include and embrace within the corporate limits of the City of Hapeville all the territory lying within the following boundary lines: 
    All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot 66 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point where the northwest corner of Land Lot 66 and the southeast corner of Land Lot 94 meet and thence running east along the southern line of Land Lot 67 and the northern line of Land Lot 66, a distance of 850 feet, more or less, to the west side of the south leg of the expressway; and thence southeasterly along the west side of the south leg of the expressway a distance of 2,350 feet, more or less, to a point where the present Hapeville city limits intersect and cross the west side of the south leg of the expressway; and thence northwest along the present Hapeville city limits a distance of 850 feet, more or less, to a point where the present Hapeville city limits intersect the east line of Land Lot 95; and thence north along the east side of Land Lot 95 and the west line of Land Lot 66 a distance of 1,200 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. 
Sec. 4. - Extension of December 1953; interest in water facilities. 
    Extend so as to include and embrace within the corporate limits of the City of Hapeville all the territory lying within the following boundary lines: 
    Beginning at a point on the west line of Land Lot 67 of the 14th District of Fulton County four hundred (400) feet south of Mt. Zion Road and running, thence, easterly, parallel with Mt. Zion Road, to a point on the west side of the south leg of the Expressway four hundred (400) feet south of Mt. Zion Road; thence, southerly along the west side of the south leg of the Expressway twenty-five hundred (2,500) feet, more or less, to a point on the south line of said Land Lot 67; thence, west along the south line of Land Lot 67, eight hundred and fifty (850) feet, more or less, to the southwest corner of Land Lot 67; thence, north along the west line of Land Lot 67, twenty-four hundred (2,400) feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. 
    The City of Hapeville shall acquire no interest in any water mains or facilities and should they desire to use them, they shall pay the City of Atlanta their cost. Should they not desire to use them, the City of Atlanta is hereby granted an easement in all streets involved so as to service said water lines. 
Sec. 5. - Exclusion of territory, 1953; interest in municipal facilities. 
    Exclude therefrom the following described territory: 
    Beginning at a point on the westerly right-of-way of the south leg of the Expressway twenty-three hundred and fifty (2,350) feet, more or less, south of the north line of Land Lot 66 of the 14th District of Fulton County, said point being where the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta and the City of Hapeville intersect on the westerly right-of-way of the south leg of the Expressway, running thence southerly along the westerly right-of-way of the south leg of the Expressway and continuing southerly along the westerly right-of-way of the ramp leading into the Macon Highway and a projection thereof to the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta north of the Central of Georgia Railway; thence southeasterly, northeasterly, and northwesterly along the corporate limits of the City of Atlanta to the point of beginning. The City of Hapeville shall retain the title to all water mains or other municipal facilities in said area with full authority to sell the same to the City of Atlanta should Atlanta desire to buy the same. 
Sec. 6. - Same-Extension of 1959. 
    Beginning at a point at the approximate center of Mt. Zion Road in the City of Hapeville, Georgia, which point is the northwest corner of Land Lot 67; running thence east along the center of said Mt. Zion Road three hundred sixty (360) feet to the western boundary of the right-of-way of the south leg of the Atlanta expressway system; thence south along the western right-of-way of said Atlanta expressway four hundred (400) feet to a point; thence westerly three hundred fifty (350) feet to the western boundary of Land Lot 67; thence northerly along the said western boundary line of Land Lot 67 four hundred (400) feet to the center of Mt. Zion Road and the point of beginning. 
Sec. 7. - Same-Exclusion of 1966. 
    By excluding and detaching from the geographical area of said city all of the area whereof within Whipple Avenue in Land Lot 127 of the 14th District of Fulton County, and all of the authority, jurisdiction, powers, and rights of said City of Hapeville, its governing authority, officers, and employees are hereby withdrawn and repealed within said detached area, and none of the laws, ordinances, rules and regulations of said city, its governing authority or the several agencies, officers and employees of said city shall apply over any of said area of the inhabitants thereof, and such detached area and the inhabitants thereof shall not be subject to any of the duties, obligations and burdens of said city within said detached area, nor entitled to any rights, privileges, benefits or protection of said City of Hapeville, its laws, ordinances, rules or obligations within said detached area, which is hereby detached and excluded from the corporate limits of said City of Hapeville. 
Editor's note- Act No. 453, Sec. 1. Ga. Laws 1966, amended the Act approved September 16, 1891, as amended, by excluding from the city's corporate boundaries, the area codified as Sec. 12.1 of this compilation. 
Sec. 8. - Same-Extension of 1986. 
    In addition to the corporate limits of the City of Hapeville described in Appendix C of this charter, the corporate limits of said city shall also include the following described tract or parcel of land: 
    ALL THAT TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND lying and being in Land Lots 127 and 130 of the 14th District of Fulton County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
    BEGINNING at a point on the southerly side of Virginia Avenue where said southerly side of Virginia Avenue intersects the southwesterly side of the former entrance ramp to the former terminal for Atlanta Hartsfield International Airport; and run thence southeasterly along the southwesterly side of said former entrance ramp a distance of 84.14 feet to a point; continuing thence in a generally southerly direction along the westerly side of said former entrance ramp a distance of 360.04 feet to a point; running thence westerly a distance of 479.92 feet to a point; running thence northerly a distance of 87 feet to a point; running thence westerly a distance of 174 feet to a point; running thence northerly a distance of 98.68 feet to a point; running thence easterly a distance of 75 feet to a point; running thence northerly a distance of 229.12 feet to a point on the southerly side of said Virginia Avenue; running thence east along the southerly side of Virginia Avenue, and following the right of way thereof, a total distance of 440.63 feet to the southwesterly side of the said former entrance ramp to the former terminal of Atlanta Hartsfield International Airport, and the POINT OF BEGINNING. 
(Ga. L. 1986, p. 4345) 
Sec. 9. - Same-Extension of 2006. 
    In addition to the corporate limits of the City of Hapeville, Georgia, described in Appendices B and C of this Charter, the corporate limits of said City shall also include the following described tract or parcel of land: 
    All parcels located in land Lots 127 and 128 in the 14th District of Fulton County, more particularly described as being located south and west of the incorporated limits of the City of Hapeville, south to the Clayton County line, then west to the incorporated limits of the City of Atlanta, then north to the road centerline of Gary Place, then west and south along the incorporated limits of the City of Atlanta, then west along the road centerline of Hartsfield Center Parkway to the municipal limits of the City of College Park, and then north along the westerly boundary of Land Lots 128 and 127, then north to the incorporated limits of the City of Hapeville, as indicated in Illustration 1 below. 
(Ord. No. 2006-04, § 1, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 2007-08, § 1, 6-19-2007) 
APPENDIX C. - Ward Boundaries 
    The City of Hapeville shall be divided into two (2) wards. Ward No. 1 shall consist of all of the area of the City of Hapeville south of the railroad tracks at Central Avenue and all of the area of the city west of the centerline of Stewart Avenue, the same being the area formerly comprising Wards 1, 2 and 3. Ward No. 2 shall comprise the area north of the railroad tracks on Central Avenue and east of the centerline of Stewart Avenue, being the area formerly known as Ward No. 4. 
Subpart B - RELATED LAWS 
CHAPTER 1. - Water and Sewer Authority[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, are derived from Ga. L. 1979, p. 3461. 

Sec. 1.101. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created the Hapeville Water and Sewer Authority. Provided that the authority shall not transact any business or exercise any powers hereunder until the governing body of the City of Hapeville shall by proper resolution declare that there is a need for such authority to function in the city. 
Sec. 1.102. - Powers; generally. 
    The authority shall have the right, power and authority to operate, build and maintain a waterworks system, together with the right to acquire lands, construct waterworks facilities, including projects embracing sources of water supply and related facilities; to sell water and its related facilities to individuals and private concerns. 
Sec. 1.103. - Same; revenue anticipation certificates. 
    The powers granted by this act shall authorize the authority to lay or construct water mains and water distribution systems within the limits of the city, and to issue water revenue anticipation certificates for such purposes as may be authorized by law. 
Sec. 1.104. - Same; police powers; connections; refusal of service. 
    The authority shall have the right, power and authority to exercise police powers over the entire water system and shall have the right and authority to make rules and regulations governing the construction, operation and maintenance, extension and connection with any water main within the limits of the city, and shall have the right and authority to require all users of water who connect with the water mains to install proper meters and make connections in accordance with the rules and regulations provided therefor and shall have the right and authority to refuse to sell or furnish water to any firm, person or corporation who fails or refuses to comply with such rules and regulations as may be promulgated for the operation of the water system. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as requiring the authority to furnish water to any consumers if in the discretion of the authority it is not deemed feasible or desirable to do so. 
Sec. 1.105. - Membership; officers; meetings; employees. 
    The water system is to be constructed, maintained and operated by a six (6) member board to be known as the Hapeville Water and Sewer Authority. The members of the board shall be appointed by the governing authority of the city. The first members appointed hereunder shall be appointed for terms of one (1), two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years as shall be designated by the governing authority. The sixth member shall be a member of the governing authority, that is, the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville; and, the sixth member shall be appointed by the governing authority for a term to run concurrently with the term to which the member was elected to the governing authority. Successors to these members and future members shall be appointed by the governing authority for terms of five (5) years, each, except the member of the governing authority, whose term shall expire at the end of the term to which he is elected. All members shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. The governing authority of the city shall fill any vacancy which occurs on the authority for the unexpired term. The members shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and secretary who shall serve for such periods as shall be fixed by the authority. The authority shall make an annual report of its action to the mayor and council. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A regular meeting shall be held once each month on a day to be set by the authority. The majority of the authority shall have the right to call a special meeting. Each member of the authority shall be given at least three (3) days' written notice of each special meeting. The authority shall employ such other employees as the authority shall deem proper for the transaction of business and provide the compensation therefor. All such compensations shall be paid out of earnings of the authority. 
Sec. 1.106. - Qualifications of members. 
    Only one (1) member of the water and sewer authority shall be a member of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville, the governing authority of the city. No other member of the water and sewer authority shall be eligible to hold an elective public office of the state, county or municipality unless first resigning as a member of the authority. No person shall be eligible for appointment to the water and sewer authority who is serving in an elective public office of the state, county or a municipality except the one member shall be and is required to be a member of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville. 
Sec. 1.107. - Water system; regulatory authority of board; collection of unpaid charges. 
    The board shall have general supervision and control over the entire water system or systems that may be constructed and placed in operation for the city, together with the right to expand or curtail such operations as it may deem advisable. The board shall regulate and provide for the use of its water, fix the time, place and rates for such usage, and in default may cause such services to be discontinued until all arrears are fully paid; provided further that any such rate or charge shall constitute a lien upon the property to which such service was rendered, and the authority may issue executions for any amount that may be past due and the secretary or clerk of the board is hereby authorized and empowered to issue execution therefor, which may be levied and collected as other executions. The board shall have the power to construct, alter, expand and maintain such water system with the funds made available to it by the city governing authority by the issuance and sale of bonds, or revenue-anticipation certificates issued by the city, and by funds arising from the operation of the water system. The authority shall have the right to join with the city in the issuance of revenue-anticipation certificates and pledge the revenues of the authority to the payment of such certificate so issued. 
Sec. 1.108. - Eminent domain; applicability of Revenue Bond Law. 
    The said authority is authorized, with approval of the city governing authority, to acquire by eminent domain such property as it may require for the expansion and development for its water and sewerage system together with rights-of-way, easements, and such other rights as may be proper for the development and expansion of the system. The authority shall have, with the approval of the city governing authority, in addition to the rights granted by this act all of the authority as provided by the act known as the "Revenue Bond Law," approved March 31, 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761), as amended, and especially the powers as defined in sections 2 and 3 thereof and sections in sequence thereof and as fully and completely as if they were set out in this act, and all property and rights so secured shall be construed to be the property of the City of Hapeville, and as an act of the city. 
Sec. 1.109. - Disposition of revenues. 
    The board is hereby charged with the duty of collection for all services rendered by the water system of the city and is hereby required to keep money collected in a bank or banks as may be required by the city governing authority. Any person handling such funds shall be required to give a surety bond in such amount as may be required by the board and approved by the governing authority. The board at all times shall maintain a schedule of fees, rates and tolls for the services of the water system as shall be sufficient to retire any revenue certificates, or other indebtedness incurred in the construction, maintenance, operation, and expansion of the water system, and to provide for any reserves and funds required to be maintained by the city in connection with the issuance of any such revenue certificates, together with sufficient amounts to pay the current operating costs of such water system. Any funds accumulated in excess over the payments and legally required reserves may be allowed to accumulate in a special reserve account in an amount equal to three (3) years' payments, at which time any further accumulation would be eliminated by reduction of user rates. 
Sec. 1.110. - Employees; quarterly reports. 
    The board shall have the power to employ or discharge its employees at its pleasure. It shall make quarterly reports to the city governing authority of all monies it has received and expenditures made in the operation of the water system. 
Sec. 1.111. - Removal of board members. 
    The board shall be amenable to the city governing authority and subject to removal from office for neglect of duty of malfeasance in office. 
Sec. 1.112. - Sewerage system; authority to construct and maintain. 
    The water and sewer authority is hereby authorized to construct a city sewerage system in the city, and all rights conferred to the board to construct, operate and maintain a water system for the city and to join with the county in the issuance of revenue-anticipation certificates for that purpose, shall likewise apply to the construction, operation and maintenance of a sewerage system for the city. 
Sec. 1.113. - Ownership of systems by city. 
    Any water or sewerage system that may be constructed under the provisions of this act shall be construed to be the property of the City of Hapeville, and nothing in this act shall be construed to limit the City of Hapeville in issuing bonds, revenue certificates or any other means of financing as are now or hereafter recognized by law for the development of the water or sewerage facilities. The powers and rights conferred by this act shall be cumulative to the powers and rights that now exist. 
Sec. 1.114. - Cost of facilities borne by recipients of service. 
    In exercising the powers herein granted, it is hereby declared to be the intention of the General Assembly that the governing authority of the City of Hapeville and the water and sewer authority created herein shall implement and carry out such powers, as far as practicable, in such a manner that the cost of establishing and maintaining the facilities herein authorized shall be borne by those citizens of Hapeville benefiting from the establishment and maintenance of such facilities. 
Sec. 1.115. - Governing authority's powers. 
    The city governing authority may, in its discretion, alter, change, modify or repeal any of the rules and regulations adopted by the water and sewer authority. 
Sec. 1.116. - Governing authority, defined. 
    The term "city governing authority" used in this act shall be construed to mean the regularly elected mayor and council of the city. 
Sec. 1.117. - Severability. 
    In the event any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this act shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this act, which shall remain of full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part hereof. The General Assembly hereby declares that it would have passed the remaining parts of this act if it had known that such part or parts hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
CHAPTER 2. - Development Authority[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise indicated, are derived from Ga. L. 1982, p. 2524, 2618, which acts were ratified by the voters November 2, 1982 as amendatory of Art. IX, Sec. IV, Para. II of The Constitution of 1976. The act was continued in force by Ga. L. 1987, p. 4961. 

Sec. 2.101. - Creation. 
    There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Hapeville Development Authority which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality and political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation thereof and by that name, style and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. 
Sec. 2.102. - Purpose. 
    The said authority is created for the purpose of acquiring, constructing, adding to, extending, improving, equipping, maintaining, and operating any public industrial, commercial, business or office projects, buildings and other public facilities, parking lots or garages and other parking structures and any and all other facilities useful or desirable in connection therewith, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, with the right to contract for the use of or to lease or sell any or all of such facilities, including real property, and to do any and all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation thereof, and to attain development and promote for the public good, general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities and to promote the general welfare of the community, by creating a climate favorable to the location of new industry, trade and commerce, and the development of existing industry, trade and commerce, and same is vested with authority to ascertain and designate areas it deems proper to be blighted, retarded or slum areas which constitute a serious and growing menace injurious to the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the City of Hapeville; the existence of such areas constitutes substantially and increasingly to the spread of disease, crime and constitutes increasingly an economic and social liability, substantially impairs or arrests the sound growth of the municipality, retards the provision of housing for commercial accommodations, aggravates traffic problems and substantially impairs or arrests the elimination of traffic hazards and the improvement of traffic facilities; and the prevention and elimination of such areas is a matter of state and local policy and state and local concern in order that the state and its political subdivisions shall not continue to be endangered by areas which are focal centers of economic and social liability, and while contributing little to the tax income of the state and its municipalities, consume an excessive proportion of its revenue because of the extra services required for police, fire, accident, hospitalization and other forms of public protection, services and facilities; in order to alleviate the aforesaid problems and to accomplish the aforestated purpose, the authority shall be vested with such powers as are necessary to accomplish same by acquisition, clearance and disposition subject to use restrictions of property, both real and personal, since the prevailing condition of decay may make impractical the reclamation of the area by conservation or rehabilitation; some areas or portions thereof may be susceptible to conservation or rehabilitation in such a manner that the conditions and evils hereinabove enumerated may be eliminated or remedied or prevented and to the extent feasible, savable areas should be conserved and rehabilitated through voluntary private action and regulatory processes; and the authority may do any and all things deemed by such authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient proper development and operation thereof. 
Sec. 2.103. - Membership. 
    The authority shall consist of nine (9) members, one of whom shall be the Mayor of the City of Hapeville, Georgia, or his designated member from the City Council of the City of Hapeville. 
(a)  Qualifications. All persons who have resided within the limits of the City of Hapeville for at least six (6) months shall be eligible for nomination to membership on the authority. 
(b)  Composition and appointments. The remaining eight (8) positions for membership in the authority shall be comprised as follows: The eight (8) positions shall be filled by resolution of the Mayor and Council of Hapeville. The Mayor of the City of Hapeville or his designee shall serve during the term of office for which he was elected. The chairman of the authority shall be selected by a majority of its members at the first annual meeting of each calendar year. The members of the authority shall serve four (4) year staggered terms as follows: For the initial membership of the authority, of the eight (8) positions filled by resolution of the Mayor and Council of Hapeville, two (2) positions shall be filled for a one (1) year term, two (2) positions shall be filled for two (2) year terms, two (2) positions shall be filled for three (3) year terms and two (2) positions for a four (4) year term. Thereafter, upon completion of a term for appointment, each successor shall be appointed for a four (4) year term and until their successors have been selected and appointed. Any member of the authority may be selected and appointed to succeed himself. All appointments shall be for a term commencing on January 1 and ending December 31. The members of the authority shall enter upon their duties immediately after such appointment. The authority shall elect one of its members to serve as vice chairman who shall be elected for a term of one (1) year or until his successor is selected and qualified and annually thereafter the authority shall select one of its members in the same manner for a one (1) year term. The authority shall also select a secretary-treasurer which secretary-treasurer need not necessarily be a member of the authority and, if not a member, he or she shall have no voting rights and said secretary-treasurer shall be elected to serve at the pleasure of the authority. No member of the authority shall hold more than one office except that of secretary-treasurer. Four (4) members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. A majority of the members shall be empowered to exercise the rights and perform all the duties of the authority and no vacancies on the authority shall impair the right of the quorum to act. In the event of a vacancy on the authority through death, resignation or otherwise, the same shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member ceasing to be a member of such authority for any reason in the same manner that such member originally became a member of the authority. The authority shall make rules and regulations for its own government. It shall have perpetual existence. In the event the number of members of the authority or the qualifications of the membership or the manner in which the members of the authority shall be selected shall ever be the subject of change, the same may be accomplished by an act of the general assembly, except that the general assembly may not alter the term of office of any duly appointed member then serving. 
Sec. 2.104. - Definitions. 
    As used herein the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word authority shall mean the Hapeville Development Authority herein created. 
(b)  The word project shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, installation, leasing, furnishing, or equipping of new industrial, commercial, business, office, trade or public facilities or the improvement, modification, renovation, acquisition, expansion, modernization, rehabilitation, leasing, equipping, furnishing, or remodeling of existing industrial, commercial, business, office, trade, or public facilities located or to be located within the City of Hapeville, including, but not limited to: one or more buildings or structures to be used in the production, manufacturing, processing, assembling, storing or handling of any agricultural, manufactured, mining or industrial product, or any combination of the foregoing; one or more buildings or structures or property useful or necessary in the transportation of persons or property; one or more buildings or structures or property to be used, maintained and operated as a multiuse coliseum and civic center type facilities to be used for athletic contests: games, meetings, trade fairs, expositions, political conventions, agricultural events, theatrical and musical performances and all other public entertainments permitted by law, and the usual facilities related thereto, including, without limitation, refreshment stands and restaurants; one or more buildings or structures or property useful or necessary in the accommodations of people, including, but without limitation, any hotel, motel, motor inn, lodginghouse, lodge or any combination thereof; one or more buildings or structures used for any industrial, commercial business, office, public or other use; and parking facilities or parking areas, including but not limited to related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings, and extensions and improvements of such facilities. 
(c)  The term cost of project shall include: all costs of construction, purchase or other form of acquisition; all costs of real or personal property required for the purposes of such project and of all facilities related thereto, including land and any rights or undivided interest therein, easements, franchises, water rights, fees, permits, approvals, licenses and certificates and the securing of such franchises, permits, approvals, licenses and certificates and the preparation of applications therefor; all machinery, equipment, initial fuel and other supplies required for such project; financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and during such additional period as the authority may reasonably determine to be necessary for the placing of such project in operation; costs of engineering architectural and legal services; fees paid to fiscal agents for financial and other advice or supervision; cost of plans and specifications and all expenses necessary or incidental to the construction, purchase or acquisition of the completed project or to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project; administrative expenses and such other expenses as may be necessary or incidental to the financing herein authorized. There may also be included, as part of such cost of project, the repayment of any loans made for the advance payment of any part of such cost, including the interest thereon at rates to be determined by the authority, which loans are hereby authorized if made payable solely from the proceeds of such authority's bonds or notes or revenues to be received in connection with the leasing sale or financing of the project. The cost of any project may also include a fund or funds for the creation of a debt service reserve, a renewal and replacement reserve, and such other reserves as may be reasonably required by the authority with respect to the financing and operation of its projects and as may be authorized by any bond resolution or trust agreement or indenture pursuant to the provisions of which the issuance of any such bonds may be authorized. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of the proceeds of revenue bonds or notes issued. 
(d)  The terms revenue bonds and bonds shall mean any bonds of the authority which are hereunder authorized to be issued, including refunding bonds, as though such revenue bonds had originally been authorized to be issued under the provisions of the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 36 et seq., as amended) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761 et seq., as amended) and in addition shall also mean any obligations of the authority, the issuance of which are hereinafter specifically provided for. 
(e)  Any project or combination of projects shall be deemed self-liquidating if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom, including, but not limited to, any revenues derived from the City of Hapeville or other political subdivision under any contracts with the authority, will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, repairing and maintaining the project to pay the principal and interest on the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project, projects, or combination of projects. 
Sec. 2.105. - Powers. 
    The authority shall have the powers: 
(a)  To sue and be sued, except as expressly provided for herein; 
(b)  To adopt and alter a corporate seal; 
(c)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease and dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(d)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, or by condemnation, upon the approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville, and in accordance with the provisions of any and all laws applicable to the condemnation of property for public use, real property, or rights or easements therein, or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of or dispose of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority, the authority being under no obligation to accept and pay for any property condemned under the provisions hereof, except from the funds provided under the authority hereof, and in any proceedings to condemn, such orders may be made by the court having jurisdiction of the suit, action or proceedings as may be just to the authority and to the owners of the property to be condemned; and no property shall be acquired under the provisions hereof upon which any lien or other encumbrance exists, unless at the time such property is so acquired a sufficient sum of money be deposited in trust to pay and redeem the fair value of such lien or encumbrance; 
(e)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees, including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(f)  To make contracts and leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired, and to contract with the City of Hapeville and with the State of Georgia and any departments, institutions, agencies, counties, municipalities or political subdivisions of the State of Georgia, public corporations and with others upon such terms and for such purposes as may be deemed advisable for a term not exceeding 50 years; and the City of Hapeville is hereby authorized to enter into contracts and related agreements for the use by the City of Hapeville or the residents hereof of any project, structure, building or facility or a combination of two or more projects, structures, buildings or facilities of the authority for a term not exceeding 50 years; and said city shall be and the same is hereby specifically authorized to levy taxes, without limitation as to rate or amount, and to expend tax monies of the city and any other available funds and to obligate said city to make payment thereof to the authority upon such terms as may be provided in any contract entered into by and between the authority and the City of Hapeville, in order to enable the authority to pay the principal of and interest on any of its bonds as same mature and to create and maintain a reserve for that purpose and also to enable the authority to pay the cost of maintaining, repairing and operating the property or facilities so furnished by said authority; 
(g)  To acquire, construct, own, repair, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate, maintain and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid, in whole or in part, from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from such proceeds and any grant or contribution from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof or from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(h)  To finance (by loan, grant, lease or otherwise), construct, erect, assemble, purchase, acquire, own, repair, remodel, renovate, rehabilitate, modify, maintain, extend, improve, install, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate or manage projects and to pay the cost of any project from the proceeds of revenue bonds, notes or other obligations of the authority or any other funds of the authority, or from any contributions or loans by persons, corporations, partnerships (limited or general) or other entities, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use; 
(i)  To borrow money to further or carry out its public purpose and to execute revenue bonds, notes, other obligations, leases, trust indentures, trust agreements, agreements for the sale of its revenue bonds, notes or other obligations, loan agreements, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds, security agreements, assignments and such other agreements or instruments as may be necessary or desirable, in the judgment of the authority, to evidence and to provide security for such borrowing; 
(j)  To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality may require; 
(k)  To accept loans and/or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision may require; 
(l)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(m)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state; and 
(n)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly given hereunder. 
Sec. 2.106. - Revenue bonds. 
    The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, subject to the approval by the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal of and interest on such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special funds herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates per annum, payable at such time or times, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 40 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be made redeemable before maturity, at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. 
Sec. 2.107. - Same; form; denomination; registration; place of payment. 
    The authority shall determine the form of the bonds, including any interest coupons to be attached thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds and the place or places of payment of the principal thereof and the interest thereon, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered forms, or both, as the authority may determine, and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both principal and interest. 
Sec. 2.108. - Same; signature; seal. 
    In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes, the same as if such officer had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and attested by the secretary-treasurer of the authority. Either of such signatures on any coupons may be by facsimile signature of the chairman and the secretary-treasurer of the authority in accordance with the provision of applicable law. Any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Sec. 2.109. - Same; negotiability. 
    All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall have and are hereby declared to be negotiable under the laws of this state, subject to provisions for registration. 
Sec. 2.110. - Same; sale; proceeds of bonds. 
    The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority and the proceeds derived from the sale of such bonds shall be used solely for the purpose provided in the proceedings authorizing the issuance of such bonds. 
Sec. 2.111. - Same; interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
    Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions, issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Sec. 2.112. - Same; replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
    The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bonds or coupons which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Sec. 2.113. - Same; conditions precedent to issuance. 
    Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things other than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required hereunder. Any resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions hereof shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posed, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority. 
Sec. 2.114. - Same; credit not pledged and debt not created. 
    Revenue bonds issued by the authority hereunder shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of the City of Hapeville, nor of the State of Georgia or any municipality, county, authority, instrumentality or political subdivision of the State of Georgia, which may contract with such authority. 
Sec. 2.115. - Same; trust indentures as security. 
    In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or without the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property, the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insuring of the project, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies; and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds; and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depositary of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state or any other state or the United States to act as such depositary and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Sec. 2.116. - To whom proceeds shall be paid. 
    The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
Sec. 2.117. - Sinking fund. 
    The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings, and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal of and interest on revenue bonds of the authority, as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds, so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund, which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payment of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agents for paying principal and interest and other investment charges, and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be maintained as a trust account for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds, or in the trust indenture, any surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Sec. 2.118. - Remedies of bondholders. 
    Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act or any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings, protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging, and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Sec. 2.119. - Funding and refunding bonds. 
    The authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution, subject to the approval of the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville, for the issuance of bonds of the authority for the purpose of funding or refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon and premium, if any. The issuance of such funding or refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Sec. 2.120. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
    Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the Superior Court of Fulton County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to the validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Sec. 2.121. - Validation. 
    Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedure of the revenue bond law, as amended, or as the same may be hereafter amended. The petition or validation shall also make a party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and any such municipality, county, authority, political subdivisions or instrumentality shall be required to show cause, if any exist, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the contract or contracts adjudicated as a part of the basis of the security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds, then validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds and the security for the payment thereof and interest thereon and against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, political subdivision or instrumentality, if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said authority. 
Sec. 2.122. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
    While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said authority or its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interests and rights of the holders of such bonds. 
Sec. 2.123. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
    All monies received pursuant to the authority of this act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act. 
Sec. 2.124. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
    The authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix rents and rates and to revise same from time to time and to collect payments, fees, tolls and charges on each project or for the services, facilities and commodities furnished; and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues of such undertakings or projects, to issue revenue bonds as herein provided to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, improvement, betterment or extension of its undertakings or projects; and to pledge to the punctual payment of said bonds, and interest thereon, all or any part of the revenues of such undertakings or projects, including the revenues of improvements, betterments or extensions thereto thereafter made. 
Sec. 2.125. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
    It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions hereof, including the basis on which services and facilities, or both, shall be furnished. 
Sec. 2.126. - Governmental function. 
    It is hereby declared that the authority is created for a public purpose and will be performing an essential governmental function in the exercise of the powers conferred upon it hereunder in the development and promotion of civic and cultural growth, public welfare, trade, commerce, education, amusement, recreation or to alleviate traffic congestion in the City of Hapeville and thereby better protect the lives and property of its residents and others using its streets. 
Sec. 2.127. - Immunity from tort actions. 
    The authority shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the State of Georgia and the officers, agents and employees of the authority, when in the performance of the work of the authority, shall have the same immunity and exemption from liability for torts and negligence as the officers, agents and employees of the State of Georgia. The authority may be sued in the same manner as private corporations may be sued on any contractual obligations to the authority. 
Sec. 2.128. - Property subject to levy and sale. 
    The property of the authority shall not be subject to levy and sale under legal process except such property, revenue, income or funds as may be pledged, assigned, mortgaged or conveyed to secure an obligation of the authority, and any such property, revenue, funds or income may be sold under legal process or under any power granted by the authority to enforce payment of the obligation. 
Sec. 2.129. - Construction. 
    This amendment and all provisions, rights, powers and authority granted hereunder shall be effective, notwithstanding any other provision of the constitution to the contrary, and this amendment and any law enacted with reference to the authority shall be liberally construed for the accomplishment of its purposes. 
Sec. 2.130. - Special tax districts. 
    The City of Hapeville shall be empowered and authorized to create special tax districts within the City of Hapeville upon the areas of any projects for redevelopment or development that said authority may determine, and to levy and collect taxes within said districts based on values of real property fixed by the tax digest of the City of Hapeville to meet, pay for and retire any and all financial obligations of the authority, its bonds and/or revenue certificates, and may pledge said revenue, and to levy and collect taxes within said districts for the retirement of said financial obligations. No such special taxes shall be levied by the City of Hapeville for any purpose against property used exclusively for residential purposes within any such tax district. 
Sec. 2.131. - Effective date. 
    This amendment shall be effective immediately upon proclamation of its ratification by the governor. 
Sec. 2.132. - General assembly. 
    This amendment is self-enacting and does not require any enabling legislation for it to become effective. However, the general assembly may, by law, further define and prescribe the powers and duties of the authority and the exercise thereof and may enlarge and restrict the same and may, likewise, further regulate the management and conduct of the authority not inconsistent with any other provisions of this constitution. The authority shall be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia, and the scope of its operation shall be limited to the territory embraced within the corporate limits of the City of Hapeville as the same now or may hereafter exist. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Charter 85-1  7-16-1985 App. A, § 12 94-16  8- 2-1994 Char. § 5-402 94-17  8- 2-1994 1 Char. § 4-302 2004-23 12-21-2004 1 Char. § 4-303 2(5-104), 2(5-105) Char. § 5-104, 
Char. § 5-105 2(5-112) Char. § 5-112 3(6-101)-3(6-109) Char. § 6-101- 
Char. § 6-109 4(app. A, § 5), App. A, § 5, 
App. A, § 6 4(app. A, § 6) 5(app. A, § 10) App. A, § 10 2006-04  3- 7-2006 1       Added App. B, § 9 2007-08  6-19-2007 1 App. B, § 9 2018-02  1-23-2018 1 Char. § 4-302  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Subpart A - GENERAL ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The provisions embraced in this and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1959, § 1-1; Code 1981, § 1-1-1) 
Sec. 1-1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
(1)  City . The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Hapeville, Georgia" followed the word city, and shall extend to and include its several officers, agents and employees. 
(2)  City council . The words "city council" or "the council" shall be construed to mean the governing body of the City of Hapeville, Georgia, consisting of a mayor, council members and an alderman. 
(3)  Computation of time . Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done, a certain length of time before any proceedings shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
(4)  County . The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Fulton, Georgia. 
(5)  Gender . A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
(6)  Interpretation . In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
(7)  Name or title of officer, board, commission or agency . The name or title of any officer, board, commission or agency, when appearing alone herein, shall be construed as if the words "of Hapeville, Georgia" followed it. 
(8)  Number . A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
(9)  Oath . The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
(10)  Or, and . The word "or" may be read as the word "and," and the word "and" may be read as the word "or," if the sense requires it. 
(11)  Owner . The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
(12)  Person . The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
(13)  Personal property [The words "personal property"] include every species of property except real property. 
(14)  State . The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
(15)  Time . Words used in the present or past tense include the future as well as the present or past. 
(Code 1981, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 1-1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted, unless expressly so provided. 
(Code 1959, § 1-3; Code 1981, § 1-1-3) 
Sec. 1-1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1959, § 1-4; Code 1981, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 1-1-5. - Severability. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code. 
(c)  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the Code and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the Code shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Code 1959, § 1-5; Code 1981, § 1-1-5; Ord. No. 2000-23, § 1, 10-3-2000) 
Sec. 1-1-6. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1981, § 1-1-6; Ord. No. 99-04, § 1, 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 2001-19, § 1, 12-4-2001) 
Sec. 1-1-7. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the mayor and council, which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 hereof. 
(Code 1981, § 1-1-7) 
Sec. 1-1-8. - General penalty; continuing violations; adjudging fines and imprisonments. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code and where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such penalty may include, in the discretion of the municipal court judge, sentencing offenders to work in a work gang on the public streets or on such public works as the city may employ the work gang. Each day any violation of any provision of this Code shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 1-1-8) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE 2. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-2-1. - Council meetings; time, calling special meetings, rules of order. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall meet on the first Tuesday in each month at 6:00 p.m. Eastern Time (ET) and continue in session from day to day in their discretion. 
(b)  Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any three members of the council at any time when deemed necessary. 
(c)  The mayor and two members of council, or the alderman-at-large and two council members, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A less number may adjourn from time to time and compel attendance of absentees. 
(d)  In the absence of the mayor, the alderman-at-large, or, if absent, any member of the council may be chosen to take the chair at the hour appointed for any meeting. 
(e)  Every committee shall report at the succeeding meeting on all matters referred to them, or show good cause why such report is not made. 
(f)  A majority of the council shall govern. The mayor or presiding officer shall vote only in case of a tie. 
(g)  Any member of the council may call for the "yeas" and "nays" on any question, and the vote so taken shall be recorded in the minutes. 
(h)  The mayor or presiding officer shall enforce parliamentary rules so far as they are applicable to such a legislative body and do not conflict with the rules adopted. "Robert's Rules of Order" shall be regarded as authority on parliamentary laws. 
(i)  Any additional rule or rules may be made from time to time, but no rule shall be altered or suspended without consent of 2/3 of the members present. 
(Code 1959, § 2-1; Code 1981, § 2-1-1; Ord. No. 2018-13 , § 1, 10-2-2018) 
Sec. 2-2-2. - Same; mayor, duties. 
    The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the council, and it shall be his duty to see that all laws and ordinances are enforced in a legal manner, and that the other officers of the city perform their duties properly including the making of such official bonds as are required, of which he shall be the custodian. All ordinances as passed by the council shall be approved and signed by the mayor within four days, or he shall file his dissent as provided under section 2-405 of the charter. 
(Code 1959, § 2-2; Code 1981, § 2-1-2) 
Sec. 2-2-3. - Public meetings. 
    All meetings of the mayor and council or any board, commission, or other body of the city shall be open to the public, except that any meeting or portion thereof may be closed to the public in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. and as amended hereafter. 
(Code 1981, § 2-1-3; Ord. No. 2004-22, § 1, 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 2-2-4. - Performance bonds of employees. 
    The mayor and council may, by resolution, require a bond of any employee of the city conditioned on faithful performance, payable to the city in an amount set in the resolution. Premiums thereon are to be paid by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-1-4) 
Sec. 2-2-5. - Rules and procedures of mayor and council. 
(a)  Ordinances. All ordinances passed by the council may, at a minimum, contain the following items: 
(1)  Ordinance number; 
(2)  Adoption date; 
(3)  Codification clause; 
(4)  Severability clause; 
(5)  Signature of mayor; 
(6)  Attestation by city manager, chief administrator, city administrator, director of finance and administration or city clerk as applicable; and 
(7)  Approval of city attorney as to form. 
(b)  Recording of ordinances. All ordinances shall be recorded in a separate book for that purpose, and the book shall bear the title "Ordinances of the City of Hapeville, Georgia." 
(c)  Mayor's meeting responsibilities. The mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed and call the members of the council to order. He or she shall preserve order and decorum, decide all questions of order, unless appealed to the council, and appoint all committees. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem is vested with like powers. If the mayor is compelled to partake in discussion, the mayor shall have the right to do so. 
(d)  Order of meetings. The business of all regular meetings of the council may be transacted in the following order: 
(1)  Call to order; 
(2)  Roll call; 
(3)  Welcome; 
a.  Pledge of Allegiance; 
b.  Invocation. 
(4)  Presentations; 
(5)  Public hearing; 
a.  Public comments will be received pursuant to subsection (e) of this section. 
(6)  Questions on agenda items; 
(7)  Consent agenda; 
(8)  Old business; 
(9)  New business; 
(10)  Committee reports; 
(11)  Public comments; and 
(12)  Adjournment. 
    The mayor and council, by a vote of a majority of the members present, may suspend the rules and change the order of business. 
(e)  Public hearings. Public hearings at meetings of the city shall be conducted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Staff recommendation. First, the staff will present its recommendation to mayor and council including dispositive considerations in making their recommendation. 
(2)  Applicant's presentation. After the staff recommendation, the applicant shall present their application by first identifying themselves and then providing any pertinent facts or documentation in support of their applications. 
(3)  Public comments. Comments from members of the public regarding the current topic on the floor, beginning with comments in opposition, followed by comments in support, with a follow-up from the applicant to address issues raised by previous commenters. If the commenter begins to stray away from the specific agenda item, the mayor may limit the commentary. Once an agenda item has passed, the mayor and council will not hear any comments regarding the specific agenda item, unless reserved for general comment session at the end of the meeting. 
a.  Time limitations. Ten minutes will be provided for discussion per agenda item, in addition to a total of ten minutes for comments by those in opposition and ten minutes for comments by those in support. 
(f)  Zoning hearings. The following rules of procedures shall govern any public hearing regarding zoning request or determination before the mayor and council: 
(1)  Each applicant shall appear before the council, identify himself/herself by name, address and whether or not applicant is owner or agent for owner. 
(2)  Each applicant or other interested party who provides the council with documents shall have each document numbered and shall identify each document and each such document submitted shall be made a part of the official record of the hearing. 
(3)  Each applicant shall have ten minutes to present facts pertinent to the application. An applicant may have additional time to address the council if the applicant notifies the city clerk prior to the start of the public hearing that applicant needs additional time. The council may grant additional time to the applicant at their own discretion. 
(4)  All people in opposition to the rezoning of property and amendment to the zoning ordinance shall have ten minutes to address the council and shall provide the city clerk with name and address; however, the total time for all interested parties in opposition shall be 30 minutes unless the applicant requests for additional time, in which case the total time shall not exceed 40 minutes. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall make a final decision at its next regular public meeting and direct the community development department to notify the applicant in writing of the council's decision. The written notification shall immediately be entered on the minutes and made a part of the record on the date that written notification is given to the applicant. 
(6)  Any aggrieved party shall have 30 days from the date of written notification to file an appeal from the council's decision with the superior court. 
(g)  Evidentiary hearings. The following rules of procedure shall govern all other evidentiary hearings not covered above: 
(1)  Each proponent shall appear before the council, identify himself/herself by name, and present the issue to the council. 
(2)  Each proponent who provides the council with documents shall have each document numbered and shall identify each document and each such document submitted shall be made a part of the official record of the hearing. Certified copies of documents shall be provided to the council, if applicable. 
(3)  Each proponent shall have ten minutes to present facts pertinent to the issue. The proponent may have additional time to address the council if the proponent notifies the city clerk prior to the start of the public hearing that proponent needs additional time. The council may grant additional time to the proponent at their own discretion. 
(4)  All people in opposition to the issue shall have ten minutes to address the council and shall provide the city clerk with name and address; however, the total time for all interested parties in opposition shall be 30 minutes unless the proponent requests for additional time, in which case the total time shall not exceed 40 minutes. 
(5)  The proponent shall be granted an additional five minutes to rebut any arguments made in opposition but submitting additional evidence. 
(6)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall make a final decision and during its next regular public meeting, shall notify the proponent in writing of the council's decision. The written notification shall immediately be entered on the minutes and made a part of the record on the date that written notification is given to the proponent. 
(7)  Any aggrieved party shall have 30 days from the date of written notification to file an appeal from the council's decision with the superior court. 
(h)  General comments. General comments regarding items not listed on the agenda will be made available before the adjournment of the meeting. Prior to the commencement of each meeting during which there will be a general comment portion, members of the public wishing to speak shall sign in with the city clerk and shall provide their name and the topic upon which they wish to speak; this will be known as the registered comments session. Members of the public that failed to sign in with the city clerk and have not identified themselves or the topic they wish to speak about will have the opportunity to speak during the unregistered comment session. 
(1)  Time limitations (registered comment session). Each member of the public, who signed up with the city clerk prior to the commencement of the meeting, wishing to address the mayor or council during the general comment session shall have a total of three minutes during which he/she may address the mayor or council. Such time shall not be extended unless approved by a majority of the council members present. The three-minute time limit shall not be extended by any dialogue with or comments by council or the mayor. The entire general comment session for registered comments shall not last more than 15 minutes unless extended by council. 
(2)  Time limitations (unregistered comment session). Each member of the public, who failed to sign up with the city clerk prior to the commencement of the meeting, wishing to address the mayor or council during the general comment session shall have a total of two minutes during which he/she may address the mayor or council. Such time shall not be extended unless approved by a majority of the council members present. The two-minute time limit shall not be extended by any dialogue with or comments by council or the mayor. The entire general comment session for unregistered comments shall not last more than ten minutes unless extended by council. 
(3)  General comment content. No member of the public shall be permitted to make personal, impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks to the mayor or any council member. Mayor and council meetings serve the purpose of conducting city business and are not a forum for the unlimited expression of opinion. The mayor reserves the right to limit comments to matters germane to city business and may refer speakers to the city manager or other staff for resolution. 
(i)  Recording in minutes. All of the following shall be recorded in the ordinance and minute books of the mayor and council: 
(1)  All motions, except for adjournment; 
(2)  All resolutions; 
(3)  All information required by the laws of the United States and of this state; 
(4)  The motion, number and title by which new ordinances are introduced; 
(5)  The "yeas" and "nays" shall be recorded whenever required by one or more members; and 
(6)  All other information which the mayor and council may direct. 
(j)  Appointments. All appointments shall be by ballot. 
(k)  Council members. During mayor and city council meetings, the council members shall not: 
(1)  Interrupt anyone who has the floor; 
(2)  Represent the personal opinion and beliefs; 
(3)  Refuse to recognize the validity of the actions approved by a majority vote of the board; and 
(4)  Text and send messages to other council members. 
(l)  Addressing presiding officer. During city council meetings, each council member, when speaking on a particular item, shall address the presiding officer. 
(m)  Robert's Rules of Parliamentary Order. Robert's Rules of Parliamentary Order shall be regarded as supplementary guidelines for the proceedings of the council insofar as the same are applicable, and do not conflict with city ordinances. 
(n)  Recording of meeting. At all such meetings of the mayor and council or meetings of the council, the deliberations of said meeting and actions taken may be recorded by the use of magnetic tapes. Upon the minutes being edited and reduced to writing, the magnetic tapes so used may then be erased or destroyed. 
(Code 1981, § 2-1-5; Ord. No. 88-1, 4-5-1988; Ord. No. 99-04, § 2, 3-2-1999; Ord. No. 2001-19, § 2, 12-4-2001; Ord. No. 2018-14 , § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 2-2-6. - Committees. 
    There are hereby established the following standing committees: 
(1)  Administration and finance; 
(2)  Police, fire, and ordinances; 
(3)  Public service; 
(4)  Recreation, parks, buildings, and grounds; and 
(5)  Economic development. 
(Ord. No. 2004-03, § 1, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-2-7. - Compensation. 
    The compensation paid to the mayor and council of the city shall be: 
(1)  Mayor, per year ..... $ 8,400.00. 
(2)  Councilpersons, per year .....   7,800.00. 
(Ord. No. 2001-13, § 1, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 2-2-8. - Waiving of late fees. 
    All late fees assessed under the Code of the city may be waived, upon an applicant's showing of good cause, by a vote of mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2015-03 , § 1, 3-17-2015) 
ARTICLE 3. - ELECTIONS 

Sec. 2-3-1. - Election officials. 
    The mayor and council shall by resolution annually appoint a municipal election superintendent, election manager, registrars, absentee ballot clerk and any other officials as are necessary, all of whom shall exercise those powers and duties set forth in O.C.G.A. chapter 34A-3 and other applicable provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(Code 1981, § 2-2-1) 
State Law reference- O.C.G.A. §§ 34A-302, 34A-401, 34A-502, 34A-1109(b), 34A-1117 and 34A-1304. 
Sec. 2-3-2. - Expenses. 
(a)  The election superintendent is authorized to incur expenses in the preparation and conduct of an election including the cost of purchasing identification badges for poll officers, the printing of ballots, voters certificates and the purchasing of all other supplies necessary for the conduct of the election. The superintendent is further authorized to incur all necessary expenses to provide voting booths for the proper conduct of all elections. 
(b)  As an alternative, the mayor and council may contract with the county to perform the duties and responsibilities of holding and conducting elections in the city as provided in O.C.G.A. § 21-3-10. 
(Code 1959, § 8-2; Code 1981, § 2-2-2; Ord. No. 91-14, 7-2-1991) 
Sec. 2-3-3. - Election district and polling places. 
    All of the area within the city shall constitute one voting district. Voters shall in all cases vote at the address known by the present system of numbering buildings in the county as 3444 North Fulton Avenue. The superintendent shall cause the polling place to be provided with sufficient light and heat. 
(Code 1959, § 8-3; Code 1981, § 2-2-3; Ord. No. 91-14, 7-2-1991) 
Sec. 2-3-4. - Registration of electors. 
    The city elects to use the county registration list and Fulton County on a mutual basis with the city shall deliver such registration list not less than 14 days before any election is to be held so that a designee may check such list for accuracy of the list and to challenge the unqualified. 
(Code 1959, § 8-4; Code 1981, § 2-2-4) 
Sec. 2-3-5. - Nomination of candidates. 
(a)  In the case of a general election, the period for qualification of candidates shall be no less than three days and no more than five days and shall commence no earlier than 8:30 a.m. on the last Monday in August immediately preceding the general election and shall end no later than 4:30 p.m. on the following Friday. In the case of a special election, the qualifying period shall commence no earlier than the date of call and shall end no later than 25 days prior to the election. 
(b)  In the case of a candidate seeking one of two or more public offices each having the same title and to be filled at the same election by the vote of the same electors, such candidate shall designate the specific office by naming the incumbent. Such designation shall be entered on the ballot in such manner that in the ensuing election such candidate shall only oppose the other candidate or candidates, if any, designating the same specific office. 
(Code 1959, § 8-6; Code 1981, § 2-2-5; Ord. No. 93-16, 10-5-1993; Ord. No. 2009-18, § 1, 12-1-2009) 
Sec. 2-3-6. - Qualification fees. 
    Qualification fees for candidates seeking the office of mayor or council member shall be three percent of the annual compensation of those respective offices. The fee shall be paid to the municipal election superintendent at the time a candidate files his notice of candidacy. 
(Code 1981, § 2-2-6) 
State Law reference- Three percent limitation on qualifying fees, O.C.G.A. § 34A-904. 
Sec. 2-3-7. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    All elections held for the purpose of filling municipal offices in the city shall be nonpartisan and no political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for such municipal election. 
(Code 1959, § 8-8; Code 1981, § 2-2-7) 
Sec. 2-3-8. - Notice of candidacy. 
    Each candidate desiring to have his name placed on the ballot for an office to be filled in a municipal election shall file notice of candidacy as is provided in section 34A-901 of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(Code 1959, § 8-9; Code 1981, § 2-2-8) 
Sec. 2-3-9. - Absentee ballots. 
    Absentee ballots shall be used in all municipal elections. The use of absentee ballots shall be governed by chapter 34A-13 of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
(Code 1959, § 8-10; Code 1981, § 2-2-9) 
Sec. 2-3-10. - Vote required for election. 
    A candidate for municipal office may be elected in a general or special election by receiving a plurality of the votes cast to fill such public office. 
(Code 1959, § 8-11; Code 1981, § 2-2-10) 
Sec. 2-3-11. - Contested elections. 
(a)  A contest case governed by the provisions of this section shall be determined in the county in which the city hall is located. 
(b)  Any person who was a candidate in an election or any aggrieved elector may be permitted to contest the election of any candidate upon the following grounds: 
(1)  Malconduct, fraud or irregularity by any election official sufficient to change or place in doubt the results. 
(2)  Ineligibility of the defendant for the office in dispute. 
(3)  Illegal votes received or legal votes rejected sufficient to change or place in doubt the results. 
(4)  An error in counting the votes or declaring the result of an election, if such error would change the result. 
(5)  Any other cause which shows that another was the person legally elected. 
(6)  A petition to contest the general or special election shall be filed with the city clerk within five days after the results of an election are certified to the governing body of the city. A hearing shall then be set before the governing body. Written notice shall be given to all affected candidates by the governing body of the city. The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and shall contain a copy of the petition of contest. The hearing will take place not more than 15 days nor less than five days after service of the contest notice upon the elected candidates. 
(c)  The governing body shall have the authority to examine the qualifications of electors concerning a right to vote or a recount of ballots, examine the registration list and perform such acts and conduct such examinations as may be deemed necessary to determine the validity of a contest of an election. 
(d)  The final determination of the governing body of the city may be appealed to the superior court in the manner of appeal from the judge of probate, except that such appeal shall be made within ten days after determination of the contest by the mayor and council by the issuance of an order so signifying. 
(Code 1959, § 8-12; Code 1981, § 2-2-11) 
Sec. 2-3-12. - Composition of legislative body. 
    There shall be one council member from each ward, one council member from the city at large, one alderman from the city at large and mayor for the city at large, which shall comprise the legislative body of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 8-13; Code 1981, § 2-2-12) 
Sec. 2-3-13. - Council member's residence in wards. 
    Any candidate for council member from any ward shall have been a resident of the ward for at least 30 days before qualification as a candidate for council member. 
(Code 1959, § 8-14; Code 1981, § 2-2-13) 
Sec. 2-3-14. - Election dates. 
    The election for mayor and council member and alderman-at-large shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November as is provided in section 38 of the Charter of the city. Special elections to fill vacancies shall be held at such times as shall be determined by the mayor and council in accordance with section 41 of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 8-15; Code 1981, § 2-2-14) 
Sec. 2-3-15. - Opening and closing of polls. 
    The polls in such elections shall be open at 7:00 a.m. and remain open until 7:00 p.m., but the mayor and council are authorized to fix the time of holding elections, including the time of opening and closing the polls as provided by section 38 of the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 8-16; Code 1981, § 2-2-15) 
Sec. 2-3-16. - Notice of elections. 
    The city clerk shall give at least 15 days' notice of each election by posting the same on the door of the entrance to the city hall. In the case of a special election, the city clerk shall give ten days notice of the election by posting a notice of the same on the door of the entrance of the city hall. 
(Code 1959, § 8-17; Code 1981, § 2-2-16) 
Sec. 2-3-17. - Working for candidate near voting place. 
    On any election date, no person shall be allowed to participate in campaigning activities for any candidate within 300 feet of any voting place in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 8-19; Code 1981, § 2-2-17) 
Sec. 2-3-18. - Wards of the city. 
    The city is hereby divided into two wards. 
(Code 1959, § 8-20; Code 1981, § 2-2-18) 
Sec. 2-3-19. - First ward description. 
    The First ward is comprised of that territory south of the Central of Georgia Railway right-of-way running through the city and west of the centerline of Stewart Avenue. 
(Code 1959, § 8-21; Code 1981, § 2-2-19) 
Sec. 2-3-20. - Second ward description. 
    The Second ward is comprised of all the territory lying north of the Central of Georgia Railway right-of-way and east of the centerline of Stewart Avenue. 
(Code 1959, § 8-22; Code 1981, § 2-2-20) 
Sec. 2-3-21. - Terms of present officers. 
    All present and future elected officers of the city shall hold their offices until the expiration of the term for which they shall have been elected, and until their successors are elected and qualified, except as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1981, § 2-2-21; Ord. No. 88-6, 12-6-1988) 
ARTICLE 4. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 
DIVISION 1. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR/CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-4-1. - Responsibilities delegated. 
    Any duties which were previously performed by or delegated to the city clerk or the director of finance and administration pursuant to the this Code shall hereinafter be performed by or delegated to the city administrator; and in all instances wherein the terms "city clerk" or "director of finance and administration" are used in this code, they shall hereinafter be construed to refer to the city administrator and/or city manager. 
(Code 1981, § 2-3-3; Ord. No. 84-5, 7-3-1984) 
Secs. 2-4-2-2-4-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-4-21. - Duties. 
    In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the city charter, the city clerk shall have the following duties: 
(1)  To receive all applications or petitions made to the city and transmit them to the mayor for presentation to the council at the meeting of council next succeeding the receipt thereof; 
(2)  To be the custodian of the city seal and affix its impression on documents whenever required; 
(3)  To carefully preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other office, and to maintain a proper index to all records and documents so that ready access thereto and use thereof may be had; 
(4)  To issue warrants, summons, receipts, executions or other processes of the city; and 
(5)  To perform any other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-3-11) 
Secs. 2-4-22-2-4-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-4-31. - Powers and duties. 
    The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and counsel of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Advise the mayor and council upon legal questions arising in the conduct of city business; 
(2)  Prepare ordinances and resolutions when so requested by the mayor and council or any committee thereof; 
(3)  Render official opinions upon any legal matter or question submitted by the mayor and council; 
(4)  Attend meetings of the mayor and council as it may require; 
(5)  Prepare for execution contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all bonds and city contracts; 
(6)  Defend or institute any legal proceedings when requested by the mayor and council; and 
(7)  Render such other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-3-21) 
ARTICLE 5. - DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 2-5-1. - Departments created. 
    The following departments of the city are hereby created: 
(1)  Administration and finance; 
(2)  Police; 
(3)  Fire; 
(4)  Public services, also known interchangeably as "community service"; 
(5)  Recreation, parks, buildings, and grounds; and 
(6)  Economic development. 
(Code 1981, § 2-4-1; Ord. No. 84-7, 8-7-1984; Ord. No. 91-6, 3-5-1991; Ord. No. 93-4, 1-5-1993; Ord. No. 94-28, 11-1-1994; Ord. No. 2004-03, § 2, 5-4-2004) 
Sec. 2-5-2. - Functions of departments. 
    The departments of the city shall perform such functions and duties as required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-4-2) 
Sec. 2-5-3. - Boards and commissions created. 
(a)  The following boards and commissions of the city are hereby created: 
(1)  Personnel board; 
(2)  Pensions and retirement board; 
(3)  Planning commission; and 
(4)  Appeals board. 
(b)  Compensation for members of city boards and commissions shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-4-3; Ord. No. 93-1, 1-5-1993) 
Editor's note- A development authority was created for the city by Resolution No. 79-2, adopted July 3, 1979, with members appointed by Resolution No. 79-3, adopted Oct. 11, 1979. 
Sec. 2-5-4. - Tenure of department heads. 
    All department heads shall serve at the will of the mayor and council and are dischargeable with or without cause. However, a majority vote of all members of the council including the mayor shall be required for the separation of a department head. 
(Code 1981, § 2-4-4; Ord. No. 94-31, 11-1-1994; Ord. No. 2000-09, § 3, 3-7-2000) 
ARTICLE 6. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-6-1. - Intent. 
(a)  Declaration of policy. The proper operation of democratic government requires that the mayor and council, city committees, boards, panels, public officials and city employees be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that government decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, there is established a code of ethics for all officials and employees, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The purpose of this code is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of private financial or other interests in matters affecting the city. The provisions and purpose of this code of ethics and such rules and regulations as may be established are declared to be in the best interests of the city. This code of ethics shall apply to all officials, employees and members of boards and commissions, task forces, panels, and authorities of the city. 
(b)  Responsibilities of public office. Public officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state and municipality, and thus to foster respect for all government. They are bound to observe in their official acts the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office, regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern. 
(c)  Procurement of qualified leaders. It is also essential to the proper operation of government that those best qualified be encouraged to serve the government. Accordingly, legal safeguards against conflicts of interest must be so designed as not unnecessarily or unreasonably to impede the recruitment and retention by the city of those men and women who are best qualified to serve. An essential principle underlying the staffing of our government structure is that its elected officials and employees should not be denied the opportunity, available to all other citizens, to acquire and retain private economic and other interests, except where conflicts with the responsibility of such elected officials and employees to the public cannot be avoided. 
(d)  Dedicated service. 
(1)  All officials and employees of the municipality should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain those objectives. Appointed officials and employees should adhere to the rules of work and performance established as the standard for their positions by the appropriate authority. 
(2)  Officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by the officially recognized confidential nature of their work. 
(e)  Distribution of code. The city administrator is authorized and directed to have such number of said code of ethics printed as in his or her discretion will be sufficient for distribution to the officials, employees and board, panel, task forces, authorities, and commission members, as well as having copies available at the city hall for citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-1), 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-6-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, only the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    City official or official, unless otherwise expressly defined, means the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges, the director of finance and administration, or other city manager or city administrator, city clerk, department heads, or member of city boards or commissions. Panels, committees, tax collector, city accountant, and city employees regardless of their employment category, whether such person is appointed salaried, hired or elected. "City official," unless otherwise expressly defined, includes individuals appointed by the mayor and city council to all city commissions, committees, boards, task forces, panels, authorities, or other city bodies unless specifically exempted from this section by the city council. 
    Complaint means a written sworn statement filed with the mayor, city attorney, or board of ethics containing specific allegations of misconduct by a city official filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
    Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the mayor and council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
    Discretionary authority means the power to exercise any judgment in a decision or action. 
    Employee shall be any person who is a full-time, part-time, temporary, or emergency employee of the city. 
    Entity means a sole proprietorship, partnership, limited partnership, firm, corporation, professional corporation, holding company, joint stock company, receivership, trust or any other entity recognized by law through which business may be conducted. 
    Immediate family means spouse, mother or stepmother, father or stepfather, grandfather or stepgrandfather, grandmother or stepgrandmother, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother or stepbrother, sister or stepsister, son or stepson, daughter or stepdaughter, of any city official. 
    Incidental interest means an interest held by a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest and which has insignificant value. 
    Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote or incidental interest held by or accruing to a city official as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A city official shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
(2)  Any entity with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the official may receive any payment or other benefits unless the official receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the official has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the official is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
(4)  Any person of whom the official is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
    Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, who would be affected in the same way as the general public, i.e., interest of a city council member in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges, or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar decisions is incidental to the extent that the council member would be affected in common with the general public. 
    Substantial interest means a known interest, of a city official either directly or through a member of their immediate family, in another person or entity where: (1) the interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity or market value of the entity; or (2) funds received by the person from the other person or entity either during the previous 12 months or the previous calendar year equaled or exceeded $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or non-professional services, or ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; (3) the person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or (4) the person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. Substantial interest in real property means an interest in real property, which is an equitable or legal ownership interest, with a market value of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-2), 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-6-3. - Standards of conduct. 
(a)  No city official shall: 
(1)  Give a reasonable basis for the impression by acts or omissions that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts; 
(2)  Draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention, or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention, or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city; 
(3)  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for him/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties; 
(4)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain; 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a city official; 
(7)  Use his/her position to request or require an employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the official's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering the city's interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business, or political purposes; and 
d.  Work for the official personally without paying the employee just compensation; 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved; 
(9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest; 
(10)  Enter into any contract involving services or property with any city official or with a business in which a city official has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
a.  The designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds; 
b.  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution, which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
c.  Contracts entered into in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-6; 
d.  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency; 
e.  Contracts or business activities entered into with a city official, or with a business in which business city official has an interest, provided that such contract or activity is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such official's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city administrator following disclosure and reporting to the mayor and council; and 
f.  Business activities solely between city officials completely unrelated to city affairs or city business. 
(b)  The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a city official, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid or a committee selection process; 
(c)  Subsection (a)(3) above shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional non-pecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; and 
(4)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with state law. 
(d)  Subsection (a)(5) of this section shall not apply to a city official who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-6-4 are made to the board of ethics or chairperson of the body before which the professional is appearing 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the city official is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-3), 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-6-4. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
    A city official who has an interest or a substantial interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of city officials shall disclose the precise nature of such interest or substantial interest by written or verbal statement made in a public meeting no more than 30 days, but at least prior to the matter being heard by a body who will be taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and the city official will abstain from discussion and voting regarding the matter. An elected city official shall disclose the nature of any interest or substantial interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council or other considering body for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting, and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the city official shall refrain from all ex-parte communications with other members regarding the application in which he/she has an interest or substantial interest. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-4), 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-6-5. - Disqualification. 
    A city official shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he/she has an interest or substantial interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-5), 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-6-6. - Proprietorship of creations. 
    All plans, designs, reports, specifications, drawings, devices, inventions, and other items produced or created by employees during working hours or through the use of the city's facilities or equipment or at the request of the city shall be and become the sole property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-6), 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-6-7. - Political activity. 
(a)  No person employed by the city shall either publicly or otherwise hold himself or herself out as a candidate in any city election while employed with the city. 
(b)  City employees shall not take part in any political management or political campaigns for election of mayor or any member of the city council during any period of time for which he/she is expected to perform work or receive compensation from the city. 
(c)  No employee, official or other person shall solicit, orally or by letter, or be in any other manner concerned in obtaining any assessments, contributions, or services for any political party from any employee during their hours of duty, service, or work with the city. 
(d)  Employees shall not represent the city by wearing any uniform or portion thereof that is issued by the city while he/she is participating in any campaign at any time. 
(e)  The city in no way seeks to influence employees in their choice of party affiliations or candidates, recognizing that this is a matter for each person to decide. Therefore, nothing contained herein shall be construed to restrict the right of the employee to hold membership in and support a political party, to vote as he/she chooses, to express opinions on political subjects or candidates, to maintain political neutrality, to attend political parties after work hours, or to campaign actively during off duty hours in all areas of political activity. 
(f)  Employees shall not utilize any city equipment or vehicles in support of any political campaign. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-7), 4-2-2002) 
Sec. 2-6-8. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  Members. The board of ethics shall consist of five members. The mayor and council shall appoint each of the five members. The city attorney shall act as legal counsel to the board, and shall cast no vote on any subject which comes before the board. At any meeting of the board three members shall constitute a quorum. The board shall elect one of the members as chairman. The chairman may vote on any matter that comes before the board where no conflict exists. The members shall be designated member one, member two, member three, member four and member five, only for purposes of staggering their terms of service. Each member of the board of ethics shall be a resident of the city at the time of appointment and for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. The members of the board of ethics shall serve staggered three-year terms after the terms of the original members are completed. Starting on January 1, 2005, member one's term shall end. The term of member two shall end on January 1, 2006. The term of member three shall end on January 1, 2007. The term of member four shall end on January 1, 2008. The term of member five shall end on January 1, 2009. The three-year terms of future board members shall thereafter continue as staggered. The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. However, travel and other expenses incurred on behalf of the city may be repaid. The mayor and council of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(b)  Criminal background check. Prior to appointment by the mayor and council, candidates for the board of ethics must agree to undergo a criminal background check conducted by the police department prior to designation, the results of which will be forwarded to the mayor and council. Upon appointment each individual shall attend a training session on the Ethics Ordinance conducted by the city. 
(c)  Duties and powers. The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
(2)  To meet within 60 days after the receipt of a complaint, to decide if the same is in the proper form and if so to decide whether or not the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to involve the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council or if further action in a full hearing is necessary; 
(3)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosures required in this article, and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
(4)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this article; 
(5)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this article; 
(6)  To hold such hearings and made such inquiries as deemed necessary to be investigated and rule upon complaints; 
(7)  To report its findings to the mayor and council for such action as the mayor and council deems appropriate; 
(8)  To vote on all issues which come before the board. The chairman may vote on all issues and not simply to break a tie; and 
(9)  To meet to hear issues. A quorum shall be constituted by the presence of all three members of the board, no proxies shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-8), 4-2-2002; Ord. No. 2004-13, §§ 1, 2, 8-3-2004; Ord. No. 2009-13, § 1, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 2-6-9. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  The board may meet and decide a complaint is not in proper form. If such decision is made, the complainant will be so notified and advised as to the deficiencies found in the complaint. A decision of sufficiency as to form must be made within 30 days of the receipt of the complaint. 
(b)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the board of ethics whether received by the mayor, city attorney, or the board itself. The board of ethics shall require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a sworn memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city attorney. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board of ethics shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the mayor and council. The board of ethics shall be empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and to add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics shall be empowered to dismiss those complaints which are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of mayor and council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action he/she might otherwise have at law or in equity against the respondent government servant. A rejection shall prevent refiling of a complaint regarding the same subject(s) and alleged perpetrator(s) for the same offense within six months of the original complaint filing. 
(e)  The board of ethics shall be empowered to conduct probable cause investigations, to take evidence and hold hearings where provided for in this article. 
(f)  The board of ethics shall be empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, applications, and any other written instruments necessary or desirable under these rules. The board of ethics may order any city official to attend any hearing as set forth hereinbelow. 
(g)  If a complaint is already the subject of pending litigation, the board may elect to table the matter until such time as the litigation is concluded. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-9), 4-2-2002; Ord. No. 2004-13, § 3, 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 2-6-10. - Service of complaint; hearing and disposition of complaints. 
(a)  The board of ethics, in any case, shall cause the complaint to be served on the public official charged as soon as practicable. Service may be personal service or certified mail, return receipt requested. Within 60 days of the receipt of a complaint, a hearing shall be held to take appropriate action under section 2-6-9, as to dismissal, or under this section, as to a full hearing, as needed. A party may provide a court reporter for an exact transcript. However, the city shall not be compelled to provide a written transcription. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered and submitted to the mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the following: 
(1)  Generally, the hearing shall be conducted following the same procedures of court hearings in the state. 
(2)  The chairman of the board of ethics shall conduct the hearing. 
(3)  The person who filed the complaint shall present his case to the board first. 
(4)  Each witness presented by the complaint, and including the complainant, shall be subject to cross-examination by the individual accused of the ethical violation or such person's representative. 
(5)  At the conclusion of the complainant's case, the respondent shall be entitled to move for dismissal based on insufficient evidence on the part of the complaint. If respondent makes such a motion and the board, by the majority vote, agrees to dismiss the complaint, the hearing shall be terminated. If either the respondent fails to make such a motion, or, if the board decides by majority vote to overrule respondent's motion, the hearing shall continue. 
(6)  Respondent shall then be entitled to present his evidence to the board, if he so chooses. 
(7)  Respondent shall then be entitled to testify. The absence of respondent's testimony shall not be viewed by the board as an admission of any sort. 
(8)  If respondent testifies, then respondent shall be subject to cross-examination by complainant. All other witnesses who testify in the respondent's case shall be subject to cross-examination by complainant. 
(9)  All persons who testify before the board shall be placed under oath, by either the chairman or a person designated by the chairman or the city attorney. The oath shall read as follows: 
"Do you solemnly swear or affirm that the testimony you are about to give in this matter shall be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, so help you God?" 
(10)  At the conclusion of respondent's case, the complainant may offer rebuttal evidence only to those items presented in respondent's case. At the conclusion of complainant's rebuttal, respondent shall be entitled to offer rebuttal evidence only to those matters presented in complainant's rebuttal case. 
(11)  At the conclusion of all of the testimony and closure of all of the evidence, the board members may ask questions of any of the individuals who testified before the board. 
(12)  At the conclusion of all questions by board members, the chairman shall end the hearing and permit the board to deliberate in public. If the board decides by majority vote that additional evidence is needed to make a decision, the board shall have the authority to conduct its own investigation or to require either the complainant or respondent, subject to the respondents right against self incrimination unless the same is waived by respondent, to submit additional evidence at a continuation of the hearing which must be held no later than 45 days after the date of the initial hearing. The board has no authority to continue the hearing past the 45-day deadline. The board cannot require the respondent to testify if he has not already done so, and the respondent cannot be forced to incriminate himself unless he has already testified, presented evidence, or in some matter waived his right against self-incrimination. 
(13)  Receipt of additional evidence shall follow the same format outlined hereinabove. Following the conclusion of any additional evidence received at the continued hearing, the board shall continue deliberation then the chairman shall call for a vote. The board's first vote must be whether or not the respondent violated the ethics code as charged by the complainant. If, by majority vote, the board rules that the respondent did not violate the ethics code as charged by the complainant, then the matter is concluded. If the board, by majority vote, concludes that the respondent did violate the ethics code as charged by complainant, then the board must make a second decision by majority vote as to the appropriate penalty. 
(14)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the public official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the complaint at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses, and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation and to be provided copies of any document in possession of the city or complainant to be used against them at least five business days in advance of the hearing. Failure to provide such documents shall preclude their submission and consideration by the board. 
(15)  The complainant's evidence must prove that respondent is guilty of the offense charged by the evidentiary standard commonly referred as "preponderance of the evidence." 
(16)  If any question concerning the hearing procedures which is not otherwise addressed in this article arise, the city attorney, or in his absence, the appointed legal advisor to the board shall resolve the procedural question by advisory opinion then said opinion shall be adopted or declined by the board. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-10), 4-2-2002; Ord. No. 2004-13, §§ 4, 5, 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 2-6-11. - Penalties. 
    Any public official who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this article shall be subject to public reprimand or censure. If, in the opinion of the board of ethics, the matter warrants such action, the matter may be sent to the solicitor pro hac vice for review for trial in city court, or to another law enforcement agency for investigation. A decision of the board recommending public reprimand, censure or referral to a law enforcement agency may be appealed to the superior court. Superior court review shall be limited to an inquiry of whether or not there was any evidence before the administrative board, which supported their decision. If a conviction results in city court, said offense shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, and may result in a $1,000.00 fine and/or 60 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 2002-08, § 1(2-7-11), 4-2-2002) 
ARTICLE 7. - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-7-1. - Judge; qualifications, compensation. 
    The municipal court judge shall be an active member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall receive such compensation as fixed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-1; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-2. - Court sessions; when held, generally; opening announcement. 
    A regular session of the municipal court shall be held at a fixed hour of a fixed day as may be determined by the judge, provided any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-2; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-3. - Special sessions. 
    The municipal court may hold special sessions when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for the trial of accused persons before the next regular sitting of the court. The necessity or urgency of the cause shall be presumed from the fact of a session being held. All defendants shall have at least 24 hours' notice of the session. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-3; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-4. - Police attendance. 
    It shall be the duty of some member of the police force designated by the chief of police, with the consent of the city administrator, to attend each session of the court to act as bailiff. It shall be the duty of each police officer making the arrest or having knowledge of the case for or against the defendant to attend the trial of any person brought before the court. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-4; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-5. - Clerk of court, subpoenas; dockets. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city administrator, with the consent of the municipal court judge, to provide a clerk to attend each session of the court and serve as clerk of court. 
(b)  The clerk of court shall: 
(1)  Prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket thereof that will show the name of the person for whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued and to whom delivered. 
(2)  At the request of the municipal court judge, maintain a duplicate court docket and to use the signed duplicate copy of the docket to make necessary entries in the master docket after each session of court. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-5; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-6. - Jury trial; bind over. 
(a)  All charges cognizable as violations of state laws shall be handled by a commitment hearing; provided, however, that they may be adjudicated in the municipal court whenever the court would have jurisdiction over the offense, and the defendant, in writing, waives any right to trial by jury. 
(b)  When a defendant is bound over to the appropriate state court, he or she may be released under any of the following methods: 
(1)  If the defendant has posted bond to the city, he or she may be released on the same bond. 
(2)  If the defendant has not posted bond before being bound over, the defendant shall be delivered, in person, by the city police to the county authorities. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-6; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-7. - Appearance bond; acceptance procedure. 
    Offenses against the ordinances of the city shall be bailable as follows: 
(1)  The clerk of court, municipal court judge, shift commander or any other officer designated by the city administrator may accept bond of the accused payable to the city conditioned upon the appearance of the accused at the next session, or any subsequent session of the court as stated in the bond, to answer the charge. In the event that the shift commander accepts a cash bond from the accused, such acceptance must be witnessed by another officer. 
(2)  The bond shall be in writing in an amount established in a schedule approved by the mayor and council. Cash bonds shall be allowed in the same amount. 
(3)  A person arrested for violation of a city ordinance may be released on his or her own recognizance if the municipal court judge determines that the person will appear at the time set for the court appearance in view of the following considerations: 
a.  The seriousness of the offense charged; 
b.  The penalty provided by law; 
c.  The number of charges pending against the defendant; 
d.  The criminal record of the defendant; 
e.  The residence of the defendant and the length of time of residence; 
f.  The defendant's age; 
g.  The defendant's marital status and number of children; 
h.  Residency of the relatives of the defendant; 
i.  Employment of defendant (by whom, nature of work and how long employed); 
j.  Former employment; 
k.  Amount of earnings; 
l.  The defendant's character, reputation and previous criminal history; 
m.  The defendant's mental condition; and 
n.  Whether the defendant has membership in any clubs or societies, church affiliation and other things which could show that he or she is a responsible member of the community with established community ties. 
(4)  Any person released under subsection (3) above shall receive a receipt for any driver's license deposited or, if released on the person's own recognizance, shall sign and receive a copy of the citation or ticket describing the violation for which the person was arrested. 
(5)  All persons arrested or notified by citation or ticket of parking violations shall be released on their own recognizance. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-7; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-8. - Continuance of cases. 
    Continuances shall be made only for good cause shown. The municipal court judge or clerk of court under the judge's supervision may grant continuations of a case. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-8; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-9. - Forfeiture of appearance bonds. 
(a)  The presiding judge shall call the case in its regular order, and, if the accused is not in court and does not answer the call, and, if no good and sufficient reason is given for nonappearance, the judge shall enter on the docket where the case is stated "bond forfeited," or similar words. 
(b)  Upon forfeiture of any bond, the cash deposited as security shall become the property of the city. 
(c)  Upon the forfeiture of any bond signed by a person as surety, the clerk shall issue an execution against the principal and surety on the bond for the amount thereof which shall be collected as tax executions are collected. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-9; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-10. - Acceptance of pleas. 
    Before accepting a plea to an offense charged, the court shall in all cases, in language which the defendant can understand, inform the defendant of the nature of the charge and the penalty which may be imposed upon conviction, and shall inform the defendant of his or her fundamental constitutional rights. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-10; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-11. - Pleas. 
(a)  The defendant shall enter one of the following pleas: 
(1)  Guilty; 
(2)  Non guilty; 
(3)  Nolo contendere (with the permission of the court); or 
(4)  A former judgment of conviction or acquittal of the offense charged. 
(b)  If the defendant refuses to enter a plea, the court shall enter a plea of not guilty and set the case down for trial. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-11; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-12. - Fines; enforcement by levy and execution; payment in advance of court date. 
(a)  For fines that may be due by any defendant, execution may be issued by the city clerk and collected as tax executions are collected. 
(b)  Persons charged with traffic violations may, prior to the time for their court appearance, plead guilty in writing and pay to the city, as their fine, the amount set as the appearance bond for the offense charged; except that those persons charged with driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs and those charged with an offense in connection with an automobile collision shall be required in all cases to appear before the court for disposition of the case. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-12; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-13. - Appearance of complaining witnesses; subpoena of witnesses. 
(a)  A material or complaining witness in any contested prosecution shall appear at the session at which the prosecution is docketed. The prosecution may be dismissed if the material witness fails to appear. 
(b)  The attendance of witnesses may be enforced by subpoena. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-13; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-14. - Rules of evidence. 
    The general rules of evidence shall be applicable in the trial of all cases. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-14; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-15. - Judgment and sentences. 
    Upon a judgment of plea of guilty the court shall impose sentence. The court may: 
(1)  Impose a fine, with or without a commitment for confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(2)  Commit the defendant to confinement, compulsory work or both; 
(3)  Suspend the execution of the sentence in whole or in part; or 
(4)  Defer the execution of the sentence or any portion or portions thereof to one or more fixed dates in the future. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-15; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-16. - Court dates; contempt warrants. 
(a)  Court date shall be made known to the defendant at the time of the arrest process and shall be properly indicated on the copy of the charges given to the defendant by the arresting officer. 
(b)  Arrest warrants for contempt of court charges may be issued following each session of court. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-16; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-17. - Appearance of persons charged; failure to appear, penalty. 
(a)  In any case where any person is charged with the violation of any of the provisions of this code or any other ordinances of the city and a copy of charges or other citations is delivered to the person requiring an appearance before the municipal court of the city at a specified time and place, it shall be the duty of that person to appear at the time and place set out in the charges or citations. 
(b)  Any person failing to appear at the time and place set out in the charges or citations shall be guilty of contempt of court. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-17; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 2-7-18. - Court costs. 
    The costs in all cases tried before the municipal court shall be established by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-6-18; Ord. No. 96-02, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
ARTICLE 8. - ANNEXATION OF UNINCORPORATED ISLAND 2006 

Sec. 2-8-1. - Annexation of unincorporated island. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-90 et seq., an unincorporated Fulton County island contiguous and abutting the City of Hapeville, Georgia, along the greatest percentage of external boundary is hereby annexed into the City Limits of the City of Hapeville, Georgia as of March 7, 2006. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Sec. 2-8-2. - Identification of formerly unincorporated island. 
    The land area to be annexed is hereby identified on a map physically attached to the original adopting ordinance [Ordinance No. 2006-02] and included therein as exhibit "A." Said ordinance is located in the Official Minutes of the City of Hapeville, Georgia, and is maintained at and may be accessed for public inspection by all affected in the office of the city clerk. The map is deemed a public record. 
(Ord. No. 2006-02, § 1, 3-7-2006) 
Chapter 5 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, adopted March 21, 2017, repealed the former ch. 5, §§ 5-2-1-5-2-3, 5-3-1-5-3-16, 5-4-1-5-4-19, 5-5-1-5-5-19, 5-6-1-5-6-23, 5-6.1-1, 5-6.2-1, 5-6.3-1-5-6.3-17, 5-6.4-1-5-6.4-18, 5-7-1-5-7-18, 5-8-1, and 5-8-2, and enacted a new ch. 5 as set out herein. The former ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2002-14, adopted October 1, 2002; Ord. No. 2002-17, adopted November 12, 2002; Ord. No. 2004-01, adopted January 6, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-02, adopted January 27, 2004; Ord. No. 2004-24, adopted December 21, 2004; Ord. No. 2005-09, adopted October 4, 2005; Ord. No. 2006-08, adopted June 13, 2006; Ord. No. 2006-08A, adopted July 11, 2006; Ord. No. 2007-05, adopted May 1, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-13, adopted July 17, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-15, adopted October 2, 2007; Ord. No. 2007-17, adopted October 1, 2007; Ord. No. 2008-16, adopted October 21, 2008; Ord. No. 2009-04, adopted April 7, 2009; Ord. No. 2009-14, adopted 10-6-2009; Ord. No. 2011-14, adopted 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 2011-15, adopted December 6, 2011; Ord. No. 2013-14, adopted January 21, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-01, adopted May 6, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-04, adopted April 15, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-06, adopted June 3, 2014; Ord. No. 2015-02 , adopted May 5, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-07 , adopted May 5, 2015; Ord. No. 2015-12 , adopted August 4, 2015; Ord. No. 2016-14 , adopted June 21, 2016; Ord. No. 2016-23 , adopted September 20, 2016; and Ord. No. 2016-36 , adopted 12-14-2016. 

ARTICLE 1. - LICENSING GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-1-1. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of state law; 
(2)  Promotion and effectuation of the city's land use and zoning policies/plans; 
(3)  Prevention of the unlawful sale and use of alcohol; 
(4)  Protection of schools, homes, churches, parks and other entities; and 
(5)  Protection of the public health, safety and welfare. 
    The businesses of manufacturing, distributing, selling, handling and otherwise dealing in or processing alcoholic beverages are privileges and not rights pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-3-1, and such privileges shall not be exercised within the city limits without full compliance with all applicable licensing, regulatory, and revenue requirements of local, state and federal rules, regulations, and laws, including this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-2. - Licenses required. 
(a)  Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, no person, entity and/or business shall engage in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the city without first having obtained a license as provided under this article. 
(b)  Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, no person, entity and/or business licensed for the sale of a particular class of alcoholic beverages may sell other classes of alcoholic beverages without obtaining a separate license required therefore. 
(c)  Generally, no entity may hold more than two licenses total. The two licenses may be in a single class. Hotels may hold up to five licenses total as long as each licensed entity or facility is physically located or operated within one building. 
(d)  All licensees hereunder must, within a six-month period after the issuance of a license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the license. Failure to open the establishment and begin the sale of such products within the six-month period shall serve as automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. No refund of a license fee shall be made to the licensee upon any forfeiture, abandonment, revocation, suspension, or cancellation of a license. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, an alcohol license fee may be refunded on a pro-rata basis by vote of the mayor and council, upon an applicant's showing of good cause. All requests for refunds shall be made at least 90 days in advance of the date on which the applicant seeks for such license to cease, terminate and/or expire. 
(e)  Immediately upon the sale or closing of a business licensed under this chapter, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender such license to the city clerk. The failure to surrender such license within 30 days of the sale or closing of a business shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(f)  Any licensee who is a designated representative, partner and/or employee of a corporation, and thereafter severs such relationship with the licensed business, whether he resigns, retires or is fired, shall immediately file notice of such with the city clerk, in writing. If such person is no longer the designated licensed representative for the establishment due to such separation, he shall immediately surrender his license to the clerk. Failure to surrender a license, upon the licensees' separation from the establishment, and the continued manufacture and/or sale of alcohol at such location, shall constitute violations of this chapter and shall be punishable as provided by law. 
(g)  Any license holder/applicant shall promptly notify the city manager, in writing, of any change in the interests in or ownership of the licensed business, the licensee and/or any change in the information stated in the original application for license. Any such change shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter and shall require the city manager's approval. A license holder/applicant's failure to notify the city manager of any such change within 30 days of the change shall be a violation of this chapter and grounds for suspension and/or revocation. Upon filing timely notice of such change, the licensee may continue to operate under the license until a decision is rendered by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-3. - Regulatory classes. 
    The following regulatory classes are established: 
(1)  Retail beer/wine store; 
(2)  Retail package stores, distilled spirits; 
(3)  On-premises: 
a.  On-premises consumption; 
b.  On-premises arts; 
c.  Off premises and special event; 
d.  Regulation of on-premises consumption establishments under 2,000 square feet; 
e.  Alcoholic beverage caterer; 
f.  Ancillary wine tasting; 
g.  Bed and breakfast; 
(4)  Growler; 
(5)  Microbrewery; 
(6)  Manufacturing; and 
(7)  Wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-4. - General application requirements. 
(a)  Applicant. License for corporations shall be issued in the name of the corporation and applied for by and in the name of the designated stockholder, officer and/or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. License for partnerships shall be issued in the name of the partnership and shall be applied for by and in the name of the partner and/or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. 
(b)  Corporation partnership. A change in a corporation or partnership's named representative may be permitted if his/her replacement meets the requirements of new license applicants. A corporation or partnership shall promptly file notice of any change in its named representative with the city clerk, and failure to do so within a period of 30 days after such change shall be grounds for revocation by the city. Upon filing timely notice of such change, the licensee may continue to operate under the license until a decision is rendered by the city. All other license shall be applied for and issued in the name of the person and/or employee primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises. 
(c)  Contents of application. The applicant shall submit to the city clerk an application containing the following: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, birth date, residential addresses for the past five years, name and location of their employers for the last five years, spouse's name, both the applicant and their spouse's criminal history showing all arrests, convictions, guilty pleas and dispositions for alleged violations of any local, state and/or federal law for the last five years prior to the application, and, where applicable, the name of the partnership or corporation for whom they are applying, and any trade, business and/or organizational name under which the licensed premises may operate. 
(2)  The type of license under this chapter for which the applicant is applying. 
(3)  Exact location of the proposed business location, including complete street address, suite number (if applicable), county tax parcel ID, zoning district and nearest intersection). 
(4)  A copy of the lease to the premises, and/or proof of ownership of the premises, and/or proof of other authorization for use of the premises. 
(5)  Name and address of all persons having any financial interest in the outlet by way of ownership of building, property, or stock, receipt of income from the business or otherwise. 
(6)  Name and address of all persons having any financial interest in the outlet by way of ownership of building, property, or stock, receipt of income from the business or otherwise. 
(7)  Photographs of location. Applicants shall submit front, side and rear photographs of the alcohol beverage license desired location as part of the application process. If the location is located in another building, such as a hotel, pictures of the exterior building located on a city street may be submitted. 
(8)  The application shall be accompanied with a fee as set out in the fee schedule under article 11. 
(9)  Local bonding requirements. A performance and tax liability bond payable to the city in the amount of $5,000.00 must be posted and filed with the city, along with the application, for the first five years an applicant seeks an alcohol beverage license under this chapter. In addition, all applicants who have been found to be in violation of any state regulation relating to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages as promulgated by the state department of revenue or any provision of this chapter must post and file with the city, along with the application, a performance and tax liability bond payable to the city in the amount of $5,000.00 for the five years immediately following the violation. The bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful observance and performance by the applicant of the rules and regulations contained in this chapter, and upon the payment of any taxes, license fees, or other sums due to the city pursuant to this chapter. Upon violation of this chapter, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined based on the nature of the violation after a hearing is provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Forfeiture of any bond pursuant to this section may be in addition to any other action that may be taken against a licensee for violations of this chapter. 
(10)  Surveyor's certificate. All applicants seeking a retail package or beer/wine store license shall be required to submit a current certificate from a registered surveyor with their application. All other applicants shall be required to submit such certificate upon request by the city manager. The surveyor's certificate shall contain the following information: 
a.  A scale drawing of the building and/or proposed building, as situated on the proposed lot. 
b.  The proposed off street parking facilities available to the building and all outdoor lighting on the premises. 
c.  The exact location of the business, including street address, ward, and county tax map number. 
d.  Current zoning classification of the location. 
e.  The distance from the business to each of the following: the nearest school building, school ground or college campus, and the nearest alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
f.  A survey shall be required for businesses licensed July 1, 1981, or before, however no such license will be denied based upon a failure to meet the distance requirements as set forth under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(11)  Advertisement; proof thereof. After the application is filed, the applicant shall advertise his application for license at his own expense in the city's designated legal organ once a week for two weeks. Advertisements shall not be required for renewals. The advertisement shall contain the name of the applicant, the purpose of the application, the proposed location of the business, and its owner's name, and the name of the proposed location manager. An advertisement shall run for each initial application. An application will not be deemed complete until the applicant has filed with the clerk a copy of the advertisement together with affidavits from the newspaper evidencing such publication as required. The applicant's failure to promptly file a copy of the advertisement together with affidavits may result in dismissal of the application. 
(12)  Required training. The applicant, and its named designated representative(s), seeking a license under this article shall submit with the application a certificate of attendance from an approved alcohol awareness training program. The chief of police shall maintain a list of approved alcohol awareness programs. 
(13)  Completed applications. All applications under this chapter shall not be deemed completed until all required information is accurately submitted, all criminal background checks are returned and attached to the application, all surveys are attached and such application has been reviewed and stamped complete by the alcohol beverage clerk or his/her designee. No time frame designated hereunder shall begin to run until an application is deemed complete. Premature or incomplete submission of an application may result in the city's refusal to accept the same until the application is complete. 
(14)  In addition to any other notice requirements set forth under this chapter, all notices under this chapter required to be submitted to the city, and/or any of the city's officials or employees, shall be submitted in writing and in a manner evidencing the city's receipt, to be valid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-5. - Transferability of licenses. 
    Licenses to engage in the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall not be transferable to any other person or location. If a licensee seeks to relocate the licensed premises to another location within the city, an application shall be made as for an original license, provided however a new license fee shall not be required for the remainder of the license year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-6. - Issuance and display of license. 
(a)  Licenses are issued on a calendar-year basis; however, such license may be abandoned, suspended, probated, or revoked as set forth in this chapter. Licenses may be issued at any time during a calendar year for the remainder of the calendar year. 
(b)  New businesses starting after the beginning of the calendar year shall pay monthly license fees prorated on the basis of the annual license fee. 
(c)  The sale or conveyance of an alcohol beverage sale licensed business requires a new license application, license, and all associated fees. 
(d)  All holders of local and state alcohol beverages licenses shall prominently display the same at the licensed location in an area accessible to city personnel. State licenses need not be displayed if the state prohibits such display. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-7. - Election day sales. 
    The sale of alcoholic beverages on election days is authorized, in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-8. - Conduct prohibited, generally. 
    The following conduct is prohibited upon any premises in the city licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcohol beverages: 
(1)  Improper attire. The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcohol beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
(2)  Lewd acts. Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in paragraph (a) of this subsection or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
(3)  Contests and promotions prohibited. The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct prohibited under this chapter. 
(4)  Unauthorized alcohol use in city owned buildings and facilities. It shall be unlawful for any person to serve, possess and/or consume any alcoholic beverage within any city building or facility unless prior written authorization of the city manager is first obtained. Service of alcoholic beverages within a city building or facility shall not require an alcohol beverage license under this chapter provided it is in accordance with the requirements of this section, however a license shall be required for and alcohol sales on such premises. As used herein, city building or facility shall mean any and all city parks and any building owned or leased by the city. 
(5)  On duty consumption. Unless otherwise permitted in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for the licensee or any manager or employee thereof of a license premise to consume any intoxicating beverage while on duty at the same, or to be on duty at the same in an intoxicated condition. "Intoxication" shall be defined as when a licensee's, manager's, or employee's alcohol concentration is 0.08 grams or more at any time while on duty as defined below. For purposes of this section, any licensee, or interest holder thereof, manager, or employee of a licensee who is on the establishment's premises shall be presumed to be "on duty" if he is: 
a.  Being paid any salary, wage or remuneration of any kind for his services rendered during the time he is on the premises; 
b.  On the establishment's premises for the benefit of or at the direction of the establishment or its management (other than as a customer, patron or guest); 
c.  Engaging in the sale, directly or indirectly, of any food or beverage; or 
d.  Taking a break during periods of on-duty employment. 
(6)  a.  Furnishing of alcohol to persons underage. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person: 
1.  Under 21 years of age to purchase and/or possess any alcoholic beverage; 
2.  To serve, provide and/or sale an underage person an alcoholic beverage; 
3.  To fail to check the identification of any person so to result in an underage person being sold, served, and/or provided an alcoholic beverage. 
b.  The prohibitions contained in this section with respect to underage persons shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
1.  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
2.  At a religious ceremony; or 
3.  In the home with parental consent. 
c.  Additionally, where such conduct is not otherwise prohibited by state law, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit any underage person from: 
1.  Dispensing, serving, selling, or handling alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in any licensed establishment; 
2.  Being employed in any establishment in which alcoholic beverages are distilled or manufactured; or 
3.  Taking orders for and having possession of alcoholic beverages as a part of employment in a licensed establishment. 
d.  The municipal court, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10, is granted jurisdiction to try and dispose of a first offense violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, pertaining to furnishing alcoholic beverages to, and purchase and possession of alcoholic beverages by, a person under 21 years of age, if the offense occurs within the corporate limits of the city. O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10 is incorporated in this section by reference. 
(7)  Sale of alcohol beverages where firearms and weapons are sold. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or offer for sale, firearms, knives or other weapons and intoxicating beverages at the same business establishment. 
(8)  Sham applicant; de facto applicant or location manager. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to file, or permit to be filed, an application for license with the city wherein a sham applicant or a sham location manager is named. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for license containing his name as applicant, or the name of a location manager, when such person is not the de facto applicant or the de facto location manager, as the case may be. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person to permit his name to be used on an application for license where such person will not be the de facto owner of the license or the de facto location manager, as the case may be. 
d.  It shall be unlawful for any person to file an application for license, or permit his name to be used in such application, where the application contains a nominal applicant or nominal location manager for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this article restricting applicants or managers to persons without criminal records, or restricting economic interests in outlets, or for any other elusive purpose. 
(9)  Surveyor's certificate containing false information. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any applicant under this article to submit with his application any surveyor's certificate containing known false information and/or measurements. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for any surveyor to submit, or allow to be submitted, a certificate containing known false information. 
c.  A violation of subsection (b) may result in prosecution as for a felony offense. 
d.  Substantial errors in measured distances, as determined by the city engineer, shall be prima facie evidence that the distances submitted are known to be false. 
(10)  Prohibited persons. It shall be prohibited for the following persons to obtain an alcohol license with the city: 
a.  A person who does not comply with any residency requirements under state law. 
b.  A person who has been convicted of a felony relating to violence, illegal substances, gambling, theft, or alcohol use, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality, or who has been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the city or any other city or county relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of malt beverages, wine or liquor, or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of malt beverages, wine or intoxicating liquors, or the taxability thereof within five years preceding the application. 
c.  A person whose license under this chapter has been revoked for cause. 
d.  A person who is under 18 years of age or who is not of sound mind and memory. 
Any licensee under this chapter who becomes a "prohibited person" as defined in this chapter, shall, within three days of the event, make the fact known to the city manager and shall surrender his license, such surrender being appealable to the city council. 
(11)  Back or side room sales. The sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption by persons in any back room or side room which is not open to general public use is prohibited, except that private parties or conventions, which have been scheduled in advance, may be served in public or private dining rooms or meeting rooms, and, provided further that this prohibition shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption hereunder to the registered guests of any hotel in their designated rooms. 
(12)  No drive-in windows for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be allowed. 
(13)  Inadequate parking area lighting. The open parking area of any establishment licensed under this chapter shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least one footcandle with a minimum allowable intensity of three-tenths of a footcandle. The covered parking area of any building or proposed building to house a retail outlet shall have an average maintained footcandle intensity of at least two footcandles with a minimum allowable intensity of five-tenths footcandle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-9. - Discontinuance of business. 
    Any licensee hereunder who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of product or products as authorized in the license, but who shall, for a period of six consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized in the license, shall upon completion of the six-month period automatically forfeit his license, which license shall by virtue of failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action of the city. Provided, however, that where a business temporarily ceases operation solely to make substantial improvements or substantially refurbish the existing improvements which will enhance the taxable value of the property on which the business is located, and where there is no change in the licensee or interest holders thereof any business and/or alcoholic beverage license may be reissued routinely upon application therefore and payment of required fees when the business is ready to resume operations; provided, however, said cease of operations shall not exceed six consecutive months from the expiration date of the license then in existence at the time the operations cease. In order for an applicant's license to be reissued, the licensee must submit a written request to the city manager. Upon good cause shown by the applicant, the city manager may recommend reissuance of the license or an additional six-month extension of the unused license to the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-1-10. - Exception of operating prior to July 1, 1981. 
    Restrictions in this chapter on the sale of alcoholic beverages near alcoholic treatment centers owned and operated by any city, any county, or the state shall not apply to any hotel or business licensed for sales of wine or malt beverages, if such license was in effect on July 1, 1981. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-11. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in accordance with the city Charter. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punished accordingly. Additionally, all persons, firms, partnerships, entities, and corporations engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages shall observe all laws, rules and regulations of the state as they pertain to the operation of their respective businesses and any violation of the same shall be determined to be a violation of this section and punishable in accordance with state law and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-12. - Changes of circumstances. 
    Unless expressly provided otherwise herein, licensees and applicants shall file written notice with the city clerk notice any changes in their initial alcohol license application, within ten days of any such change. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-13. - Renewal, suspension and/or revocation. 
(a)  All licenses under this article shall be issued on a calendar-year basis and may be renewable upon payment of the appropriate fee; however, the same may be suspended or revoked at any time by the city manager, in writing and with the reasons set out thereon, as set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  Each licensee shall file a written application for renewal with the city clerk on or before October 15 of each year on forms approved by the clerk, and the license fee shall be paid in full no later than December 15 of each year. 
(c)  The application shall be referred to the city manager. 
(d)  The city manager shall grant, or deny for cause, the renewal of any license issued under this article, and shall provide the reasons for such decision to the applicant in writing. Any decision rendered by the city manager to suspend and/or revoke a license, and/or deny a request for renewal, shall be final unless the applicant files a notice of appeal with the city clerk to the city council within 14 days of the applicant's receipt of such decision by the city manager. A hearing before the city council shall be held not more than 30 days from the date of filing of the applicant's notice of appeal, where the city council may vote to ratify or reject the city manager's decision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-1-14. - Brown-bag, "BYOB" prohibitions and exemptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring in his own alcoholic beverage (BYOB) in any retail establishment, without regard to whether such establishment is licensed to serve alcoholic beverages. This section shall not prohibit any person dining at an establishment licensed to sell wine for consumption on the premises from bringing an unopened bottle of beer or wine for consumption into said establishment, where the establishment's policies permit the same. For purposes of this paragraph, the term retail establishment shall not include a private hotel room or other similar guest room. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-15. - Number of package stores. 
    The number of package stores selling malt beverages, wine, and liquor shall be limited based upon population. Population shall be determined by the U.S. decennial census. The census in effect for establishing enforcement of this section shall be the U.S. census in effect at the adoption of this chapter until such time as a new U.S. census is established. There shall be no more than one package store outlet selling malt beverages, wine, and liquor per 1,500 residents of the city according to the U.S. census. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-16. - Consumption on city streets prohibited; limited in certain areas. 
(a)  Drinking alcohol on city streets prohibited. Except as permitted otherwise in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to dispense any alcoholic beverage in an open container for removal from the premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove from an alcoholic beverage establishment any open container of alcoholic beverage or to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from any open container or to possess in any open container any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages at city sponsored events; number and size limited. From time to time, the city council may approve city sponsored special events at which the outside consumption of alcohol may be permitted during set time periods and at designated locations. The following regulations shall apply during any such city sponsored events: 
(1)  One drink limit. Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a can or bottle, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. 
(2)  Size limited to 16 ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(3)  Volunteers. The licensed establishment shall provide the city manager with a list, at least three days in advance of the city sponsored event, of all persons who will serve as volunteers for the licensed establishment at the event. The licensed establishment shall provide all such volunteers with wristbands identifying the establishment, which shall be worn by any such volunteer at all times during his/her service as a volunteer for the establishment at the event. 
(c)  Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages in the arts alley. Any establishment in the arts alley licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container, other than a can or bottle, for removal from such premises for outside consumption throughout the arts alley. The arts alley shall consist of the brick paved, or brick thermoplastic covered, courtyard, pathway and sidewalk area identified on the arts alley map adopted by the city council with this ordinance, and which map may be amended from time to time. A copy of the official map designating the arts alley may be retrieved from the city clerk. Notwithstanding any other requirements in this chapter, the following additional regulations shall apply to the arts alley: 
(1)  Off-premise traverse limitation. The outside and off-premise consumption and/or carrying of an open container of alcohol shall be limited to the brick paved and/or brick thermoplastic covered surfaces within the arts alley, although persons may walk within the arts alley in a direct path from the entrance of a licensed establishment to reach the brick paved/marked pathway. Traverse with an open container is not permitted in any parking lot and/or parking space within the arts alley, with the exception that persons may walk across the brick paved and/or brick marked portions of the parking lot within the arts alley. 
(2)  One drink on-street limit. No establishment shall dispense to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. 
(3)  Size limited to 16 ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in their possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(4)  Proof required. The licensed establishment shall provide all customers requesting to carry an alcoholic beverage off-premises with a wristband evidencing the beverage's date of purchase. No person shall consume and/or carry an open container of alcohol within the arts alley, without carrying on their person a wristband from the licensed establishment evidencing that such beverage was purchased on the date carried. 
(5)  Business hours limitation. The outside and off-premise consumption and/or carrying of an open container of alcohol shall be allowed from the opening of the licensed establishment each day through midnight. 
(d)  Drinking from can or bottle prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can or bottle to possess in an open can or bottle any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(e)  Drinking alcohol in parked motor vehicle prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages while in the confines of a motor vehicle when the vehicle is parked on any city street, alley, way or parking lot. 
(f)  Open container of alcohol in moving vehicle prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in the city or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-1-17. - Permits required for handlers of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Any person, manager, or employee whose responsibility is the service of alcoholic beverages in restaurants, on-premise consumption establishments, hotels, or lounges or who handles alcoholic beverages or who works as a security guard or as a security employee in any location licensed under this chapter, whether or not such person is an employee of such licensee, shall apply to the city manager for an alcoholic beverage handler permit, which shall be renewed annually upon the anniversary date of original issuance. The fee for the permit shall be set forth under article 11. The licensed establishment shall maintain at the licensed premise, copies of all handler permits for persons required to have such permit under this paragraph. No person shall perform the above listed duties at the licensed establishment until their permit is on file at the establishment. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage handlers shall make themselves available for photographing, fingerprinting and such other identification as may be required by the police department in accordance with state and local law. 
(c)  The police chief, and his/her designee within the police department, shall investigate handler permit applications and issue and/or deny the same. An alcoholic beverage handler permit shall not be issued to any person who has pled guilty to, or has been convicted of a felony involving violence, gambling, theft, use of alcohol, or use of illegal substances, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality or who has been convicted of a crime involving violation of the ordinances of the city or other jurisdictions relating to the use, sale, taxability or possession of malt beverages, wine or liquor, or violations of the laws of the state and federal government pertaining to the manufacture, possession, transportation or sale of malt beverages, wine or intoxicating liquors, or the taxability thereof, or who has pled guilty to or who has been guilty of multiple felonies involving violence, use of alcohol, theft, gambling, or use of controlled substances, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality unless five years shall have elapsed between the date of the applicant's most recent conviction and the date of issuance of the handler permit, provided that a handler permit shall not be issued to any person who is then serving probation of a felony sentence from any felony described above. The police department may deny the same where the applicant's record indicates such issuance would adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare or violate the law, and may require surrender of a person's handler permit where such person violates the provisions of this chapter. All employees who serve alcoholic beverages must be at an age authorized by state law to do the same. Decisions of the police chief, and his/her designee, with respect to handler permits may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
(d)  No package store licensee under the provisions of this chapter shall hire any person, nor permit any person to work or assist in a licensed business, until such person has procured an alcoholic beverage handler permit as prescribed in this section. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for a handler whose permit has been revoked, and upon whom demand for surrender of a permit has been made, to refuse to so surrender, or to alter, conceal, deface or destroy the permit, with such action being punishable in accordance with the city Charter. 
(f)  One permit is required for each location where a handler is employed. 
(g)  Handler permit fees are found in article 11. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL CLASSES 

Sec. 5-2-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine. 
    Alcoholic beverage caterer means any retail dealer licensed pursuant to this chapter who provides alcohol at an authorized catered event. 
    Authorized catered event means a one day event which is not open to the general public, such as a private wedding, reception and/or business function, occurring at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this chapter. An authorized catered event shall not include functions where persons must purchase a ticket and/or pay a cover charge to enter into the event. 
    Bed and breakfast means a facility used for accommodating travelers as guests for a charge or donation where at least one meal is served, excluding churches and nonprofit soup kitchens. 
    Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing the percent of alcohol by volume sufficient to constitute a beer or malt beverage as defined by state law, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Booth means a seating area with a table for use by the public. 
    Bottle means a generic term for all alcoholic beverages whether or not the same are in a glass container including beer, wine, and hard liquor. 
    Brewery means any establishment where malt beverages are manufactured. 
    Brewpub means any eating establishment in which malt beverages are manufactured. For purposes of this paragraph, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 40 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
    Business location means the site of an alcohol sales business or proposed site. 
    BYOB means "bring your own bottle" and/or "bring your own beer." 
    Cashier's cage means any area where money or other things of value are exchanged for goods or services in an enclosed area located within another facility the purpose of which is security and/or separation of the operator of the establishment from customers. 
    Caterer means any person who, for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
    Church means a building, which is controlled by a religious organization or association and primarily utilized for religious services, ceremonies, or instruction. 
    Contiguity means a premises connected by open hallways or rooms without doors or dividers. 
    Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing the percent of alcohol by volume sufficient to constitute a distilled spirit as defined by state law. 
    Election day means one hour before the polls open to one hour after the polls close. 
    Food means all edible substances appropriate for human consumption as determined by the health department inspecting the city's restaurants and lounges as sold or provided to the public in a restaurant as defined in this chapter. Food shall not be construed to mean: olives, cherries, limes, lemons, salt, pepper, pineapples, celery, tomato juice, or any other fruit, vegetable or dairy product such as ice cream, cream, yogurt, milk or soft drinks, water, tonic water, other non-alcoholic carbonated or non-carbonated beverages when such items are used in alcoholic beverages or mixed drinks as an essential part of the beverage, mixed drink, or as a garnish thereon. 
    Growler means a container that is filled by a licensee or employee of a licensee with beer or wine from a barrel, keg, or cask for off premises consumption. 
    His or her means a word importing male or female, which shall be applied to either sex interchangeably in this chapter. 
    Home-brew special event is an event held pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4(c) in which malt beverages brewed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 may be consumed by participants and judges of the home-brew special event. 
    Hotel means every building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether conducted in the same building or in a separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation: 
(1)  Which maintains 50 or more rooms used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests; 
(2)  Which maintains an adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment to serve food as required therein; 
(3)  Which operates one or more public dining rooms (excluding banquet rooms) with a combined seating capacity of at least 50, where meals are regularly served to guests; provided that consistent with the definition of "lounge" in this section, in no event shall the seating capacity of the lounge exceed that of such public dining room; 
(4)  Which employs sufficient personnel to serve food as required in this chapter; and 
(5)  Which derives at least as much gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed in the hotel as it does from its sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Individual means a natural person. 
    Intoxication means a condition where the licensee's, manager's, or employee's alcohol concentration is 0.08 grams or more at any time while on duty. 
    Licensee means the individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of said partnership or corporation. 
    Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the state and who possesses a license by a local government in the state authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
    Lounge means a separate room connected with, a part of, and adjacent to, a restaurant or room located in a hotel as defined herein with all booths, stools, and tables being open and unobstructed to the view of any other customers in such lounge, or the manager thereof. 
    Malt beverage. See "Beer." 
    Manufacturer means any maker, and/or producer, of bottled alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; provided, however, that a vintner that blends wine with distilled spirits to produce a fortified wine shall not be considered a manufacturer of distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
    Manager means the person who does or will actually manage or operate the premises on a day-to-day basis. 
    Method of measuring. Unless otherwise provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, all measurements to determine distances required for the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the primary entrance of the structure from which the alcoholic beverage is sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway by the nearest reasonable travel route; 
(4)  To a point on the property line which is in a straight line from the primary entrance of the structure to the nearest public sidewalk, walkway, street, road or highway; or to the nearest property line of school grounds. 
    Microbrewery is the term used in this chapter to collectively refer to breweries and brewpubs. 
    Monthly means on the basis of whole months. 
    Motel means facilities meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be also classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge, or restaurant in their premises, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of "hotel." 
    On duty means any licensee, manager, or employee located on the premises while being remunerated in any way for services rendered; who is on the premises for the benefit or at the direction of the outlet or its management; who is engaging in the sale, directly or indirectly, of any food or beverage; or is taking a break during a precise work period. 
    Open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or of which the seal has been broken. 
    Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Pour means sell for beverage purposes, sell for consumption on the premises, sell by the drink, and the process of patrons bringing their own liquor, wine or malt beverages for the purposes of mixing drinks and/or consuming same on the premises. The sale of mixes or setups or advertising to "bring your own" or the possession by patrons on the premises of liquor, wine or malt beverages, not purchased at the licensed facility shall be prima facie evidence of pouring and shall be prohibited. 
    Premises means areas with dual or more: cash registers, menus, trade names, seating, counter space, cooking facilities or some combination of these elements shall be considered prima facie evidence of a separate facility requiring a separate license. However evidence of contiguity may be presented to rebut the presumption of separateness. 
    Principle [principal] business means that at least 30 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food in lounges and restaurants. To be included in the tabulation of receipts for the purpose of this calculation are all receipts of all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other nonemployee personnel not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services, repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. 
    Private club means any nonprofit association organized under the laws of this state which: 
(1)  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
(2)  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
(4)  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. As used herein, a "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this definition, tips or gratuities which are added to the bill under club regulations shall not be considered profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Redecorate shall not include repair nor freshening, change of theme or scheme, or work of any kind which is incident to a repair. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are actual and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, such place being provided with adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room seating capacity of at least 50 persons, including patios which are immediately adjacent to and a part of the main licensed facility and wherein the same services are offered as inside the main licensed facility, with said seating capacity complying with the Code; and having employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook, and serve edible food to its guests. 
    Retail beer/wine store means any location which sells malt beverages, wine or malt beverages and wine in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale, such as, but not limited to, convenience and grocery stores, beer shops, and wine shops. Additionally, retail beer and/or wine stores shall be referred to as "retail beer/wine stores." Likewise, the words "beer" and "malt beverage" shall be synonymous. 
    Sham means any information provided for an application which is not true, accurate, or is spurious, or deceitful. 
    State law means the laws, rules, regulations and/or policies promulgated by the state of Georgia and/or its departments and/or agencies, including the Official Code of Georgia. 
    Taxpayer means any person made liable by law to file a return or to pay tax. 
    Underage person pertains to and includes any person to whom the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by state law because of age. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to on-premises consumption locations. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added, and containing the percent of alcohol by volume sufficient to constitute a wine as defined by state law. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the condition of wine contained in this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2016-36 , § 1, 12-14-2016; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2018-18 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 5-2-2. - Terms not expressly defined. 
    Except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, any term in this chapter not expressly defined herein shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the "Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code," O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-1 et al. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
ARTICLE 3. - REVIEW AND INVESTIGATION OF ALCOHOL LICENSE APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 5-3-1. - Review of applications by city manager. 
    The city manager, and any city administrative staff at the direction of the city manager, shall have the sole responsibility for verification and review of all applications for alcoholic beverage license and renewals in the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-3-2. - Files and records associated with alcohol license applications. 
    The city clerk or his/her designee shall be responsible for all files and records, the in-take of completed and supplemented applications, and other such tasks as designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-3-3. - Investigation of application, issuance, denial and appeal. 
(a)  All applications for new licenses, and accompanying fees, shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall, upon subsequent receipt of proof of advertising from the applicant, promptly refer such applications to the city manager for review and recommendation from city administrative staff. The city manager shall then make an independent review of each application and any city administrative staff recommendation. 
(b)  Applicants for new or renewal licenses shall furnish all data, information and records considered pertinent to such application to the city clerk, and the failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of the request may subject the applicant to dismissal of the application. 
(c)  The city manager shall submit a recommendation on applications for new licenses to the applicant, city clerk and city council with respect to applications for new licenses, permits, renewals and transfers of locations within 60 days from the date of the filing of a completed application. The 60 day period under this section shall be tolled during period where the city manager has requested and is awaiting receipt from the applicant of supplemented information pertinent to the application. Absent the foregoing, if the city manager does not submit a recommendation with respect to the application within 60 days from the date of the filing of a completed application, subject to any time tolled, the application shall be considered approved until revoked and/or a recommendation by the city manager on the application is submitted, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  The city manager shall recommend approval for all applications for alcoholic beverage licenses meeting the standards of this chapter. The city manager's recommendation under this subsection is for the purpose of aiding the city council on whether to grant and/or deny a pending application, and does not grant the applicant a license. 
(e)  The city clerk shall schedule for an application for an alcohol beverage license to be heard before the city council within 30 days of the city manager's recommendation on the application. The applicant will have the opportunity to be heard and present evidence at such hearing. At such hearing, the city council shall vote to approve and/or deny the application, using the standards set forth under this chapter. The approval of an application under this article shall expire after 90 days from the date of such approval, unless the applicant has procured, and paid the fee for, the approved license. If the application is approved and all fees paid, the license shall lapse if no action is taken on the license by the applicant within six months of issuance. The city manager may extend expiration period up to 90 days for good cause shown, such as fire, flood, war, and other uncontrollable occurrences, provided that a written request for extension is submitted to the city clerk by the application within the original 90-day period. 
(f)  In the event the city approves, denies, revokes, suspends, refuses to renew and/or renders an unfavorable decision with respect to an alcohol license or permit, such decision shall be transmitted to the applicant, in writing, with the reason(s) for such action. All appeals from a decision of the city and/or mayor and council under this chapter shall be taken by writ of certiorari to the appropriate superior court. 
(g)  In all instances in which an application or license is revoked, suspended or denied, the applicant may not reapply for an alcohol license for at least six months from the date of such decision, whichever occurs later. 
(h)  Either the city manager or the city council, or both, may defer action upon any application, the subject matter of which is substantially the same as the subject matter of litigation then pending in the city, state, or federal courts until such time as the litigation is resolved. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-3-4. - Standards for approval, denial, renewal, suspension, or revocation. 
    The city manager and the city council in making determinations and recommendations on an alcohol license application, request, revocation, suspension and/or renewal, shall be guided by the following factors: 
(1)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the subject location, that is, whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business. 
(2)  The proximity of school grounds, school buildings, college campuses, and alcoholic treatment centers owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(3)  Whether the subject location has adequate off street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(4)  Whether the location would tend to increase and promote traffic congestion and resulting hazards therefrom. 
(5)  The criminal record and financial responsibility of the licensee, applicant and their named representatives, provided that nonpayment of federal, state, county or city taxes shall be prima facie evidence of lack of financial responsibility. 
(6)  The reports of the city manager and any city administrative staff relating to the use or sale of alcohol at the subject location. 
(7)  The applicant, business or licensee's meeting of the requirements of this chapter and state, federal and local laws, including as such pertains to notice and distance requirements, fire codes, building, zoning, parking, storage, sanitation codes, parking buffers, lighting and other matters relating to public welfare and safety and the use or sale of alcohol at the proposed location. 
(8)  Evidence presented to the city manager relating to the sale or use of alcohol at the subject location. 
(9)  Whether or not the granting of the application or request is in the best interest of the health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
(10)  Whether any license for sale of beer or wine or alcohol previously issued for the subject location or applicant has been revoked for cause by the city. 
(11)  The history or reputation of the building or establishment (proposed for business) for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law relating to the sale or use of alcohol at the proposed location; or the overtaxing of existing city infrastructure and personnel. Such determination of overtaxing will be made based upon reports of members and associated departments of the city administration, as well as reports of crimes and emergencies reported and responses made to the site when compared to similarly situated establishments. 
(12)  Whether or not the applicant, licensee or subject location is in violation of other local ordinances or state laws relating to misconduct, nuisances or crimes as related to the sale or use of alcohol at the subject location. 
(13)  Whether or not the applicant, licensee or their named representatives have violated other jurisdiction's laws regarding alcohol beverage licensing. 
(14)  Evidence of fraudulent, false, omitted, and/or misleading information provided by the applicant, licensee, and/or their employees in securing, renewing and/or maintaining the alcohol license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-3-5. - Effect of revocation by state. 
    The state's revocation of any state license to sell any alcoholic beverage shall result in the automatic revocation of a license issued under this chapter without any action by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-3-6. - Periodic inspection and audits. 
    The city manager and his/her designees shall have the authority to inspect establishments and their financial records licensed under the alcoholic beverage ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. The inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
ARTICLE 4. - RETAIL BEER/WINE STORES 

Sec. 5-4-1. - Classification of licenses. 
    Licenses under this article shall be classified as: Retail beer/wine store, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages and/or wine in packages at retail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-4-2. - Retail beer/wine stores, regulations generally. 
    The following regulations shall apply to licensed retail beer/wine establishments: 
(1)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a retail sale of beer/wine store by the package from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. Additionally, each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior and exterior of the store is visible day and night. 
(2)  No sale of malt beverage and/or wine by the package shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In addition, no sale of malt beverages and/or wine by the package shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or any other days or times prohibited by state law. 
(3)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of malt beverages and/or wine by the package, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
(4)  Each retail beer/wine store shall install and maintain in a secure location security cameras in the outlet of a type and number approved by the chief of police. Such cameras: 
a.  Shall be placed in the outlet to record activities in the checkout or cash register area(s). 
b.  Shall be capable of producing a retrievable image on film, tape, or any readable medium that can be made a permanent record and enlarged through projection or other means. 
(5)  Each retail outlet shall post at least four copies of its complete price list or, in lieu thereof, place a price on each package for sale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-4-3. - Prohibited locations. 
    Prohibited locations. It shall be prohibited to obtain a license for the sale of malt beverages within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district or other prohibited zoning district established in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Within a measured 100 yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(3)  Within a measured 100 yards of any school building, school ground, or college campus. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-4-4. - No broken packages. 
    The licensee and the retail package stores, retail beer/wine stores, or other businesses licensed for the sale of packages of alcoholic beverages, and the employees thereof, shall not engage in or allow for the pouring or opening of any alcoholic beverage packages (i.e., opening or breaking the seal) of any alcoholic beverage on the premises of such establishment. The licensee and the retail package stores, retail beer/wine stores, or other businesses licensed for the sale of packages of alcoholic beverages, and the employees thereof, may, however, sell individual bottles of alcoholic beverages (i.e., distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine) provided the establishment collects and remits the applicable city, state and federal taxes on each sale. This prohibition shall not be construed to apply to establishments with an on-premises consumption license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 5-4-5. - Convenience stores. 
(a)  Definition. For purposes of this chapter, "convenience store" means any business that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of convenience goods, or both convenience goods and gasoline, and has less than 10,000 square feet of retail floor space. Convenience store does not include any business where there is no retail floor space accessible to the public. 
(b)  Condoning of loitering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the owner, manager and/or operator of a convenience store licensed to sell alcohol under this chapter to allow any person to loiter on or about the licensed premises as prohibited by chapter 26, article 2, section 26-2-19 of the Code, without taking prompt action to cause for such loiterer to be removed from the premises. The unlawful loitering of a person at a convenience store for a period of more than 30 minutes shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner, manager and/or operator of the establishment is unlawfully condoning such prohibited conduct. 
(c)  Prominent display of loitering prohibition. Convenience stores maintaining alcohol licenses pursuant to this chapter shall cause for the following language to be prominently displayed, in no less than 48-inch font, in a manner which is visible to the general public on the exterior and interior of the licensed establishment: 
Loitering Prohibited: 
This establishment is required to prohibit loitering, pursuant to Chapter 5, Article IV, Sec. 5-4-5, of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Penalties. In addition to other penalties and sanctions authorized by state law and the Code, the violation of this section by owners, managers and/or operators of convenience stores shall subject the convenience store to termination, revocation and/or suspension of its license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-15 , § 1, 8-1-2017) 
ARTICLE 5. - RETAIL PACKAGE STORES, DISTILLED SPIRITS 

Sec. 5-5-1. - Classification of licenses. 
    Licenses under this article shall be classified as: retail package store, which shall permit only the sale of liquor in packages at retail. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-5-2. - Additional application requirements. 
    In addition to the general application requirements set forth under article 1, applicants under this article shall: 
(1)  Show within the initial license application their compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23 when the applicant has been a resident of the city for less than 12 months immediately preceding the submission of their application. 
(2)  Within three days after filing the initial license application, identify the proposed location by posting a sign not less than 24 inches by 36 inches in size, with letters of at least two and one-half inches on the front door of the building proposed to be used (if facing the right-of-way of the city street upon which the building fronts; otherwise, within three feet of the right-of-way), or upon a prominent place on the lot where the building is proposed to be constructed, facing the street. The sign shall be captioned "Liquor License Application Pending" and shall designate the name and address of the applicant, the type of license and the date of the application, and no other advertisement or wording. The sign shall remain posted until final action on the license application by the city manager, or city council, if appealed. An application will not be deemed completed until an applicant has filed with the clerk a photograph of the sign erected pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-5-3. - Retail package stores, regulations generally. 
    The following regulations shall apply to retail package stores licensed to sell distilled spirits: 
(1)  The building or proposed building to house a retail outlet for the sale of liquor by the package shall comply with all applicable state, federal and local laws and regulations, including ordinances of the city for zoning, storage, parking and buffers. 
(2)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a retail outlet from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. Additionally, each such retail store shall be so lighted that the interior and exterior of the store is visible day and night. 
(3)  No sale of distilled spirits shall be permitted between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In addition, no sale of distilled spirits shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or on any other days or times prohibited by state law. 
(4)  Each retail outlet shall post at least four copies of its complete price list or, in lieu thereof, place a price on each package for sale. 
(5)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits, as revised, promulgated by the state department of revenue, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this section. 
(6)  Each location for a package store shall install and maintain security cameras in a secure location in the package store of a type and number approved by the chief of police. Such cameras: 
a.  Shall be placed in the outlet to record activities in the checkout or cash register area(s). 
b.  Shall be capable of producing a retrievable image on film, tape, or any readable medium that can be made a permanent record and enlarged through projection or other means. 
    Such cameras shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or his designee. If a robbery or other felony occurs in such outlet, the film or tape recording of such event shall immediately be made available to the chief of police or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-5-4. - Prohibited locations. 
    It shall be prohibited to obtain a license for a package store within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district or other prohibited zoning district as set out in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Within a measured 100 yards of any church building. 
(3)  Within a measured 100 yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(4)  Within a measured 200 yards of any school building, school ground, or college campus. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-5-5. - No broken packages. 
    The licensee and the retail package stores, retail beer/wine stores, or other businesses licensed for the sale of packages of alcoholic beverages, and the employees thereof, shall not engage in or allow for the pouring or opening of any alcoholic beverage packages (i.e., opening or breaking the seal) of any alcoholic beverage on the premises of such establishment. The licensee and the retail package stores, retail beer/wine stores, or other businesses licensed for the sale of packages of alcoholic beverages, and the employees thereof, may, however, sell individual bottles of alcoholic beverages (i.e., distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine or fortified wine) provided the establishment collects and remits the applicable city, state and federal taxes on each sale. This prohibition shall not be construed to apply to establishments with an on-premises consumption license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018; Ord. No. 2018-21 , § 2, 12-4-2018) 
ARTICLE 6. - ON-PREMISES CONSUMPTION 

Sec. 5-6-1. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pour or offer to pour any distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages within the corporate limits of the city without having an on-premises consumption license, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this chapter. Additionally, applicants under this article shall show within the initial application their compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23 when the applicant has been a resident of the city for less than 12 months immediately preceding the submission of their application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-2. - License for on-premises consumption. 
    Licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Liquor pouring. Location for pouring liquor, which shall permit only the sale of liquor by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(2)  Wine pouring. Location for pouring wine, which shall permit only the sale of wine by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(3)  Malt beverage pouring. Location for pouring malt beverages, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-3. - On-premises consumption regulations generally. 
    The following regulations shall apply to licensed on-premises consumption establishments: 
(1)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this article. 
(2)  No pouring of liquor, malt beverages, or wine, or any other on-premises alcohol service shall be permitted between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. for licensed establishments whose property lines abut an area zoned residential, and 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. for all others. Except for bed and breakfasts and hotels, all patrons shall vacate such licensed establishments whose property lines abut an area zoned residential no later than 12:45 a.m., and 2:45 a.m. for all others. For purposes of this subsection, "residential" shall mean any parcel of land designated for use as a single or multifamily dwelling and duplexes. 
(3)  No pouring of liquor, malt beverages, or wine, or any other on-premises alcohol service shall be permitted on Sundays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. 
(4)  In no event shall drinks be mixed or sold, nor malt beverages sold, during the prohibited hours, based upon the timely sale of tickets, chits, decanters or other devices. 
(5)  On-premises consumption licensees may sell malt beverages by the pitcher, or wine by the bottle or decanter. 
(6)  Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a lounge or restaurant in their premises, provided the hotel and the franchisee meet all the requirements of this chapter. 
(7)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit a licensee from offering free food or entertainment at any time; or to prohibit the licensee from including an alcoholic beverage as a part of a meal package; or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals; or to prohibit any bed and breakfast, hotel or motel from offering room service or a complimentary social hour to its registered guests. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for any person to employ knowingly in any pouring outlet in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers and musicians, any person who has plead guilty or has been convicted of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in drugs, sex offenses or for any charge relating to the manufacture or sale of intoxicating liquors, other alcohol related offenses or for violations of local other jurisdictions ordinances regarding alcoholic beverages within the last five years prior to the application. 
(9)  The state law and regulations relating to the sale of beer, wine, and distilled spirits, as revised, promulgated by the state department of revenue, and especially as related to retail sale for consumption on premises are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this section. 
(10)  All on-premises consumption licenses shall collect and pay a tax of three percent on the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city in accordance with chapter 17, article 6 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. 
(11)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: 
a.  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
b.  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
c.  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one such alcoholic beverage; 
d.  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been substantially consumed, by any one person; 
e.  The sale or delivery to any person or group of persons of an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; or 
f.  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage. 
(12)  Bucket sales. 
a.  For the purpose of this subsection, a "bucket" shall be defined as a vessel in which malt beverages, in their original packaging, are sold to multiple persons at one table in a licensed restaurant establishment. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, bucket sales in a licensed on-premises consumption establishment are authorized as follows: 
1.  The bucket may not contain more malt beverages than the number of consuming individuals that are being served on a given restaurant ticket in a given sitting, with a maximum of six malt beverages per bucket being served at a time. 
2.  The malt beverages being served in a bucket must be less than 13 fluid ounces each and be the same exact brand of malt beverage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-06 , § 1, 6-19-2018; Ord. No. 2018-20 , § 1, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 5-6-4. - Sales outside of licensed premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell alcoholic beverages on the streets or sidewalks within the city, or elsewhere, outside of the building, premises, or place of business licensed for such sale, except that businesses with licenses to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises may serve such beverages only within the confines of the licensed building structure; provided, however, that any business with such license which has an outside patio area on private property or on privately leased public property that is actually and permanently attached to the main building may serve alcoholic beverages in an defined and enclosed patio area. The structure must be approved by the city's community development and fire departments, but does not have to be solid or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open area. No bar, whether permanent or temporary, may be set up in such outside areas. Businesses with licenses to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises within the city may also apply for a special use permit to sale alcoholic beverages at temporary events specifically authorized by the city for outside sales. Outside sales under this section shall be limited to the Downtown Development Zone and other areas as may be approved by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-5. - Food truck collaborations. 
    An on-premises licensee collaborating with a licensed food truck establishment to meet food sales requirements under this chapter shall only be permitted to sell alcohol within two hours of the time period that the food truck is offering the sale and service of food. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-6. - Regulation of lounges; reporting food sales. 
    All lounges shall submit a quarterly report to the city manager. As used in this section, lounges must prove that at least 40 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-7. - Regulations of restaurants; reporting food sales. 
(a)  A restaurant holding an alcohol beverage license must (i) be open to the public at least six hours per day, serving at least two meals per day, with a minimum serving time of three hours per meal; and (ii) serve meals at least six days a week with the exception of weeks including holidays, vacations, and periods of redecorating. Before any repair, redecorating or any period of closure other than nationally recognized or religious holidays, vacations or emergencies, the details of such repair or redecorating shall require approval by the city manager who shall first submit such information to the city manager for review and recommendation. Where closure is the result of a catastrophic emergency, post closure review can be applied for; however, such review request must be applied for by the license holder no later than 30 days post closure or the same closure may be prosecuted as a violation of this section and may result in administrative proceedings as well. 
(b)  Serving of alcoholic beverages at off-premises locations shall not be the principal business of the restaurant and consumption on the premises shall only be incidental thereto. 
(c)  As used in this section, seating capacity shall mean that no more than 25 percent of such seating shall be at a common table or counter area or shall be other than individual tables or booths designed for seating of at least two individuals. 
(d)  The restaurant, including its front facing exterior windows and doors, shall be designed in a manner which affords police and public safety personnel a clear view into the restaurant's interior. 
(e)  The principle business of a restaurant shall be the sale of food. As used in this section, principal business shall mean that at least 30 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. While a separate license shall be required for each food establishment within a hotel, the food and alcohol sales percentages for a hotel shall be calculated as an aggregate number for the hotel and not based on each individually licensed establishment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-07 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 5-6-8. - Entertainment at pouring outlets. 
(a)  Bands, orchestras, pool tables, musical entertainment and/or patron dancing shall be permitted at alcohol licensed on-premises consumption establishment if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Adequate space exists after consideration of required NFPA occupancy and seating; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; 
(3)  The appropriate license fee has been fully paid. 
(4)  The location installs and maintains security cameras in a secure location of a type and number approved by the chief of police. Such cameras: 
a.  Shall be capable of producing a retrievable image on film, tape, or any readable medium that can be made a permanent record and enlarged through projection or other means. 
b.  Shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the chief of police or his designee. If a robbery or other crime occurs in such outlet, the film or tape recording of such event shall immediately be made available to the chief of police or his designee. 
(5)  No more than six pool tables are located in the establishment; 
(6)  The musical entertainment at the establishment may not be heard from a distance of more than 100 feet from the front and/or back doors of the establishment. 
(b)  Alcohol licensed on-premises consumption establishments which offer patron dancing and musical entertainment shall have at least two paid security officers, who are certified, registered and/or licensed by the state to provide security services, on duty during all times in which the establishment is open for business. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-9. - Private clubs. 
(a)  Private clubs shall be subject to the requirements for on-premises consumption licenses as set out in this chapter, except as otherwise provided. 
(b)  Private clubs shall not be subject to section 5-6-1 and [subsection] 5-6-5(a). 
(c)  Private clubs may sell alcoholic beverages only to their members. At least 40 percent of the receipts of such business shall come from the sale of food. Private clubs shall further be required to submit monthly reports to the city manager clearly indicating its sales receipts for food and its sales receipts for alcoholic beverages pursuant to this article attesting that they have at least 75 regular dues-paying members. 
(d)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-10. - Off-premises and special event licenses. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the city manager may grant a license to permit the off-premises pouring of malt beverages, wine, and liquor under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  An off-premises license may only be issued to licensees who hold in good standing an alcohol pouring license issued by the city, and no such licensee shall be permitted to pour any alcoholic beverage off-premises which cannot be lawfully poured on the licensee's premises. 
(2)  An application for an off-premises pouring license shall contain the following information: 
a.  Name of licensee. 
b.  Address of licensee. 
c.  Type of on-premises pouring license held by licensee. 
d.  Type of off-premises license required by licensee. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, it shall be unlawful for an off-premises licensee to pour any malt beverages, wine, or liquor at any off-premises location without first obtaining an off-premises pouring permit. Such permit may be issued by the city manager for any period up to three days. Any permit for a period longer than three days must be approved by the city council. An off-premises permit may be issued in accordance with the following: 
(1)  No permit for a particular off-premises location shall be issued if the requested building is a "prohibited location" as set forth in this chapter or state law, or fails to meet all requirements of this chapter and state law for an on-premises pouring outlet. 
(2)  Unless specifically permitted by the city otherwise, for events such as gallery crawls, it shall be unlawful for any off-premises licensee to sell liquor at an off-premises location unless food is served at the event. 
(3)  Unless otherwise provided for in this section, all regulations of this code controlling the pouring of alcoholic beverages on premises shall govern the pouring of alcoholic beverages off premises. 
(4)  The amount of sales sold off premises shall be included in the licensee's gross income figures for the purpose of establishing the amount of the mixed drink taxes due from the licensee to the city. 
(c)  The city manager may approve up to three special event licenses for an applicant in a single calendar year. Each special event license shall allow alcohol beverage sales for up to 12 days in a single calendar year and can be used no more than two consecutive days per calendar year up to the 12-day limit. In order to qualify to receive such license, the applicant must comply with the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  The applicant must be licensed for sale of alcoholic beverages by the state; 
(2)  The application must provide the information requested under subsection (a)(2) above; 
(3)  All distances and hours of operation requirements set forth for on-premises consumption must be obeyed; 
(4)  All identification badge requirements must be met; and 
(5)  An annual license fee, as set out in this chapter, must be paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-11. - On-premises arts licenses. 
(a)  An on-premises arts license may be issued to a nonprofit arts organization whose primary purpose is to present productions or performances of an artistic or cultural nature. 
(b)  An on-premises arts license permits the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages only to patrons of the productions or performances for consumption inside the licensed premises in connection with the productions or performances. 
(c)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee under this section shall permit any exterior or interior advertising concerning the sale of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises. 
(d)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee under this section shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverage in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price, including the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(3)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one such alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  Requiring or allowing the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been substantially consumed, by any one person; 
(5)  The sale or delivery to any person or group of persons of an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; or 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage. 
(e)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee under this section shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this article. 
(f)  The building or proposed building shall meet all requirements of the building inspector, the fire marshal, the traffic engineer, and planning and zoning coordinator and shall comply with other ordinances of the city for zoning, storage, parking, buffers and other issues. 
(g)  All on-premises arts licensees shall collect and pay a tax of three percent on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the city in accordance with chapter 17, article 6 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. 
(h)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of distilled spirits, as revised, promulgated by the state department of revenue, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this article as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-12. - Regulation of on-premises consumption establishments under 2,000 square feet. 
(a)  This article applies only to on-premises consumption establishments under 2,000 square feet (including any outside serving area). 
(b)  Only on-premises consumption establishments under 2,000 square feet (including any outside serving area) may obtain an on-premises consumption under 2,000 square feet license. 
(c)  All general provisions set forth in article six shall apply fully to on-premises consumption under 2,000 square feet licensees, except such licensees shall only be required to: 
(1)  Serve one meal per day; 
(2)  Be open for service five days a week; and 
(3)  Have at least 40 percent of its receipts come from the sale of food. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-13. - Alcoholic beverage caterers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages at a location not licensed for the sale of alcohol and in connection with a catered event without first having obtained a permit as provided herein. 
(1)  Permit requirements for resident caterers. 
a.  Any caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply to the city manager for an off-premises permit that allows for alcohol sales at an authorized catered event. The application for the permit shall include the name of the licensee, the date(s), address(es), time(s), and name of the event(s) and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be served at the event(s). 
b.  Each off-premises catering permit shall be valid only for the event(s) for which the permit is issued. A resident caterer shall be limited to a maximum of 36 authorized catered events in a one year period. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in article 11. 
(2)  Permit requirements for nonresident caterers. 
a.  A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city manager. The fee for each permit shall be as set forth in article 11. A non-resident caterer shall be limited to a maximum of 12 authorized catered events in a one year period. 
b.  The application for the permit shall include the name of the caterer, a copy of the caterer's current alcohol license issued from an outside jurisdiction, the date(s), address(es), time(s), and name of the event(s) and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the catered event(s). 
c.  The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event. 
(3)  Limitation on permit. A permitted alcoholic beverage caterer may sell and/or otherwise dispense at the authorized catered event only that which is authorized by their alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event. 
(4)  Sunday sales. An alcoholic beverage caterer wishing to cater an event on Sunday must comply with the requirements of state law with respect to the service of alcoholic beverages at such event. 
(5)  Tax on sales by resident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article 11 of this chapter. 
(6)  Tax on drinks served by nonresident caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article 11 of this chapter and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-14. - Ancillary wine tasting license. 
(a)  The holder of a wine license shall be eligible for an ancillary wine tasting license to provide samples of wine offered for sale to customers under the conditions set forth in this section. 
(b)  Wine sampling shall be on limited occasions when a customer requests a sample of a wine offered for sale within the premises, or in conjunction with wine education classes and sampling designed to promote wine appreciation and education. 
(c)  Wine tasting for customers shall only be conducted at a wine counter area constituting no more than ten percent of the entire floor area of the premises. 
(d)  Wine sampling for customers shall be limited to no more than one time per day for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. 
(e)  Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. 
(f)  No open containers of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. 
(g)  Not more than two times per week for a period of not to exceed two consecutive hours, the holder of an ancillary wine tasting license may conduct educational classes and sampling for classes. All conditions of sampling set forth in this section shall apply to such classes, except for the limitation on floor areas where the classes can be conducted. 
(h)  Holders of an ancillary wine tasting permit shall not charge for samples or tastings, but may accept donations for a charitable organization of their choice. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-15. - Bed and breakfast license. 
(a)  A bed and breakfast desiring to sell alcohol on premises shall first obtain a bed and breakfast alcohol license. Such license shall be limited to the sale of beer and wine. 
(b)  A bed and breakfast licensed under this article shall: 
(1)  Comply with all local, state and federal licensing and operational requirements, and shall have all licenses and permits required of bed and breakfasts by the same; 
(2)  Have a full-service kitchen at the licensed location approved by local health and fire departments; 
(3)  Restrict its sale of alcohol to overnight customers staying on the premises and its customers who are served food that is to be consumed on the premises while dining or attending a culinary class. More than one bottle of wine shall not be sold to any customer in a three-day period. A bed and breakfast shall not allow customers to take alcoholic beverages in any form away from the licensed premises, except that overnight customers may be permitted to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises at the end of their overnight stay; 
(4)  Submit reports to the city manager as required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-16. - Reports, required. 
(a)  All reports required under this article shall clearly indicate the sales receipts of the licensed establishment for food and the sales receipts for alcoholic beverages. The report shall be post marked on or before the last day of the calendar month after the calendar quarter. 
(b)  The report, required annually, shall identify, by name and nature of service provided, all persons laboring on the premises, including the services of all independent contractors, performers, servers, entertainers, or other non-employee personnel, not to include, however, persons who are called to the premises from other licensed businesses to perform services repairs or construction on equipment or building premises. 
(c)  The failure of a licensed establishment to submit a report required under this article shall be considered cause for probation, suspension, revocation or other appropriate action. The reports described herein shall be in a form recognized by certified public accountants and shall utilize common and generally recognized accounting principles and shall be submitted under oath. Those submitting the reports shall be prosecuted for fraudulent statements under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20 in a court of competent jurisdiction, if such reports are not true. 
(d)  For the purposes of determining whether a licensed establishment is qualified to operate under the license during December and on January 1 of each year, the preceding quarter's receipts shall be utilized on making such determination, unless such business is new and had not been open long enough to provide the quarterly reports required herein. Where the business has not been open long enough to provide quarterly reports, then such reports as are available shall be used by the city manager to determine if the business shall be allowed to operate in December and on January 1 each year. If no quarterly reports are available, whatever sales receipts for daily sales from the outset of the business will be submitted to the city manager for review in order to make the determination. In such cases, suspension, probations, revocations, or other actions based solely on food sales receipts will not occur until after three months of receipts have been submitted. However, nothing in this section shall prohibit actions under this chapter for other violations of state, federal or local laws. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-6-17. - Extended Sunday alcohol sales. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including the sale of wine and/or malt beverages and the sale of distilled spirits, may be sold on Sundays between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. midnight in any licensed establishment which derives 
(1)  At least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served; or 
(2)  At least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(Ord. No. 2018-12 , § 5, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 2018-20 , § 2, 12-4-2018) 
Sec. 5-6-18. - Home-brew special events. 
(a)  Permits. No home-brew special event shall be held in the city except pursuant to a permit issued in advanced by the city manager and pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4(e). 
(1)  No person or entity shall engage in, participate in, or sponsor a home-brew special event unless a home-brew special event permit is first obtained from the city. 
(2)  Any person seeking a home-brew special event permit from the city shall file a permit application at least three business days in advance of the beginning of the event. The application shall be in letter form, or on a form created by the city, and shall be presented to the city clerk or city manager. 
(3)  All home-brew special event permit applications shall contain the name of the sponsor(s) of the event, the name of the organizer(s) of the event, the exact date, time, and place of the event, the approximate number of persons involved in the event, the location of the event, a general description of the event, and a description of the prizes or awards to be offered. No home-brew special event may be held at a facility otherwise licensed for the production or sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(4)  The city shall charge a fee in the amount of $50.00, and the city manager may issue a home-brew special event permit allowing for up to six home-brew special events per calendar year. 
(5)  The city manager shall determine whether the home-brew special event permit should be granted by considering: (1) whether the event is being held in compliance with this chapter and state and municipal laws, (2) whether the event is likely to endanger the safety of the event participants and/or citizens of the city, and (3) whether the event is likely to result in violations of state law or the city's ordinances, including laws relating to public intoxication. 
(6)  Each permit shall state the date, location, and starting and ending time of the home-brew special event. If the city manager imposes any additional restrictions or conditions on the event in order to ameliorate any of the potential adverse factors listed in subsection (5), all such restrictions and conditions shall be listed on the permit. 
(7)  Permit holders are required to comply with all permit restrictions and conditions, and abide by all laws and ordinances. 
(8)  The permit shall be posted in the event premises at all times during the home-brew special event. 
(Ord. No. 2018-18 , § 2, 12-4-2018) 
ARTICLE 7. - GROWLERS 

Sec. 5-7-1. - Growler license. 
(a)  The retail sale of growlers is authorized for establishments licensed pursuant to this article. 
(b)  A growler license may be obtained only by establishments engaged in the retail sale of growlers. 
(c)  In addition to the retail sale of growlers, a growler licensee is permitted to engage in the retail sale of beer and/or wine by the package, and by the glass for consumption on premises. 
(d)  Growlers may only be filled with beer or wine from kegs or barrels procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(e)  After a growler is filled at the licensed premises, it must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original condition and cannot be opened or consumed on the premises. 
(f)  Only professionally sanitized and sealed growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale. 
(g)  A growler licensee shall be authorized to offer samples of draft beer or wine to patrons over the age of 21. 
(h)  Growler licensees and employee thereof shall be permitted to taste draft beer and wine at the licensed growler premises for quality control or educational purposes only. At no time however, shall a growler licensee or employee become intoxicated at the licensed premises. 
(i)  No food purchased at an establishment possessing a growler license may be consumed on premises. 
(j)  A growlers license shall constitute a pouring license for the purpose of city approved events. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-7-2. - Growlers license, regulations generally. 
    The following regulations shall apply to licensed growler establishments: 
(1)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a growler store from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(2)  No sale of beer or wine shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In addition, no sale of beer or wine shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or any other days or times prohibited by state law. 
(3)  The state regulations relating to the sale and distribution of beer and/or wine, as revised, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-7-3. - Prohibited locations. 
    Prohibited locations. It shall be prohibited to obtain a growler license within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district or other prohibited zoning district established in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Within any area prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
ARTICLE 8. - MICROBREWERIES 

Sec. 5-8-1. - Microbrewery license, regulations generally. 
    The following regulations shall apply to licensed microbrewery establishments: 
(1)  A microbrewery license may be obtained only by establishments operating as a brewery or a brewpub. 
(2)  A microbrewery licensee, or employee thereof, shall be permitted a limited exception under this article to taste draft beer and wine at the licensed premises for quality control or educational purposes only. At no time however, shall a growler licensee or employee become intoxicated at the licensed premises. 
(3)  An individual applying for a microbrewery license shall indicate on their application whether he or she intends to open and operate a brewery or brewpub. 
(4)  All operations by a microbrewery shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
(5)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a microbrewery from the street, nor any booth within, shall be permitted. 
(6)  The state regulations relating to the manufacture, sale, and distribution of beer, as revised from time to time, promulgated by the state revenue department, are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-8-2. - Provisions applicable to breweries only. 
(a)  A microbrewery licensee operating a brewery shall be authorized to provide guided tours of said brewery, during which a "free tasting" of malt beverages or beer may be conducted by the brewery. Said tours and tastings shall be permitted in accordance with the Official Code of Georgia, as amended from time to time. 
(b)  No "free tasting" of beer or malt beverages shall be permitted between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. any day of the week. In addition, no pouring or tasting of beer or malt beverages shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or on any other days or times prohibited by state law. Promotional or educational tours of a brewery facility shall also only be permitted within these allowed timeframes. 
(c)  All malt beverages or beer provided at the "free tasting" shall be served by a state licensed representative of the brewery and shall be malt beverages or beer brewed on-site by said brewery. 
(d)  The licensed brewery may elect to provide non-alcoholic food or beverages at no charge to customers or tour-attendees, either directly or indirectly. 
(e)  No person who is a participant in an educational or promotional tour may bring alcoholic beverages obtained off the premises of the licensed brewery to said brewery under any circumstances. 
(f)  Souvenirs may be provided by a brewery, including souvenir containers that may be used in "free tastings" sponsored by the brewery, in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-5-38, as amended from time to time. No brewery providing free souvenirs pursuant to this section shall provide, directly or indirectly, more than one souvenir to the same individual in one calendar day. An individual shall be 21 years of age or older to receive a free souvenir or "free tasting." 
(g)  Except as set forth in this section, a microbrewery licensee operating a brewery shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Operation of a brewery shall prohibit a microbrewery licensee from obtaining any other category of alcohol beverage license available under this chapter for the same premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-8-3. - Provisions applicable to brewpubs only. 
(a)  A microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub shall be authorized to operate an eating establishment that shall be the sole retail outlet for such malt beverages and that may offer for sale for consumption on the premises any other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers which are authorized for retail sale under this chapter, provided that such alcoholic beverages are purchased from a licensed wholesaler and, provided further, in addition to malt beverages manufactured on the premises, each brewpub licensee shall offer for sale commercially available canned or bottled malt beverages purchased from a licensed wholesale dealer. 
(b)  Should a microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub offer for sale other alcoholic beverages produced by other manufacturers on the premises of the brewpub, the licensee shall also be required to obtain an on-premises consumption license. 
(c)  The holder of a microbrewery license who is operating a brewpub shall not be entitled by virtue of said microbrewery license to sell alcoholic beverages by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(d)  A microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub shall pay all state and local license fees and excise taxes applicable to individuals licensed under this chapter as manufacturers, retailers and, where applicable, wholesale dealers. 
(e)  Except as set forth in this section, a microbrewery licensee operating a brewpub shall be subject to all sections of this chapter. 
(f)  Brewpubs may not pour or serve malt beverages between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. any day of the week. In addition, no sale or pouring of malt beverages or wine shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or on any other days or times prohibited by state law. Where in conflict with the operating hours permitted for other establishments offering on-premises consumption, the operating hours of this subsection shall control for brewpubs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-8-4. - Prohibited locations. 
    Prohibited locations. It shall be prohibited to obtain a microbrewery license within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Any area not authorized for the location and operation of microbreweries pursuant to article 28, "A-D Zone (Arts District Overlay)" of chapter 93, "Zoning," of the City Code. Any microbrewery not in compliance with said provisions of chapter 93 shall not receive a license from the city and shall not open or operate. 
(2)  Within any area prohibited by state law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
ARTICLE 9. - ART GALLERY ALCOHOL LICENSE 

Sec. 5-9-1. - Applicability. 
    A person or entity operating an art gallery may offer complimentary alcoholic beverages to patrons for consumption within the premises by obtaining an art gallery alcohol permit, which shall be renewed annually. As used herein, "art gallery" means an establishment whose primary purpose is to exhibit: 
(1)  A work of visual art such as a painting, sculpture, drawing, mosaic, or photograph: 
(2)  A work of calligraphy; 
(3)  A work of graphic art such as an etching, a lithograph, an offset print, a silk screen, or any other work of similar nature; 
(4)  A craft work in materials, including but not limited to clay, textile, fiber, wood, metal, plastic, or glass; or 
(5)  A work in mixed media such as collage or any combination of the art media set forth in this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-9-2. - Art gallery license, regulations generally. 
(a)  An art gallery alcohol permittee shall not, directly or indirectly: 
(1)  Sell alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Charge an entrance fee or cover charge in connection with the offering of complimentary alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Serve alcoholic beverages for more than four hours in any one day; 
(4)  Serve alcoholic beverages more than 15 days in any calendar year; 
(5)  Allow any alcoholic beverages to be consumed outside the facility; 
(6)  Engage in any exterior or interior advertising concerning the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the permitted premises. 
(b)  An art gallery alcohol permittee shall provide the city at least 15 days written notice prior to any art gallery exhibit or display at which alcoholic beverages will be complimentarily offered. 
(c)  An art gallery alcohol permittee's building shall meet all requirements of the building inspector, the fire marshal, the traffic engineer, and planning and zoning coordinator and shall comply with other ordinances of the city for zoning, storage, parking, buffers and other issues. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
ARTICLE 10. - MANUFACTURING/WHOLESALE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 5-10-1. - Classification of licenses. 
    Manufacturing and/or wholesale licenses under this article shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Manufacturer of malt beverages/wines, which shall permit only the manufacture, bottling and packaging of malt beverages and/or wine. 
(2)  Manufacturer of distilled spirits, which shall permit only the manufacture, bottling and packaging of distilled spirits. 
(3)  Wholesale malt beverage/wine distributor, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages and/or wine at wholesale. 
(4)  Wholesale distilled spirits distributor, which shall permit only the sale of distilled spirits at wholesale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-10-2. - Manufacturing/wholesale establishments, regulations generally. 
    The following regulations shall apply to manufacturing and wholesale establishments: 
(1)  No screen, partition or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of a manufacturing and/or wholesale establishment shall be permitted. 
(2)  No sale of alcohol shall be permitted between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. In addition, no sale of alcohol shall be permitted on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. and after 11:30 p.m., or any other days or times prohibited by state law. 
(3)  The state regulations relating to wholesalers and manufacturers promulgated by the state revenue department are hereby incorporated into and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out in this article. 
(4)  Each manufacturing and/or wholesale establishment store shall install and maintain in a secure location security cameras in the outlet of a type and number approved by the chief of police. Such cameras: 
a.  Shall be placed in the outlet to record activities in the checkout or cash register area(s). 
b.  Shall be capable of producing a retrievable image on film, tape, or any readable medium that can be made a permanent record and enlarged through projection or other means. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-10-3. - Additional application requirements. 
    In addition to the general application requirements set forth under article 1, applicants seeking a manufacturing and/or wholesale license under this article shall: 
(1)  Show within the initial license application their compliance with O.C.G.A. § 3-4-23 when the applicant has been a resident of the city for less than 12 months immediately preceding the submission of their application. 
(2)  Within three days after filing the initial license application, identify the proposed location by posting a sign not less than 24 inches by 36 inches in size, with letters of at least 21/2 inches on the front door of the building proposed to be used (if facing the right-of-way of the city street upon which the building fronts; otherwise, within three feet of the right-of-way), or upon a prominent place on the lot where the building is proposed to be constructed, facing the street. The sign shall be captioned "Liquor License Application Pending" and shall designate the name and address of the applicant, the type of license and the date of the application, and no other advertisement or wording. The sign shall remain posted until final action on the license application by the city manager, or city council, if appealed. An application will not be deemed completed until an applicant has filed with the clerk a photograph of the sign erected pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-10-4. - Exception for licensees with no fixed place of business within city. 
    Wholesalers and manufacturers maintaining no fixed place of business, warehouse or other facility in the city and possessing a valid state license may make sales and deliveries to licensed retailers and to persons licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without obtaining a city license. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-10-5. - Prohibited locations. 
    Prohibited locations. It shall be prohibited to obtain a license for a manufacturing and/or wholesale establishment within the following areas of the city: 
(1)  Within any residential zoning district or other prohibited zoning district as set out in the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Within a measured 100 yards of any church building. 
(3)  Within a measured 100 yards of any alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state or any county or municipal government therein. 
(4)  Within a measured 200 yards of any school building, school ground, or college campus. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-10-6. - No broken packages. 
    No manufacturing and/or wholesale establishment may sell single alcoholic beverages from an ice chest, tub, or cooler. Packages of alcoholic beverages may not be broken for individual sale. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
ARTICLE 11. - FEES, TAXES AND REPORTS 

Sec. 5-11-1. - Fee chart depending upon the licenses sought. 
    All the fees established throughout this chapter shall be as set forth in the chart below, which may be amended by the city from time to time. No license issued under this chapter shall be valid until the licensee pays the annual license fee as established and set forth under this chapter. Some fees may be cumulative depending upon the licenses sought. Where no fee is specifically provided for in this chapter, the fee shall be $1,000.00. This fee schedule is subject to change by ordinance adopted by the mayor and council. The most current duly adopted change in the fees shall supersede any fee provision in this chapter. 
Beer/wine/liquor-Retail, wholesale, manufacturer, restaurant, lounge, hotel $5,000.00 Beer/wine only-Retail, wholesale, manufacturer, restaurant, lounge, hotel $3,150.00 Bed and breakfast license $250.00 Liquor only-On-premises under 2000 square feet $1,600.00 Beer only-On-premises under 2000 square feet $750.00 Wine only-On-premises under 2000 square feet $750.00 Microbrewery license $1,600.00 Growler license $1,600.00 On-premises arts license $250.00 Art gallery license $50.00 Alcohol beverage caterer permit (resident licensee, per event) $25.00 Alcohol beverage caterer permit (non-resident, per event) $75.00 Ancillary wine tasting $100.00 Administration fee $200.00 Off-premises and special events $50.00 annually Hander permit fee $35.00 per employee, $60.00 per manager/owner Late fee 15% penalty for failure to pay amount when due and payable to city and interest at rate of 1% per month until paid  
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-2. - Rate of taxation for malt beverages. 
    In addition to the annual license fees required by this chapter, there is hereby levied upon each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages within the city an excise tax, on such malt beverages so sold, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(2)  All malt beverages sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, and being commonly known as tap or draft beer, shall not be subject to the excise tax provided for in subsection (1), but in lieu thereof there is hereby imposed upon each wholesale dealer selling such malt beverages within the city an excise tax of $6.00 for each barrel or bulk container having a capacity of 151/2 gallons sold by such wholesale dealer within the city and at a like rate for fractional parts thereof. 
(3)  This tax shall apply to all malt beverages except as except under O.C.G.A. § 3-5-90. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-3. - Method of payment. 
    The tax levied under this article shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all malt beverages sold within the city as follows: Each wholesale dealer selling, shipping or in any way delivering malt beverages to a retailer in the city shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all such deliveries on or before the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales are made. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-4. - Payment of tax; report. 
    The summary report made by each wholesale dealer to the city shall show the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-5. - Right to audit. 
    The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from each wholesaler of malt beverages supplying retailers in the city, and each retailer so supplied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-6. - Failure to make timely report; penalty. 
(a)  The failure to make a timely report and remittance under this article shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of 25 percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 50 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report and prosecution for a felony offense. 
(b)  Such failure to make a timely report or remittance, or the filing of a false or fraudulent report, shall also constitute grounds for the revocation of the license issued by the city to the wholesale dealer and prosecution for a felony offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-7. - Payment of fee to wholesaler; payment revocable. 
    The city may pay to each wholesaler for the service of computing and remitting the taxes collected from retailers under this article a fee of three percent of such remittances, such payment to be revocable by the city at any time. Such payment shall be forfeited if any report or payment of tax under this article is not submitted to the city by the time required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-8. - Sale prohibited when tax not paid. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any malt beverage on which the tax required in this article has not been paid to the wholesaler or distributor or the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-9. - Rate of taxation for liquor. 
    In addition to the annual retail liquor license fee required by this chapter, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter, which shall be paid to the city on all liquor sold, displayed or stored in the city. The $0.22 per liter shall be prorated down on miniatures, half pints, pints, fifths, half gallons and other quantities and on liquor gallons so that each bottle shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-10. - Method of payment. 
    The tax levied under this article shall be paid to the city by the wholesale distributor on all liquor sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering liquor to any such retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-11. - Summary of purchase invoices. 
    Each wholesale distributor of liquor shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for liquor sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-12. - Right to audit, failure to timely report; penalty. 
    The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from, each wholesaler of liquor supplying retailers in the city and each retailer so supplied. The same penalties shall apply for failure to timely and accurately report and remit as are set out in section 5-9-6. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-13. - Payment of fee to distributor; payment revocable. 
    The city may pay to each wholesale distributor for the service of computing and remitting the taxes collected from retailers under this article a fee of three percent of the remittances, the payment to be revocable by the city at any time. Such payment shall be forfeited if any report or payment under this article is not submitted to the city by the time required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-14. - Rate of taxation for wine. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail wine license fee required by this chapter, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter which shall be paid to the city on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the city. The $0.22 per liter tax rate shall be proportionally applied to smaller and larger quantities of wine so that each container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. 
(b)  This tax shall apply to all wine except as exempt under O.C.G.A. § 3-6-70. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-15. - Method of payment. 
    The tax levied under this article shall be paid to the city by each wholesale distributor on all wine sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping or in any way delivering wine to any such retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the same together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-16. - Summary of purchase invoices. 
    Each wholesale distributor of wine shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-17. - Right to audit, failure to timely report; penalty. 
    The city shall have the right to audit, and to require production of records from each wholesaler of wine supplying retailers in the city, and each retailer so supplied. The same penalties shall apply for failure to timely and accurately report and remit as are set out in section 5-9-6. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-18. - Payment of fee to wholesaler; payment revocable. 
    The city may pay to each wholesaler for the service of computing and remitting taxes collected from retailers under this article a fee of three percent of such remittances, such payment to be revocable by the city at any time. Such payment shall be forfeited if any payment of tax under this article is not submitted to the city by the time required herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Sec. 5-11-19. - Tax on alcoholic beverages on-premises for consumption. 
    Chapter 17, article 6 (section 17-6-1 through section 17-6-10 of this Code) shall govern taxes on the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
(Ord. No. 2017-04 , § 1, 3-21-2017) 
Chapter 8 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
ARTICLE 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-1-1. - City designated a bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-1) 
Sec. 8-1-2. - Animals at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any animal to run at large on the streets of the city or upon the premises of any other person within the city without the consent of the owner or tenant in possession of the premises. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-2) 
Sec. 8-1-3. - Wild animals. 
    No wild animal may be kept within the city limits, except under such conditions as shall be fixed by the city; provided, however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes only by circuses, zoos and educational institutions, in accordance with such regulations as shall be established by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-3) 
Sec. 8-1-4. - Certain animals deemed public nuisance. 
    Any animal which: 
(1)  Is found at large in violation of section 8-1-2; 
(2)  Is found to be housed, located and/or kept in a condition in violation of section 66-1-10; 
(3)  Produces, because of quantity, manner, or method in which said animal or animals are domesticated or maintained, unsanitary conditions in the city; 
(4)  Attacks passersby or passing vehicles; 
(5)  Makes or causes frequent or long continuing noise which disturbs the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity; and/or 
(6)  Is inimical to the public health, welfare, or safety, according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the county health department, which rules and regulations are incorporated herein and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article; 
is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and any person who knowingly keeps, owns, harbors or acts as custodian of any animal constituting said nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for such offense according to law. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed as a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-4; Ord. No. 82-12, 9-7-1982; Ord. of 11-2-1982) 
Sec. 8-1-5. - Vicious or dangerous animals. 
(a)  Definition. For the purpose of this section, a vicious animal or dangerous animal is one which has been known to bite or threaten to bite any member of the public and/or domestic animal belonging to the public or one which is classified as a wild animal, including apes, lions, tigers but not limited to such groups. 
(b)  Keeping prohibited except in enclosure. It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor, maintain or keep a vicious animal or dangerous animal, or commonly so known, on his premises unless the animal is fully enclosed by a steel chainlink fence of No. 2 gauge strength set at least two feet deep in the ground and not less than seven feet in height at all times. 
(c)  Roaming streets, etc., prohibited. If such an animal is harbored, maintained or kept on such premises, it shall be unlawful for such animal to be allowed to roam the streets of the city or any other public place. 
(d)  Notice to enclose animal. Upon ten days' notice to the offending person by the police, any person failing to fully enclose such vicious animal shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. 
(e)  Failure to enclose; judge's authority. Upon failure to fully enclose such animal, the judge of the city shall have authority to order the police to destroy such animal attacking or threatening to attack any member of the public or known to the police to have attached any member of the public. 
(f)  Penalty for violation of section. The penalty for violating this section is to be a fine of $250.00 or 60 days in the public jail. 
(Code 1959, § 4-7; Code 1981, § 4-4-5; Ord. No. 88-7, § 1, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-1-6. - Tethering of dogs. 
(a)  As used in this section, tether means to restrain a dog by tying it to any object or structure, including, without limitation, a house, tree, fence, post, garage, or shed, by any means, including, without limitation, a chain, rope, cord, or leash. Tethering shall not include using a leash to walk a dog and shall not include a pulley, running line, or trolley systems. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tether a dog while outdoors, except when all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The dog is in visual range of the responsible party, and the responsible party is located outside with the dog. 
(2)  The tether is connected to the dog by a buckle-type collar or a body harness made of nylon or leather, not less than one inch in width. 
(3)  The tether has the following properties: It is at least five times the length of the dog's body, as measured from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail; it terminates at both ends with a swivel; it does not weigh more than one-eighth of the dog's weight; and it is free of tangles. 
(4)  The dog is tethered in such a manner as to prevent injury, strangulation, or entanglement. 
(5)  The dog is not outside during a period of extreme weather, including, without limitation, extreme heat or near-freezing temperatures, thunderstorms, tornadoes, tropical storms, or hurricanes. 
(6)  The dog has access to water, shelter, and dry ground. 
(7)  The dog is at least six months of age. Puppies shall not be tethered. 
(8)  The dog is not sick or injured. 
(9)  If there are multiple dogs, each dog is tethered separately. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each and every violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2008-15, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
ARTICLE 2. - DOGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs, O.C.G.A. ch. 62-20. 

DIVISION A. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-2-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Kennel shall mean any location where boarding, caring for, keeping, training, or similar purposes are conducted of more than four dogs (except litters of dogs under six months old) on a commercial or noncommercial basis for a period of 14 days or longer. A kennel shall also include facilities for the raising of show or hunting dogs. 
    Owner of an animal means a person who owns, harbors or keeps or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises for more than five days. 
    Person means any individual, household, firm, partnership, corporation and every officer, agent or employee thereof. 
    Premises means a parcel of land and the structures thereon. 
    Registered dog means an animal licensed by the city as hereinafter required. 
    Vaccination means protection against rabies by inoculation with antirabies vaccine, given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year. 
    Vicious dog means any dog which has been shown to have bitten or in any other manner attached or have attempted to attack any person within the city, without provocation, whether the person is lawfully on the premises of the owner of the dog or on the premises of another. Provided, however, that any dog that bites, attacks or attempts to bite or attack any person unlawfully upon its owner's premises or keeper's premises, or which is provoked to attack, shall not be deemed a vicious dog. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-11; Ord. No. 88-7, § 3, 12-6-1988; Ord. No. 2013-11, § 1, 9-7-2013) 
Sec. 8-2-2. - Rabies inoculation. 
    All animals over 90 days old within the city shall be inoculated annually so as to provide immunity from rabies for a period of at least one year. All inoculations shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian or an authorized representative of the public health department. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-12) 
Sec. 8-2-3. - Rabies tags required. 
    A valid rabies vaccination tag shall be securely attached to the dog's collar or harness, which collar or harness must be secured to and on the dog at all times and it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner to see that the same is so attached and secured at all times. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-13; Ord. No. 88-7, § 3, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-4. - Impoundment; notice; redemption prohibited in certain instances. 
(a)  The following animals shall be subject to impoundment by the city, its agents and employees: 
(1)  All dogs upon which a valid tag indicating inoculation against rabies is not appropriately attached as provided herein; 
(2)  All female dogs found at large in violation of section 8-2-5; 
(3)  All wild animals found in violation of section 8-1-3; and 
(4)  All animals found at large in violation of section 8-1-2. 
(b)  Notice of the impoundment shall be given immediately by mail or telephone call to the owner of the impounded dog if such owner may be ascertained. 
(c)  The aforesaid notice of impoundment shall contain a general description of the animal impounded, including color, sex and breed, if readily ascertainable. 
(d)  Any dog or other animal impounded for being a public nuisance may not be redeemed unless such redemption is authorized by any court having jurisdiction. 
(e)  When in the judgment of the city, or its agents, an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be redeemed. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-14; Ord. No. 88-7, § 3, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-5. - Female dog in heat. 
    Every female dog in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secure enclosure, or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel, in such manner that the female dog cannot come in contact with another animal, except for breeding purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-15; Ord. No. 88-7, § 3, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-6. - Disposal; redemption; costs and expenses. 
(a)  If, following impoundment, a dog is not claimed or redeemed by its owner as provided for hereafter within seven days of impoundment for dogs wearing a collar and tag or three days of impoundment for dogs wearing no tag, the city may dispose of such dog by any of the following methods: 
(1)  The dog may be placed in an adoptive home; 
(2)  The dog may be sold; or 
(3)  The dog may be destroyed by such a humane method as the city may deem appropriate. 
(b)  The owner of the impounded dog may claim the dog and it may be redeemed by its owner upon payment to the city the cost and expense of impounding and keeping the dog, such costs and expenses to be determined from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-16; Ord. No. 88-7, § 3, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-7. - Dogs; cleaning up litter. 
    Any person having the custody or control of any dog on public property or private property of another shall be responsible for cleaning up any feces of the dog and disposing of such feces in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 2013-12, § 1, 9-17-2013) 
Secs. 8-2-8-8-2-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION B. - DANGEROUS DOGS 

Sec. 8-2-21. - Construction. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. All terms shall be defined and construed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-21; Ord. No. 88-7, § 4, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-22. - Appointment of a dog control officer and animal control board. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall designate a dog control officer who shall perform the duties and exercise the powers assigned to that position by the dangerous dog act. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall appoint an animal control board which shall consist of four members, who shall serve two-year staggered terms with two members to be appointed in alternating years. The animal control board will sit in two panels of two members each. Members shall receive such compensation as is established by the mayor and council. The animal control board will conduct hearings as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 and in section 8-2-24. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-22; Ord. No. 88-7, § 4, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-23. - Investigation. 
    The dog control officer may make such investigations and inquiries as may be necessary to identify dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs and their respective owners within the city. The dog control officer shall have the authority to investigate complaints as part of the process of identifying dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. The dog control officer's authority to investigate shall include the power to enter onto public and private property for the purpose of periodic inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-23; Ord. No. 88-7, § 4, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-24. - Classification; notice and hearing. 
    When the dog control officer, based on his investigation, classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog the dog control officer shall follow the procedure set out in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24; provided that: 
(1)  In addition to the certified notice provided by O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24, a second identical notice shall be sent by regular first-class mail. Notice shall be deemed received three days after the notice was mailed, in the event the certified notice is not accepted; 
(2)  Appeals from the dog control officer's initial classification of a dog as a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog shall be heard before a panel of the animal control board; 
(3)  Appeals from any subsequent classification of a dog as a dangerous dog shall be heard before the panel of the animal control board which has not heard the matter previously. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-24; Ord. No. 88-7, § 4, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-25. - Registration. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog must secure a certificate of registration in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25. 
(b)  The annual fee for the certificate of registration shall be $100.00. 
(c)  Nonpayment of the registration fee shall be an offense and shall be punishable under section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(d)  The dog control officer shall maintain a copy of all state and local laws applicable to dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs which shall be available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. The dog control officer shall not be authorized to interpret these laws or to give advice to owners. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-25; Ord. No. 88-7, § 4, 12-6-1988) 
Sec. 8-2-26. - Confiscation. 
(a)  Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs are subject to immediate confiscation pursuant to the grounds for confiscation in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27. 
(b)  Dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs that have been confiscated shall be taken to such impound facility as is designated from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Dog owners shall pay a confiscation fee of $25.00 and the daily boarding fee of $4.00 for each day the dog remains at the impound facility. Nonpayment of either or both of these fees shall be an offense and shall be punishable under section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(d)  Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs shall be returned to their owners pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 4-8-27 and after all fees have been paid. 
(Code 1981, § 4-4-26; Ord. No. 88-7, § 4, 12-6-1988) 
Secs. 8-2-27-82-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION C. - KENNELS 

Sec. 8-2-41. - Requirements for kennels. 
    All kennels shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Animals housed in kennels shall be limited to dogs. 
(2)  Dogs classified as "dangerous dogs" pursuant to chapter 8, article 2, division B of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances shall be housed separately and kept away from all other dogs at all times. 
(3)  All dogs shall be housed within an enclosed building designed and operated in such a manner as to ensure that no objectionable odors or noise are detectable at the property line. Objectionable noise shall be deemed to be any noise generated by dogs in the kennel or outdoor runs that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or that causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of a normal sensitiveness residing in the vicinity of the kennel. 
(4)  Dogs may be placed in outdoor runs for an exercise period not to exceed 30 minutes per dog. 
(5)  A maximum of 24 dogs may be allowed in outdoor runs at any given time. 
(6)  No dog may be permitted in an outdoor run between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(7)  Outdoor runs shall be located a minimum of 150 feet away from any residential use or zone. 
(8)  Kennel buildings shall be located a minimum of 100 feet away from any residential use or zone. 
(9)  All kennels, including but not limited to their outdoor runs, shall be maintained in a clean condition and in such a manner as to not constitute a nuisance to the occupant of any adjoining property at all times. 
(10)  Any enclosure used to keep an animal shall be provided with drains or other means of animal waste disposal that shall discharge directly into a public sewer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-11, § 2, 9-7-2013) 
ARTICLE 3. - APPLICATION OF FULTON COUNTY RABIES AND ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE 

Sec. 8-3-1. - Use of this article and other codes. 
    This article may be used in conjunction with or in lieu of ordinances relating to the subject matter of articles 1 and 2 in effect prior to the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and this article shall have the same force and effect on and after said adoption date as ordinances adopted subsequent hereto. Where previously adopted ordinances regarding animal control specifically conflict with this article this article shall be deemed to prevail. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-27), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means "dog control officer" and shall refer to an individual employed by the health department or its designee to perform and execute the provisions of this article, and his office shall have the power to issue citations in violation of this article and as deputized by the county sheriff. 
    Animal control shelter means the facilities operated by the health department or its designee for the confining of dogs, cats, or other animals impounded under the provisions of this article. 
    Cat means cat, or any domesticated feline, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
    Commercial guard/security dog means any dog that is purchased, leased, or rented and that is trained to guard, protect, patrol, or defend any commercial property, public or private, upon and within which it is located. 
    Current vaccination/license tag means a vaccination/license tag bearing a number which shows the license is valid for a one- or three-year period. The licensing period runs concurrently with the vaccination period. 
    Custodian means any person which has been entrusted with the responsibility and care of a dog, cat, or other animal by its owner. 
    Dangerous dog. 
(1)  Any dog that, according to the records of any appropriate authority: 
a.  Inflicts a severe injury on a human without provocation on public or private property; or 
b.  Aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
(2)  Exception. A dog is not considered potentially dangerous or dangerous if it bites a human: 
a.  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
b.  When its owner is being attacked. 
c.  Who is a willful trespasser on the property of the owner or who is committing another tort or crime. 
d.  Who has tormented or abused it or who in the past has been observed or reported to have tormented or abused it. 
    Dog means dog, or any domesticated canine, of either sex, whether vaccinated against rabies or not. 
    Domestic animal/fowl means any animal/fowl domesticated by humans so as to live and breed in a tame condition for the advantage of humans. Pen raised skunks are categorized as those skunks acceptable by the state and may be kept in as pets. 
    Exotic animal means any animal of any kind which is not indigenous to the state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal, but shall include any hybrid animal which is part exotic animal. 
    Harborer means any person that has provided sustenance and/or shelter to a dog, cat, or other animal for a period of more than seven days. 
    Health department means the commissioner of health of the county his authorized representatives, which shall include officers or employees of the Atlanta Humane Society so long as such corporation is under contract with the county and other cities of the county. 
    Livestock means horses, mules, cows, sheep, goats, hogs, and all other animals used or suitable for either food or labor. 
    Nuisance means whatever is dangerous or detrimental to human life or health and whatever renders or tends to render the soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome, or unreasonably offends or impairs the senses of smell, sight, and hearing. 
    Person means person, firm, corporation, municipality, society, or association. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human on public or private property at any time. 
    Records means records of any state, county, or municipal law enforcement agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state, or local court; or records of an animal control officer. 
    Vaccinate means intramuscular injection, by a veterinarian, of a specified dose of antirabies vaccine to an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. government license number of approval stamped on the label of the vaccine container and having been approved by the state department of human resources. Vaccine used for vaccination of dogs, cats, or other animals against rabies shall be refrigerated and kept under proper conditions and shall show no signs of spoilage or otherwise be unfit for producing immunity against rabies. 
    Vaccination certificate means a certificate provided by the state department of human resources and issued at the time of vaccination of the dog, cat, or other animal and bearing thereon the signature of the vaccinator; the name, color, breed, age, and sex of the dog, cat, or other animal; the name and address of the owner; the date of expiration of the vaccination; and the spay or neuter status, if known. 
    Vaccination/license tag means a metal tag bearing a number which is issued to the animal owner after showing proof of vaccination for the animal and paying, when required, the license fee. This tag is issued on behalf of the county by the health department or its designee and is provided by the state department of human resources. 
    Veterinarian means any person who holds a license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in the state; the veterinary license number shall be the same as that recorded by the state board of veterinary examiners. 
    Vicious animal. 
(1)  Any animal which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack, bite, or injure humans or other animals without provocation, or an animal which has, on one or more occasion, caused physical injury to humans or other animals without provocation, whether on public or private property. 
(2)  Exception. An animal is not considered vicious if it attacks, bites, or menaces: 
a.  When being used by a law enforcement officer. 
b.  Anyone attacking the owner. 
c.  Unlawful trespassers on the property of the owner. 
d.  Any person or animal that has tormented or abused it. 
e.  If it is defending its young or other animal. 
    Wildlife/fowl means any animal/fowl of any kind which is indigenous to the state, but not included in the definition of a domestic animal/fowl, and shall include any hybrid animal/fowl which is part wild animal/fowl. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-28), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-3. - Penalties for violation of article. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500.00 and/or imprisonment in jail for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. Each and every violation of the provisions of this article constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article as it pertains to a potentially dangerous dog will be fined not less than $150.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $300.00 for a third conviction. 
(c)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article as it pertains to a dangerous dog shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of a high and aggravated nature and will be fined not less than $500.00 for a second conviction, and not less than $750.00 for a third conviction. 
(d)  If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog fails to comply with section 8-3-21 and his/her dog attacks or bites a human, he/she shall be guilty of a felony and will be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000.00 nor more than $5,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not less than one year nor more than five years. 
(e)  If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog knowingly and willfully fails to comply with section 8-3-21 and his/her dog aggressively attacks and causes severe injury to or the death of a human, he/she shall be guilty of a felony. Conviction under these circumstances will subject the owner to a fine of not less than $5,000.00, nor more than $10,000.00 and/or imprisonment for not less than one year, nor more than ten years. 
(f)  In addition to subsections (d) and (e) of this section, the animal control officer shall immediately confiscate the dog and place it in quarantine for a period of time as provided by the health department and thereafter humanely destroyed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-29), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-4. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or provision of this article shall be held invalid, such part shall be deemed severable, and the invalidity thereof shall not affect the remaining parts of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-30), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-5. - Courts. 
    The county magistrate courts or the courts wherein the county has a contractual agreement for providing animal control services shall hear cases and assess fines for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-31), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-6. - Enforcement of article. 
    The county health department or its designee shall enforce this article by means of impoundment and court citations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-32), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-7. - Dog/cat license required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of each owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat over four months of age kept, maintained, or harbored within the unincorporated area of the county, or within any municipality in the county, who has or may enter into an agreement with the county for animal control services, to obtain a dog/cat license for such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the areas of the county designated in subsection (a) above to obtain a dog or cat license for such dog or cat within 14 days from the date of entry. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-33), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-8. - Vaccination/license tag required. 
(a)  In order to maintain a centrally located record of all vaccinated dogs, cats, or other animals kept, maintained, or harbored in any area of the county, including those within the corporate city limits of any municipality in the county, the owner, custodian, or harborer of such dog, cat, or other animal is required to apply to the county animal control for a vaccination/license tag. 
(b)  A vaccination/license tag shall be issued upon presentation of a certificate showing that the dog, cat, or other animal for which the tag is issued has been vaccinated against rabies as prescribed by this article, provided that the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog or cat in the areas of the county designated in section 8-3-7(a) also make payment of a license fee to be set by the county manager. The vaccination/license tag will be available to the public throughout the year and is issued on behalf of the county by the health department or its designee. The tag shall be valid for the same period as the time specified by the vaccination. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of any dog in the areas designated in subsection (a) above to affix such vaccination/license tag to a collar worn by the dog at all times, except that the wearing of a vaccination/license tag is not required for show dogs where the wearing of such tag could damage the coat, and except when dogs are boarded in kennels or veterinary clinics, or in an area zoned for agricultural purposes where the owner or custodian of the dog in question is using the dog for hunting purposes, and has on his/her person a valid hunting license. In the latter case, the owner, custodian, or harborer shall have the tag or vaccination certificate in his/her possession where it may be shown on demand by any duly constituted authority. 
(d)  Should the vaccination/license tag become lost, misplaced, or stolen, it shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or harborer of the dog or cat to obtain a replacement tag at a cost set by the county manager. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination/license tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove a vaccination/license tag from any animal without the consent of the owner or custodian. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-34), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-9. - Special permits. 
(a)  Each premises where there are four or more dogs over the age of four months kept, maintained or harbored for a period of 14 days or longer shall be deemed to constitute a kennel. The owner or person in possession of the premises where the kennel is located shall be required to apply to the county animal control for a special permit. 
(b)  A special permit will be issued upon payment of an annual fee set by the county manager and proof that the premises and dogs covered by the special permit meet the requirements set out in this article. 
(c)  The special permit will be valid for one year from the date of issue, provided it is not revoked during the year for violations of this article. Application to renew a special permit must be made at least 14 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit. 
(d)  Individual license tags will be issued for each dog located in such a kennel, and a separate tag fee over and above the annual special permit fee will not be required. 
(e)  All commercial kennels which are subject to a business license fee shall be exempt from the annual special permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-35), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-10. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, poison, cruelly treat, maim, tease, bruise, deprive of necessary sustenance or medical attention, improperly use, deprive of shade and shelter, or in any manner whatsoever, torture, kill, or abuse any animal. 
(b)  No person shall abandon any animal on any property, public or private, or keep an animal under unsanitary conditions. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to transport any dog in an open bed truck except when safely confined in a portable kennel or safely restrained by a harness or tether. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-36), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-11. - Running at large. 
(a)  Generally . Within the unincorporated area of the county or within any municipality in the county which has or may enter into an agreement with the county for animal control services, the running at large of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, or dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs is prohibited, with the exception of cats. Owners of wildlife or exotic animals must have the necessary state and/or federal permits on their person when transporting their animals. 
(b)  Dogs. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or harborer of any dog to allow or permit such dog to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog unless such dog is securely under leash; said leash being not more than six feet long, and under the control of a competent person. Dogs must be confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of the dog and shall be restrained by means of a fence or wall or other enclosure, or restrained individually by a leash or chain. Excluded are those dogs participating in or training for obedience trials, field trials, dog shows, tracking work, or law enforcement. Also, the requirements of this subsection shall not apply in any area zoned for agriculture where the owner or person having custody of the dog is at the time in question using the dog for hunting purposes and has on his/her person a valid hunting license and proof of vaccination. 
(2)  An electronic confinement system shall be considered an acceptable enclosure when the equipment is properly maintained and in continuous working order, and the animal to be contained within wears the appropriate electronic collar when within the system perimeters. 
(3)  In cases where an animal has been deemed dangerous by the court, or has been trained to be a guard dog, an electronic animal confinement system may not be used as either the primary or secondary enclosure. 
(4)  Individuals who contain an animal by means of an electronic animal confinement system and are found to be in violation of this section or have been deemed as restraining a dangerous animal shall thereafter restrain the animal by means of a fence, wall or other enclosure, or such animal shall be restrained individually by a leash or chain. 
(c)  Restraint of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife and exotic animals . It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian, or harborer of any domestic animal, livestock, wildlife, or exotic animal to allow or permit such animal to leave the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such unless securely under leash, in a carrying case, or restrained by some other means and under the control of a competent person, with the exception of cats. 
(d)  Confinement of domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs . Domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, exotic animals, and dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs shall be securely confined to the premises of the owner or other person having custody of such by means set forth under the provisions of this article or approved by the health department or its designee and/or as required by state or federal regulations, with the exception of cats. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-37), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-12. - Commercial guard/security dogs. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all persons who keep, use, or maintain any guard/security dog to have signs conspicuously posted on the premises where the guard/security dog is located to warn of the presence of the dog. This warning shall consist of a sign placed at each entrance and exit to the premises and in a position to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the sign (eye level). If the premises is not enclosed by a wall or fence, a sign shall be placed at every entrance and exit to each structure on the premises in which a guard/security dog is located. Each sign shall measure at least ten inches by 14 inches and shall contain block lettering stating "Warning: Guard dog on duty." In addition, for dogs rented or leased, the sign shall set forth the name, address, and phone number of the responsible person or persons to be notified during any hour of the day or night. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of any person who keeps, uses, or maintains a guard/security dog to ensure the dog is vaccinated against rabies and licensed as required by section 8-3-8(b). The dog also must have the current vaccination tag affixed to a collar worn by the dog at all times as required by section 8-3-8(c). 
(c)  It shall be the duty of any person that sells, leases, and/or rents any guard/security dog to be used within the county to notify the county animal control of the location and number of guard/security dogs in use, kept, or maintained at a particular location. The animal control office shall maintain a record of the location, number of guard/security dogs, and current rabies vaccination and licensure of all guard/security dogs utilized within the county. The person that sells, leases, and/or rents a guard/security dog to be used in the county shall furnish the following information to the county animal control office: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the location where a guard dog is located. 
(2)  Name, breed, sex, and current license tag information of each guard dog at any location in the county. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to transport any guard/security dog in an open bed truck, and the vehicle transporting guard dogs shall be identified as to the business owner. It shall be unlawful to transport any guard dog in the county except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Each dog shall be placed in separate holding bins. 
(2)  Each holding bin shall be enclosed and measure 48 inches long by 18 inches wide by 30 inches high. 
(3)  Each holding bin will be adequately ventilated. 
(e)  No guard/security dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate objects such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure. 
(f)  A guard/security dog shall be confined by the owner/custodian/harborer within a building or secure enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape of its own volition. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-38), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-13. - Confinement of female dogs in heat. 
    It shall be the duty of any owner, custodian, or harborer of any female dog in heat within the areas designated in section 8-3-7(a), when such dog is left unattended, to securely confine such dog so as to prevent contact with another dog except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-39), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-14. - Skunks and foxes. 
(a)  All skunks, except pen-raised skunks, and all foxes from whatever geographic region, including Alaska and Canada, are forbidden to be purchased, sold, owned, possessed, or harbored. Pen-raised skunks and foxes in possession as of July 1, 1987, are grandfathered. 
(b)  Pen-raised skunks, other than black and white skunks, may be purchased and kept as pets after securing a permit from the county animal control. The county animal control is responsible for ensuring that purchasers of pen-raised skunks are made knowledgeable of the proper care, handling, and confinement. No pet store shall allow the purchase of pen-raised skunks without being first presented with the permit issued by the county animal control. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-40), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-15. - Wildlife or exotic animal. 
    Each owner, custodian, or harborer of any wildlife or exotic animal must obtain all necessary state and/or federal permits and/or meet all state and/or federal requirements for keeping such an animal. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-41), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-16. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Any vicious animal shall be deemed a nuisance. A vicious dog will be exempt as a nuisance upon classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog as prescribed in section 8-3-22. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animal or livestock except under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any housing or enclosure used by any domestic animal or livestock shall be well-drained, free from accumulations of animal excrement and objectionable odors and otherwise clean and sanitary. Animal excrement shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the health officer or his designee. 
(2)  A domestic animal or livestock shall be kept at the following minimum distances from any occupied building except the dwelling unit of the owner, with the exceptions of licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public or commercial horse facilities: 
Animal Distance 
(in feet) Horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep or goats 150 Hogs 900 Dogs (three or more) 25 Rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters 25 Chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, or similar fowl 25  
(3)  Except in an area zoned for agriculture, each domestic animal or livestock shall be provided with the following average minimum floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which it is kept, with the exceptions of licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors and public and commercial horse facilities: 
Animal Area per Animal 
(in square feet) Horses, mules, asses, cows, sheep, or goats 150 Hogs 150 Dogs 100 Rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters 4 Chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, or similar fowl 4  
(4)  Except in the areas zoned for agriculture, the maximum number of domestic animals or livestock that may be kept on any single premises shall not exceed the following, with the exceptions of licensed veterinary hospitals, commercial kennels, grooming parlors, and public and commercial horse facilities: 
Animal Maximum Number Horses, mules, asses, cows 5 Sheep, or goats 10 Hogs 10 Dogs, cats 10 Rabbits, guinea pigs, hamsters 75 Chickens, turkeys, geese, ducks, pigeons, or similar fowl 75  
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-42), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-17. - Animals as prizes. 
    It shall be unlawful to offer as a prize or gift any animal in any contest, raffle, or lottery, or as an enticement for fundraising or for entry into any place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-43), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-18. - Vaccination required. 
(a)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each dog or cat over four months of age kept, maintained, or harbored in any area of the county, including any dog or cat within the corporate city limits of any municipality in the county, is required to maintain a current rabies vaccination on such dog or cat. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of all persons owning or having custody of any dog or cat over four months of age brought into the county from outside the county to have such dog or cat vaccinated within 14 days from the date of entry, provided that when the owner or person having custody of the dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the health department through its designee that such dog or cat has a current vaccination, as prescribed by this article, such dog or cat will not be required to be vaccinated again until the expiration date of the current vaccination. 
(c)  Only a licensed veterinarian shall be entitled, in connection with his/her practice, on the request of any owner of a dog, cat, or other animal, to vaccinate such dog, cat, or other animal against rabies, with a vaccine as set forth in the definition of "vaccinate" in section 8-3-2, provided that at the time of vaccination he furnishes two copies of the vaccination certificate to the owner, forwards one copy to the county animal control, and maintains one copy for his/her files. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-44), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-19. - Rabies cases to be reported. 
    It shall be the duty of any person knowing of a rabid animal or of any animal showing symptoms of rabies to immediately report such animal to the health department or its designee and give as much pertinent information as possible. Any bite by an animal shall be reported to the health department or its designee. The animal control office, in order to maintain an effective epidemiological surveillance and control program, shall maintain a record of its rabies related activities, including investigation and confirmation of rabies in animals in the manner and frequency stipulated by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-45), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-20. - Quarantine. 
(a)  In the event a dog or cat has bitten a human, such animal shall be immediately confined at the animal control shelter, veterinary hospital, or other such premises deemed acceptable by the health department or its designee for a period of ten days from the date of the bite to be observed for symptoms of rabies. 
(b)  In the event a warm-blooded animal other than a dog or cat has bitten a human or other warm-blooded animal, or in the event a warm-blooded animal has been bitten by another warm-blooded animal, the recommendations contained in the Rabies Control Manual compiled by the state department of human resources shall be followed. 
(c)  All expenses incurred for boarding an animal for the quarantine period as well as other applicable fees shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person, custodian, or harborer to fail to surrender a dog, cat, or other animal which has bitten a human, upon the sworn statement of the person bitten. Such animal will be placed under quarantine or submitted for laboratory examination at the discretion of the health department or its designee. The provisions of this division shall apply, regardless of whether or not such animal has a current rabies vaccination and tag. 
(e)  When rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department or its designee may designate a geographical area within which quarantine of all owned warm-blooded animals shall be maintained. Such animals shall be immediately confined to the premises designated and in a manner approved by the health department or its designee, whether or not such animals have been vaccinated against rabies. 
(f)  No warm-blooded animal shall be brought into or removed from a quarantined area or premises without written approval of the health department or its designee. 
(g)  Quarantine ordered by the health department or its designee shall be maintained for such period as deemed necessary to protect the public health. 
(h)  Quarantined areas or premises where rabid animals or animals suspected of having rabies remain at large may be posted by the health department or its designee with signs which read as follows: "Rabies suspected" or "Rabies-Keep away from animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed in a place designated by the health department or its designee and shall not be removed except by the health department or its designee. Such signs shall not be defaced. 
(i)  The owner, custodian, or harborer of each animal subject to a quarantine invoked by the health department or its designee under the terms of this article shall be notified of the quarantine, the particular animals subject thereto, and shall be given such other information as the health department or its designee deems necessary. 
(j)  Every animal showing clinical signs of rabies, as determined by the health department or its designee, shall be immediately destroyed, and/or the heads of all animals suspected of having had rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the epidemiology office, department of human resources, for examination by the department of human resources laboratory. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-46), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-21. - Precautions to be taken by owners. 
(a)  No person owning or having custody or control of any dog or other animal known by such person to be vicious, dangerous, or potentially dangerous shall permit it to run at large, or permit it to run loose on or within the premises of such person in such a manner as to endanger the life or limb of any person lawfully entering such premises. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, or anyone having any such animal in his/her possession or custody, to ensure that the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is kept under restraint, as prescribed in subsections (d), (e), and (f) of this section, and that reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of its owner, custodian, or harborer, and it is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, locked pen, or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition. Such enclosure must be securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended so that children are prevented from entry and to prevent the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog from escaping. 
(c)  For owners of a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog whose animal lives out-of-doors, a portion of their property should be fenced with a perimeter or area fence. Within this perimeter fence, the vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be humanely confined inside a locked pen or kennel of adequate size. The pen or kennel may not share common fencing with the area or perimeter fence. The kennel or pen must have secure sides, a secure top attached to all sides, the sides must be securely set into the ground or onto a concrete pad, or securely attached to a wire bottom. The gate to the kennel must be locked when the animal is unattended. This enclosure shall provide protection from the elements. 
(d)  A vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall not be upon any street or public place except when securely restrained by leash not more than six feet in length and humanely muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and in the charge of a competent person. 
(e)  Whenever outside of its enclosure, as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, but on the owner's property, a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog must be attended by the owner or custodian and restrained by a secure collar, muzzled when appropriate, as determined by the animal control officer, and on a leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. 
(f)  No vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied while unattended by the owner or custodian to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its primary enclosure. 
(g)  A warning sign (i.e., beware of dog) shall be conspicuously posted denoting a vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on the premises. These signs are exempt from building permit requirements. 
(h)  Failure to keep any vicious animal or dangerous or potentially dangerous dog confined or under restraint as provided for in this section shall be unlawful and shall be punishable as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-47), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-22. - Notice to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog owners. 
(a)  When an animal control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the animal control officer shall notify the dog's owner. The notice shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address; 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has the right to request a hearing on the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested, shall be before the animal control hearing board; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the animal control hearing board and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the board. 
(b)  When the animal control hearing board receives a request for a hearing, as provided in this section, it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The hearing board, will notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the dog owner at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence, and, in addition thereto, the hearing board shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the hearing board may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's classification of the dog. 
(c)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the animal control hearing board shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective. 
(d)  A certificate of registration to the effect that the dog owner has a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall also be issued by the animal control officer, and is contingent upon the dog owner presenting to the animal control officer evidence of: 
(1)  An enclosure as prescribed in section 8-3-21(b), (c) for confinement of a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog; 
(2)  The proper posting of the premises as prescribed in section 8-3-21(g); and 
(3)  An insurance policy or surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00, insuring the owner against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by a dangerous dog. This shall apply to dogs classified as dangerous, only. 
(e)  An annual fee of $100.00 will be charged in addition to regular dog licensing fees, to register dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. This registration fee is subject to change as dictated by the county board of commissioners. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the animal control officer does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in section 8-3-21 of this article are maintained by the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration, or following the date of any renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or been sold, stolen or donated. If the dog is sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner. If sold or donated to another resident of the county, the new owner has ten days after taking possession of the dog to register the dog with the county animal control. If the owner moves with the dog from one jurisdiction to another within the state, the owner shall register the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog in the new jurisdiction within ten days after becoming a resident. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog as required in this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-48), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-23. - Formation of hearing board. 
(a)  The county board of commissioners shall create a board known as the animal control hearing board, to hold hearings provided for in section 8-3-22 of this article. The board so designated is authorized and shall have jurisdiction to conduct hearings and determine matters provided for in section 8-3-22. No member of the animal control hearing board may participate in a hearing on any matter in which a member previously participated in the classification of the dog at issue. 
(b)  The hearing board shall consist of seven members appointed by the board of commissioners. The initial term of members shall be as follows: 
(1)  Two members to serve for one year; 
(2)  Two members to serve for two years; and 
(3)  Three members to serve for three years. 
Thereafter, all members shall be appointed for terms of three years and until their successors are appointed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-49), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-24. - Impoundment of dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals. 
(a)  Any citizen may pick up and impound any animal running at large in the county, provided said animal is promptly surrendered to the county animal control to allow the person having the right of possession an opportunity to reclaim their animal. 
(b)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, and exotic animals within any of the following classes may be captured and impounded from the areas noted in subsection 8-3-7(a), with the exception of subsections (b)(1), (b)(3), (b)(4), (b)(5), and (b)(6) of this section which shall also apply to any area of the county not under contract for animal control services: 
(1)  Dogs or cats without a current rabies vaccination. 
(2)  Dogs or cats without a current county license. 
(3)  Dogs not wearing a current vaccination/license tag. This shall include dogs wearing a tag that was not issued for said dog. 
(4)  Warm-blooded animals which have bitten a human or another warm-blooded animal and warm-blooded animals which have been bitten by another warm-blooded animal suspected of having rabies. 
(5)  Warm-blooded animals suspected of having rabies. 
(6)  Unconfined warm-blooded animals in quarantine areas. 
(7)  Animals whose safety, health, or life is in immediate danger. 
(8)  Animals the ownership of which is unknown. 
(9)  Dogs, domestic animals, livestock, owned wildlife, or exotic animals roaming at large, with the exception of cats. 
(10)  Vicious animals or dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined in section 8-3-21. 
(11)  Commercial guard/security dogs not properly confined or restrained as defined this article. 
(12)  Dogs in heat not properly confined as defined in this article. 
(c)  No animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this article by virtue of a vaccination, tag, or certificate. 
(d)  Any animal control officer empowered to perform any duty under this article is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for impounding a dog or other animal which the officer is in immediate pursuit of with the exception of any occupied building into which the dog or other animal may enter. In the latter case, if the occupant or owner of the premises gives permission to the animal control officer to enter the premises, the officer may remove said dog or other animal. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any manner, interfere with, hinder, resist, obstruct, or molest the animal control officer in the performance of his/her duties, or for any person to remove any animal from the animal control vehicle or animal control shelter without the permission of the animal control officer. 
(f)  When the owner of the dog or other animal impounded under the provisions of this article can be readily identified and located, the health department or its designee shall notify the owner of the impoundment. A reasonable attempt to contact the owner shall be satisfied by a telephone call to the owner's residence, when possible, or a postcard sent to the owner's residence through the U.S. Postal System. 
(g)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately impounded by any animal control officer, or by a law enforcement officer if: 
(1)  The owner of the dangerous dog does not secure the liability insurance or surety bond required by section 8-3-22(d)(3); 
(2)  The dangerous dog is not validly registered as required by section 8-3-22(d); or 
(3)  The dangerous dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure as specified in section 8-3-21(b) or (c). 
Any dangerous dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this section, and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this section within 20 days of the date the dog was impounded, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-50), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-25. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Every animal impounded under the provisions of this article which is found, upon arrival at the animal control shelter, to be diseased or injured, and whose ownership is unknown or is relinquished in writing, shall, at the discretion of the health department or its designee, be immediately destroyed if not accepted by an organization approved by the health department or its designee, and provided such organization signs a receipt for the animal. In the event an owner cannot be contacted and the severity of the injury or disease of the animal dictates that euthanasia is a humane course of action, the animal will be destroyed and the owner, if known, notified as soon as possible. 
(b)  If, in the opinion of the health department or its designee, the release of an impounded animal will impair the safety of the public, such animal will be held pending a court order disposition. 
(c)  Any animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be held a minimum of three days from the day of impoundment or such longer period of time as deemed reasonable by the director of animal control. Animals under observation for rabies symptoms shall remain in the animal control shelter for such period of time as the health department or its designee may deem necessary to protect the public health, with the exception of livestock, which shall be held a minimum of 14 days. 
(d)  Impounded animals not claimed within three days of the day of impoundment or at the end of the quarantine period shall be disposed of (euthanized) in a humane manner as approved by the health department or its designee. No animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be released to any person or organization for the purpose of live animal experimentation. 
(e)  Before the release of any impounded animal, the owner shall pay the following: 
(1)  A vaccination fee for any unvaccinated animal when a vaccination is required by this article. 
(2)  A license fee for any unlicensed dog or cat in an area covered by this article. 
(3)  An impoundment fee. 
(4)  A daily boarding fee. 
(f)  The county manager shall establish reasonable vaccination, license, impoundment, and boarding fees. In some instances, the amount of impoundment and boarding fees will be on a cost-incurred basis. 
(g)  Proceeds from license, impoundment, and boarding fees shall be applied to the annual operating budget of the county animal control for animal and rabies control, enforcement activity, and operation of the animal facility. 
(h)  The health department or its designee shall exercise every reasonable care to prevent injury, illness, death, escape, or pilfering of any animal with which it deals but shall not be responsible for any such occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-51), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 8-3-26. - Adoption of impounded animals. 
(a)  The county animal control as a designee of the county health department shall cooperate with the Atlanta Humane Society and any other approved organization by offering for adoption or placement cats and/or dogs not claimed by the person having the right of possession or any cat and/or dog that may be designated as a stray. 
(b)  Organizations with a continuing interest in adopting animals from the animal control shelter must register with the county animal control on the forms provided and be designated as an approved adoption organization. 
(c)  All animals housed at the animal control shelter shall be under the authority of the animal control director or his/her designee. No animal will be released for adoption or placement prior to the holding period required by section 8-3-25(c) and with the written approval of the animal control director or his/her designee. 
(d)  The animal control director may confer ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the animal control shelter to an approved organization, subject to conditions prescribed by the animal control director including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Payment of any vaccination, licensing, or veterinary costs shall be the responsibility of the receiving organization; 
(2)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been or will be examined by a veterinarian and has had or will have vaccinations against rabies and other diseases administered; and 
(3)  Evidence satisfactory to the animal control director that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(e)  The Atlanta Humane Society will have the right of first refusal on adoptable animals at the animal control shelter. Other approved organizations interested in the adoption of a cat and/or dog may call the animal control shelter on Monday and Thursday morning to question the availability of adoptable animals. The animal control director may also contact an approved organization if an animal is available for adoption. No animal shall be held more than 24 hours past the time of notification. 
(f)  The county health department or its designee shall be held harmless and free from liability for any animal adopted to or placed with an approved adoption organization. 
(Ord. No. 2004-29, § 1(4-4-52), 12-21-2004) 
Chapter 11 - BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATION 
ARTICLE 2. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 11-2-1. - Findings; public purpose. 
(a)  The mayor and council, which is the governing body of the City of Hapeville, Georgia (the "city"), is aware of the following evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult entertainment on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the mayor and council of the city: 
(1)  Findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986) and Young v. American Mini Theatres, 427 U.S. 50 (1976), and in articles and studies in other communities including, but not limited to: Rome, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; New York, New York; Newport News, Virginia; El Paso, Texas; Manatee County, Florida; Bellevue, Washington; Kent, Washington; City of Sandy Springs, Georgia; Fulton County, Georgia; Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Indianapolis, Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Los Angeles, California; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, and other studies, articles, and court decisions; and 
(2)  The opinion of the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals in Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia v. Fulton County, Ga., 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010), which discusses extensive evidence of negative secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments in Fulton County, Georgia incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the mayor and council of the city; and 
(3)  Three articles authored or co-authored by Dr. Richard McCleary, Professor at the University of California, Irvine, entitled "Rural Hotspots: The Case of Adult Business" (2008); "Do Peep Shows 'Cause' Crime? A Response to Linz, Paul, and Yao" (2006); and "Do 'Off-Site' Adult Businesses Have Secondary Effects? Legal Doctrine, Social Theory, and Empirical Evidence" (2009), incorporated into the record of the proceedings before the mayor and council of the city; and 
(b)  Based upon all of this evidence, the mayor and council of the city find: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, also known as adult entertainment establishments, lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled or inadequately controlled by the operators of the establishments. Sexually oriented businesses cause an increase in criminal behavior in nearby areas, including, but not limited to, disorderly conduct, prostitution, solicitation, drug trafficking, drug use, assaults and batteries, and corruption of public officials. 
(2)  Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, may occur at sexually oriented businesses. Offering or providing private or semi-private space encourages such activities, which creates unhealthy conditions. 
(3)  Adult entertainment establishments escalate and exacerbate undesirable community conditions, including, but not limited to, blight, diminished property values, increased need for law enforcement and emergency medical response resources, and increased burden on the judicial system as a result of the criminal behavior which the mayor and council find such business establishments bring to a community. The secondary negative effects that are caused by such businesses are not limited to such facilities that offer live or recorded performances with human nudity or the depiction of sexual acts, but other forms of sexually oriented businesses that also have a deleterious effect on nearby neighborhoods, commercial districts, and on urban life in general. These other types of such businesses include , but are not limited to adult bookstores, peep shows, massage parlors, bath houses, adult gift and novelty shops, and lingerie or nude modeling studios. 
(4)  Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sexual activity within the premises of such sexually oriented businesses. 
(5)  Communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in sexually oriented businesses. 
(6)  Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities. 
(7)  Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in some areas of some sexually oriented businesses. 
(8)  The findings noted in subsections (1) through (7) raise substantial governmental concerns. 
(9)  Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns. 
(10)  The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and other secondary negative effects as described herein. 
(11)  It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to obtain a limited amount of information regarding employees who may engage in the conduct which this chapter is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses to such activity. 
(12)  The fact that an applicant for an adult entertainment license has been convicted of a sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in that conduct in contravention of this chapter. 
(13)  The barring of such individuals from the management of adult entertainment establishments for a period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases. 
(14)  The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the city will be promoted by the enactment of this chapter. 
    Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities as described above, which experiences are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the city; and based on the findings of multiple courts around the country; and based on the documentary evidence submitted to the mayor and council, the mayor and council take note of the well-known and self-evident conditions and secondary effects attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among the various communities within our country. 
    It is the finding of the mayor and council that public nudity (either partial or total), under certain circumstances, in establishments offering live nude entertainment or "adult entertainment," begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. In the same manner, establishments offering cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment have the same deleterious effects on the community. 
    Among the undesirable community conditions identified in other communities with commercial nudity and cinematographic or videographic adult entertainment are criminal activity, depression of property values and acceleration of community blight in the surrounding neighborhoods, increased allocation of and expenditure for law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, and increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior hereinabove referenced. The mayor and council find it is reasonable to believe that some or all of these undesirable community conditions will result in the city, as well, unless these regulations are adopted. 
    Furthermore, it is the finding of the mayor and council that nude or semi-nude live entertainment and other forms of adult entertainment including, but not limited to, adult book stores, adult novelty shops, adult video stores, peep shows, adult theaters, and massage parlors have an adverse effect upon the quality of life in the city and surrounding communities. 
    The mayor and council further find that each separate adverse secondary effect of adult entertainment businesses and sexually oriented businesses constitutes a substantial governmental interest, that each substantial governmental interest includes, but is not limited to, preventing future adverse secondary effects of both pre-existing sexually oriented businesses and adult entertainment businesses in the city and those that may open in the future, and the viability of each separate substantial governmental interest of the city addressed herein does not depend upon any comparative analysis between adult entertainment businesses and non-adult entertainment businesses. 
    The mayor and council therefore find that it is in the best interests of the health, welfare, safety and morals of the city, the community and the preservation of its businesses, neighborhoods, churches, schools, residential areas, public parks and children's day care facilities to prevent or reduce the adverse impacts of adult entertainment establishments. Therefore, the mayor and council of the city find that licensing and regulations are necessary for any adult entertainment establishment, and find that these regulations promote the public welfare by furthering legitimate public and governmental interests, including but not limited to, reducing criminal activity and protecting against or eliminating undesirable community conditions. The mayor and council further find that such will not infringe upon the protected Constitutional rights of freedom of speech or expression. To all of these ends, this chapter is hereby adopted. 
    Also based upon all of the information, studies, and findings in court decisions, as well as the well known and self evident conditions and secondary effects caused by the commercial exploitation of commercial nudity combined with the sale, dispensing and consumption of alcoholic beverages, the mayor and council also find and conclude that the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages of any kind in an adult entertainment establishment as defined herein tends to independently create, aggravate, exacerbate, and add to all of those negative secondary effects set forth in this section. The purpose and intent of this article is to address and forestall those negative secondary effects in the city within the permissible limits and parameters of the Georgia and United States Constitutions. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17 , § 1, 11-3-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-17 , § 1, adopted November 3, 2015, repealed and reenacted section 11-2-1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 11-2-1 pertained to definitions, and derived from the Code of 1981, § 9-4-221; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, adopted July 11, 1995, and Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 1, adopted June 2, 2015. 
Sec. 11-2-1.1. - Definitions. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall be as defined in the most recent edition of the New Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the foregoing book shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context of the sentence and section in which they occur. 
    Adult bookstore means any commercial establishment in which: 
(1)  More than 50 square feet of floor space is used for the display or offer for sale or rental of any book or publication, film, or other medium which depicts sexually explicit nudity or sexual conduct by its emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and/or 
(2)  25 percent or more of its display area is used for the display or offer for sale or rental of those media or materials. 
    Adult entertainment means entertainment that is characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or the featuring of "specified anatomical areas." Adult entertainment includes trade, "adult" or sexually oriented toys, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes, movies, photographs, or films, as well as live performances, that predominantly feature, simulate, or depict performances by persons that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, and/or performances that feature, depict, or emphasize performers' genitals, pubic region, anus, female breasts below the top of the point immediately above the areola, or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult entertainment facility shall be defined to include the following types of businesses: 
(1)  Any commercial facility which provides live entertainment where such performances are distinguished or characterized by a simulated depiction of "specified sexual activities" as defined herein; 
(2)  Any commercial facility in which persons perform live in a manner so as to feature, depict, or emphasize their genitals, pubic region, anus, female breasts, or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein; 
(3)  Any commercial facility which holds, promotes, sponsors or allows any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where live patrons of the establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and/or (2) above; 
(4)  Any commercial facility having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, "adult" or sexually oriented toys, books, magazines or other periodicals, videotapes or movies, or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" as defined herein, or "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein, or having a segment or section comprising more than 50 square feet of its total floor space devoted to the sale or display of such material, or which utilizes 25 percent or more of its display area for the display or offer for sale or rental of such media or materials, or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from the sale or rental of such material; 
(5)  Any commercial facility utilizing an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for cinematographic or videographic presentation of material distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein; 
(6)  Any adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult bookstore, adult video store, adult hotel, or adult motel, as defined herein; 
(7)  The definition of "adult entertainment facility" shall not include traditional or mainstream theater, which means a theater, movie theater, concert hall, museum, educational institution, bar, restaurant, dinner theater, karaoke bar or restaurant, or similar establishment which regularly features live or other performances or showings which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, display, or description or the featuring of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in that the depiction, display, description or featuring is incidental to the primary purpose of any performance. For purposes of this subsection, such performances and showings are regularly featured when they comprise at least 80 percent of all annual performances or showings. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel which: 
(1)  Makes available to patrons any material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and has a sign visible from any public right-of-way advertising that such material is available; or 
(2)  Regularly offers a room or rooms for rent for any period of time that is less than 12 consecutive hours; or 
(3)  Regularly allows a tenant or occupant of a room or rooms to sub-rent the room or rooms for a period of time that is less than 12 consecutive hours. 
    Adult mini-motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity for fewer than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted to be invited wherein paper currency, coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult video store means any facility having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or a facility with a segment or section, comprising more than ten square feet of its total floor space or wall space, or floor and wall space combined, devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
    City clerk shall mean and include the duly appointed and serving city clerk of the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
    City manager shall mean and include the duly appointed and serving city manager of the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
    License shall mean a license issued by the city under this chapter to a licensee that authorizes the licensee to operate, engage in, or carry on the business of an adult entertainment facility as defined in this article. 
    Police chief shall mean and include the duly appointed and serving chief of police of the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
    Specified sexual activities shall be defined to mean and include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated vaginal intercourse, oral vaginal copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(4)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(5)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall include human genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, and/or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola whether or not such areas are completely exposed, partially covered, or completely covered. 
(Ord. No. 2015-17 , § 2, 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 11-2-2. - Permitted locations. 
    Adult entertainment facilities shall be allowed only in those areas designated as "permitted locations for adult entertainment establishments" as indicated on that certain map prepared by the city planner, which map is kept on file with the city clerk. Any person, entity, or individual may review said map upon request to the city clerk. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-222; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, 7-11-1995; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 2, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-17 , § 3, 11-3-2015) 
Note- The above-referenced maps are also attached to Ord. No. 2015-17 and incorporated herein as if fully set out at length. 
Sec. 11-2-3. - Other locational and structural requirements. 
    Adult entertainment facilities shall be subject to the provisions of the zoning code, this article and the following standards of use: 
(1)  The minimum lot area for an adult entertainment facility shall be one acre, and the minimum lot frontage on a public street shall be 75 feet. 
(2)  In addition to zoning development standards governing commercial zoning districts, buildings and structures established in connection with an adult entertainment facility shall be separated at least 40 feet from the buildings and structures of any other business establishment. The minimum rear yard shall be 75 feet. 
(3)  In addition to the development standards of the zoning ordinance, adult entertainment facilities shall not be located in any strip shopping center, mall or other group structures and must be placed in a separate building on its own lot. 
(4)  Parking shall meet the standards of a restaurant under the city zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-223; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, 7-11-1995; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 3, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-17 , § 4, 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 11-2-4. - Licensing. 
(a)  Any person, firm, partnership or corporation which owns or operates an establishment offering adult entertainment shall be required to obtain a license for an adult entertainment facility. No person, firm, partnership or corporation shall be permitted to operate an adult entertainment facility unless and until such a license is obtained. 
(b)  To obtain an adult entertainment facility license, the applicant must: 
(1)  Complete the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in or material omission left out of an original or renewal application for a license hereunder shall be cause for the denial thereof, and, if any license has been granted under these circumstances, same shall be cause for revocation. 
(2)  Provide documentation to prove that the applicant meets or exceeds the conditions pertaining to the property to be licensed; provide an "as-built" survey prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer depicting the location of the structure which will operate as the adult entertainment facility. Prior to the issuance of such license, the "as-built" survey shall be submitted to the building inspector for a determination as to whether the proposed site meets the standards set forth in the conditions of zoning and this article. 
(3)  Furnish a complete set of fingerprints for all owners of sole proprietorships, all officers and owners of 15 percent or more of the shares of any corporation and all partners of any partnership. 
(4)  Pay the applicable license fee. 
(c)  No person, partnership, business, firm or corporation shall be granted a license if any person, partner, officer or the owner of 15 percent or more of the shares of or any interest in any such business, firm, partnership or corporation has been convicted of or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, lottery, gambling, illegal possession or sale of any narcotics, drugs or chemicals for which the sale thereof is controlled or prohibited by law, the control of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages, prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, sodomy, solicitation of sodomy or receiving stolen property, within a period of 15 years immediately prior to the filing of the application. Should any such person, partner, or officer or shareholder of a corporation, after a license has been granted, be convicted of or plead guilty or nolo contendere to any such crime, such license shall be subject to suspension and revocation. Withdrawal of an owner, officer or partner or enumerated shareholder, after pleading guilty or nolo contendere to the above enumerated crimes shall not necessarily mitigate against the penalty imposed hereby. 
(d)  The city shall issue no more than one license to an establishment meeting the definition of adult entertainment facility set forth in section 11-2-1.1 per each 10,000 persons living in the city according to the most recent decennial census of the United States as published by the United States Bureau of the Census. 
(e)  It is the belief of the mayor and council that sale of items described in section 11-2-1.1 is illegal under Georgia law and therefore not licensable under city ordinance. However, if any court declares to the contrary, the city shall issue no more than one license to an establishment meeting the definition of section 11-2-1.1 per each 10,000 persons living in the city according to the most recent decennial census of the United States as published by the United States Bureau of the Census. 
(f)  The license shall be renewed each year. A change of ownership shall require a new license and new license fee. 
(g)  The fee for the adult entertainment facility license shall be $3,000.00 per year. 
(h)  Any person, firm, business, partnership or corporation which holds an adult entertainment facility license must also comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws or regulations otherwise pertaining to these establishments. 
(i)  All applications for new licenses shall be decided upon by the police chief, or the city manager if the police chief is unavailable or incapacitated, within 60 calendar days of the date of filing of the completed application. The date of filing shall be the date by which a properly completed and executed application form and the license fee are received by the police chief. Upon the expiration of this 60 calendar-day period without a decision being made on the application by the police chief, the applicant shall be permitted to begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the police chief notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for the denial. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the police chief later denies the application, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(j)  In the event that the police chief, or the city manager if the police chief is unavailable or incapacitated, denies an application for a license: 
(1)  The denial and specific reasons for the denial shall be transmitted to the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial to the mayor and council. Such appeal shall be filed in writing no later than ten calendar days from the date of the police chief's denial. The applicant's failure to appeal the police chiefs denial within ten calendar days shall constitute a waiver of any appeal rights hereunder. If a timely appeal is filed, a hearing shall be held not more than 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the written notice of appeal by mayor and council. Upon the expiration of this 30 calendar day period without a hearing, the applicant shall be permitted to begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the mayor and council sustain the decision of the police chief. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the mayor and council later sustain or modify the police chiefs denial of the application, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(2)  The mayor and council may sustain, overrule, or modify the decision of the police chief. The decision of the mayor and council following the hearing on the matter shall be issued within 15 calendar days of the date of the hearing and shall be final. Upon the expiration of this 15 calendar-day period without a decision of the mayor and council, the applicant shall be permitted to begin and conduct business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the mayor and council sustain the decision of the police chief. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the mayor and council later sustain or modify the police chiefs denial of the application, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(3)  An appeal of the decision of the mayor and council shall be taken by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-224; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, 7-11-1995; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 1, 3-6-2001; Ord. No. 2015-04 , §§ 4, 5, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-17 , §§ 5-8, 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 11-2-5. - Regulation of conduct on premises. 
(a)  Any person, firm, business, partnership or corporation licensed hereunder or patronizing such business shall comply with the following rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the adult entertainment facility: 
(1)  No licensee shall offer adult entertainment between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon. 
(2)  No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted on the premises. 
(3)  No patron shall touch, fondle or caress any performers, nor shall any performer touch, fondle or caress a patron. 
(4)  No tips for performers shall be placed by a patron on the person of the performer. 
(5)  All live performers of adult entertainment shall be restricted to fixed stages, and no patron shall be permitted on such stages for any purpose. Fixed stage shall be defined as a raised floor area or stage at least four feet high and designed exclusively for, and used only by, performers. Tables used for seating and service to customers do not meet these standards and shall not be used for performing purposes. 
(6)  The license shall be displayed in a prominent place on the premises at all times. 
(7)  No licensee shall permit any alcoholic beverages to be served, offered or consumed on the licensed premises or in any parking area dedicated to use of the premises. 
(8)  In all areas where adult entertainment as described in section 11-2-1.1 occurs, lighting equivalent to three and one-half footcandles per square foot shall be maintained. 
(9)  No patron shall be allowed in any dressing area, nor shall any entertainer and patron jointly occupy any private room. 
(b)  Violations of these rules and regulations will result in either citation or the suspension or revocation of the license or both. Criminal penalties for violation are as set forth in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(c)  Should the police chief, or the city manager in the event the police chief is unavailable or incapacitated, determine that grounds for suspension or revocation exist under subsection (a) above: 
(1)  The police chief shall send notice by first-class mail to the license holder of the license suspension or revocation with a statement of the grounds supporting such action. Any revocation or suspension shall be effective on the third business day after the date of the notice. 
(2)  Any license holder may request within ten calendar days of the date of notice of revocation or suspension from the police chief a hearing before the mayor and council for the purpose of presenting evidence and asking for reconsideration of such action. Failure to request such reconsideration in writing within ten calendar days of the date of the notice shall result in a waiver of any appeal rights hereunder. If a hearing for reconsideration before the mayor and council is requested, a hearing shall be held not more than 30 calendar days from the date that the written notice requesting such hearing is received by the mayor and council. Upon the expiration of this 30 calendar-day period without a hearing, the license holder shall be permitted to resume business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the mayor and council sustain the decision of the police chief. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the mayor and council later sustain or modify the police chief's suspension or revocation of the license, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(3)  The mayor and council may sustain, overrule, or modify the decision of the police chief. The decision of the mayor and council following the hearing on the matter shall be issued within 15 calendar days of the date of the hearing and shall be final. Upon the expiration of this 15 calendar-day period without a decision of the mayor and council, the license holder shall be permitted to resume business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the mayor and council sustain the decision of the police chief. No person or entity conducting business as an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the mayor and council later sustain or modify the police chiefs suspension or revocation of the license, the business must be brought into compliance with this article. 
(4)  An appeal of the decision of the mayor and council shall be taken by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-225; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, 7-11-1995; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 2, 3-6-2001; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 6, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-17 , §§ 9, 10, 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 11-2-6. - Employee investigations; fees. 
(a)  No person may be employed or allowed to work as an independent contractor delivering adult entertainment by an establishment holding a license hereunder until such person has been fingerprinted by the police department and has been issued a letter of clearance by the police department indicating the person has not, within the preceding five years been convicted of or pled nolo contendere to any law catalogued by section 11-2-4(c) of this article. A letter of compliance shall be issued by the police department indicating the person is eligible for such employment. This letter must be kept on file at the licensed establishment where such person may be performing. This section shall apply to performers, entertainers and musicians engaged in temporary work or independent contracting, as well as regular employees. 
(b)  The police department shall conduct or procure a criminal background search of the person fingerprinted to discover any police record of the person fingerprinted. 
(1)  In the event that the search reveals a violation of law as catalogued in subsection 11-2-4(c) of this article, the police department shall issue a letter to the person fingerprinted stating that the person is ineligible for employment. This determination must be made within seven calendar days from the date that a complete application is received by the police department from the person fingerprinted. Upon the expiration of this seven calendar-day period without a determination being made on the application by the police department, the person fingerprinted shall be permitted to be employed or work as an independent contractor at an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the police department notifies the person fingerprinted of a determination of ineligibility. No person employed or working as an independent contractor at an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the police department later determines that the person fingerprinted is ineligible, the person fingerprinted must comply with this article. 
(2)  In the event that the police department issues a letter to the person fingerprinted indicating that the person fingerprinted is ineligible for employment, this determination may be appealed to the city manager. Such appeal shall be filed in writing no later than ten calendar days from the date of the letter of ineligibility from the police department. Failure to appeal the police department's decision within ten calendar days of the letter shall constitute a waiver of any appeal rights hereunder. If an appeal is filed, a hearing shall be held not more than 30 calendar days from the date of the written notice of appeal. Upon the expiration of this 30 calendar-day period without a hearing, the person fingerprinted shall be permitted to be employed or work as an independent contractor at an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains the police department's decision. No person employed or working as an independent contractor at an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the police department's determination of ineligibility, the person fingerprinted must comply with this article. 
(3)  The city manager may sustain, overrule, or modify the decision of the police department. The decision of the city manager following the hearing on the matter shall be issued within 15 calendar days of the date of the hearing and shall be final. Upon the expiration of this 15 calendar-day period without a decision of the city manager, the person fingerprinted shall be permitted to be employed or work as an independent contractor at an adult entertainment facility under this provision unless and until such time as the city manager sustains the police department's decision. No person employed or working as an independent contractor at an adult entertainment facility under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued conduct of such business, and if the city manager later sustains or modifies the police department's determination of ineligibility, the person fingerprinted must comply with this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-226; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, 7-11-1995; Ord. No. 2001-03, § 3, 3-6-2001; Ord. No. 2015-04 , § 7, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 2015-17 , § 11, 11-3-2015) 
Sec. 11-2-7. - Exemptions. 
    Nothing in this section shall be construed as applying to State of Georgia licensed barbers, cosmetologists, manicurists, pedicurists, physical therapists, physical therapists assistants, midwives, practical nurses, agents, servants or employees in licensed hospitals or nursing homes or other licensed medical institutions, licensed physicians, osteopaths, chiropractors, podiatrists, naturopathic physicians or other licensed medical practitioners, licensed psychologists or their agents, servants or employees acting in the course of such agency, service or employment. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-227; Ord. No. 95-06, § 2, 7-11-1995) 
ARTICLE 3. - BAIL BONDSMAN 

Sec. 11-3-1. - Licensing. 
    No one shall be licensed as a bail bondsman nor shall a bail bondsman's license be renewed, unless or until a written application for such license or renewal thereof has been filed with the city clerk. 
(Code 1959, § 13-52; Code 1981, § 9-4-21) 
Sec. 11-3-2. - Application. 
    The contents of an application for a bondsman license shall contain the following: 
(1)  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual; 
(2)  Place where the proposed business is to be located; 
(3)  Kind of business to be carried on; 
(4)  Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
(5)  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors; and 
(6)  A complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer or director for violations of any and all laws of the city, state or federal government. 
(Code 1959, § 13-53; Code 1981, § 9-4-22) 
Sec. 11-3-3. - Fee established. 
    The annual business license for each bondsman doing business in the city shall be $100.00. 
(Code 1959, § 13-54; Code 1981, § 9-4-23) 
Sec. 11-3-4. - Police investigation of applicant. 
    Each bail bondsman must be approved by the sheriff of the county before the application is sent to the chief of police, except provided that any bail bondsman, licensed and doing business in the city for a period of at least one year prior to the adoption of this article, may, upon the approval of the chief of police, renew such license without approval of the sheriff of the county. The chief of police shall then require an investigation of each applicant for a bondsman license. Such investigation shall be made to determine the moral character and financial condition of the applicant. A report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if, any, shall be attached to the application and forwarded to the mayor and council. Applicants, by filing for license for bondsman, agree to furnish the data, information and records as called for herein and also agree to investigation by the police department and the city attorney. All information furnished or secured under this authority shall be kept in strict confidence and shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be utilized solely by the officers of the city responsible for administering the provisions of the city regarding licensing businesses. 
(Code 1959, § 13-57; Code 1981, § 9-4-24) 
Sec. 11-3-5. - Posting of security by authority bondsmen. 
    All bondsmen and/or bonding companies shall be required to post security with the city prior to the authorization of such bondsmen and/or bonding companies to post bonds for the release of prisoners from the jails of the city, in one of the following manners: 
(1)  The security may be in the form of cash deposits in a joint checking account between the bondsmen and/or bonding company and the treasurer of the city in an amount equal to 20 percent of the total face amount of all bonds that any bondsmen and/or bonding company shall be allowed to write in the city; 
(2)  By execution of a deed of trust in favor of the city to certain real estate having a value as shall be substantiated by the report of an appraiser who shall be approved by the city prior to the submission of his report, the value to be at least the total amount of bonds upon which a bondsman and/or bonding company has pledged as security, and upon such terms and conditions as may be specified in the deed or trust, a copy of which is attached hereto and which may be from time to time amended. The bondsmen and/or bonding company posting the deed of trust shall accompany the deed of trust with a title certificate indicating that the parcel or parcels of land so deeded to the city are free and clear of all encumbrances and liens of any kind; 
(3)  The bondsmen and/or bonding company shall file with the city clerk a surety bond running to the city in the amount of $50.000, with surety acceptable to and approved by the mayor and council and the chief of police; or 
(4)  A liability insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state with a face amount at least equal to the amount of bonds the bondsmen and/or bonding company is allowed to write may be permitted in lieu of bond, if approved by the mayor and council and the chief of police. 
(Code 1959, § 13-56; Code 1981, § 9-4-25) 
Sec. 11-3-6. - Procedure for issuance of bail bondsman license. 
    The city clerk shall forward all applications for bondsmen licenses to the chief of police within 48 hours of the time of receipt of the application and all necessary information. The police chief shall review the application and make his investigation. He shall make a recommendation thereon, favorable or otherwise, and shall return such recommendation to the city clerk within 30 days after receiving a copy of the application. The city clerk shall then forward the application and recommendation to the mayor and council for consideration and action at its next regularly scheduled public meeting. 
(Code 1959, § 13-57; Code 1981, § 9-4-26) 
Sec. 11-3-7. - Procedure for forfeiture of bail bond licenses. 
(a)  If any person holding a license under the provisions of this article should: 
(1)  Violate any ordinance or regulation lawfully adopted by the city; or 
(2)  Allow a bond forfeiture to remain outstanding and unpaid for a period of 90 days or longer his license is subject to revocation. 
(b)  Upon written notice by the city clerk that such licensee is in violation of any ordinance or regulation, his license shall be revoked 15 days thereafter unless the licensee shall indicate a desire for a hearing before the mayor and council concerning the revocation. The mayor and council may revoke, suspend or in anyway restrict the license of any person found in violation of any ordinance or regulation lawfully adopted by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-27; Ord. No. 80-6, 7-10-1980) 
ARTICLE 6. - COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES 

Sec. 11-6-1. - Definitions. 
    To the extent not otherwise defined herein, all terms set forth in this article shall be defined as stated in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine includes coin-operated amusement machines and means: 
(1)  Every machine of any kind or character used by the public to provide amusement or entertainment the operation of which requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object and the result of which the operation depends in whole or in part upon the skill of the player, whether or not it affords an award to a successful player pursuant to subsections (b) through (g) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and which can be legally shipped interstate according to federal law. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Pinball machines; 
b.  Console machines; 
c.  Video games; 
d.  Crane machines; 
e.  Claw machines; 
f.  Pusher machines; 
g.  Bowling machines; 
h.  Novelty arcade games; 
i.  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
j.  Miniature racetrack, football, or golf machines; 
k.  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
l.  Basketball machines; 
m.  Shuffleboard games; 
n.  Kiddie ride games; 
o.  Skeeball machines; 
p.  Air hockey machines; 
q.  Roll down machines; 
r.  Trivia machines; 
s.  Laser games; 
t.  Simulator games; 
u.  Virtual reality machines; 
v.  Maze games; 
w.  Racing games; 
x.  Coin-operated pool tables or coin-operated billiard tables as defined in paragraph (3) of O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1; and 
y.  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
(2)  Every machine of any kind or character used by the public or provide music whose operation requires the payment of or the insertion of a coin, bill, other money, token, ticket, or similar object such as jukeboxes or other similar types of music machines. 
    Registrant means any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, organization, or other entity who, as the owner, lessee or beneficiary, has under his/her or its control any establishment, place or premises in or at which bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are placed or kept for use or play, or on exhibition for the purpose of use or play by the general public. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-187; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 3-7-2000; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 1, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 11-6-2. - Registration required. 
    No registrant shall make available for use within the city limits any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine unless: 
(1)  The license and required sticker is affixed to the machine pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70 et seq.; 
(2)  The bona fide coin-operated amusement machine is registered with the city clerk; and 
(3)  The bona fide coin-operated amusement machine is located and used in such a manner as designated in this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-188; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 3-7-2000; Ord. No. 2013-07, § 2, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 11-6-3. - No registration fee. 
    No registration fee shall be required to register a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-189; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 3-7-2000) 
Sec. 11-6-4. - Registration form. 
    The registration shall be filed in writing with the city, on a form to be provided by the city and shall specify the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the registrant, and if a firm, corporation, partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their addresses. 
(2)  Registrants shall list the address of the premises where the licensed machine or machines are to be operated, together with the character of the business as carried on at such place. 
(3)  Registrants shall list the number of machines to be maintained on the premises. 
(4)  The name and address of the owner of the machine or machines, if other than the registrant. 
(5)  Whether or not the person or persons having the ownership, management of or supervision over the registrant's business, and whether any employees of the business have, within five years of registration or amendment to registration under section 11-6-5, been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to any federal or state felony or any federal or state misdemeanor involving a violation of the Georgia Controlled Substance Act or an offense involving moral turpitude. The registrant will submit the identity of all owners, management, supervisors, and employees to the director of finance and administration on a continuing basis as changes regarding the ownership, management, supervisors and employees occur. This information is to be forwarded to the city police department, for the purpose of allowing a complete check in order that these qualifications be fulfilled, prior to the acceptance of any registration or amendment of registration under section 11-6-5. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-190; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 3-7-2000) 
Sec. 11-6-5. - Increasing number of machines. 
    In the event a registrant under the provisions of this article desires to increase the number of machines to be used or played, or exhibited for use or play in his establishment, so that he then has more machines than as shown on his original or amended registration, he shall, within five days, notify the city and register the new machines. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-191; Ord. No. 2000-08, § 1, 3-7-2000) 
Sec. 11-6-6. - Class B machines. 
    Location owners and location operators offering to the public class B machines shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Class B machines that reward players exclusively with noncash merchandise, prizes, toys, gift certificates, or novelties are limited to no more than six at the same location; 
(2)  No location owner or location operator shall derive more than 50 percent of such location owner's or location operator's monthly gross retail receipts for the business location in which the class B machine or machines are situated from such class B machines; 
(3)  Copies of all reports made pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(c) shall be provided to the city; 
(4)  Violations of this section may be penalized by the city pursuant to penalties set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(d). 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 3, 6-4-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-07, § 3, adopted June 4, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 11-6-6, and adding a new § 11-6-6. Former § 11-6-6 pertained to operating regulations, and derived from the Code of 1981, § 9-4-192; Ord. No. 2000-08, adopted March 7, 2000; and Ord. No. 2013-07, adopted June 4 2013. 
Sec. 11-6-7. - Notification of prohibitions and penalties to employees. 
    Owners and operators of business locations which offer to the public any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that rewards players exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) must inform all employees of the prohibitions and penalties set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), and (g). 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 4, 6-4-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-07, § 4, adopted June 4, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 11-6-7, and adding a new § 11-6-7. Former § 11-6-7 pertained to violation of article penalties, and derived from the Code of 1981, § 9-4-193; Ord. No. 2000-08, adopted March 7, 2000; and Ord. No. 2013-07, adopted June 4 2013. 
Sec. 11-6-8. - Notification of prohibitions and penalties to location owners and location operators. 
    Owners and possessors of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine that rewards players exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) must inform all location owners and location operators of the prohibitions and penalties set out in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e), (f), and (g). 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 5, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 11-6-9. - Distance requirements. 
    No person knowingly or intentionally may offer to the public for play a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 6, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 11-6-10. - Operating regulation. 
    All registrants hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Machines to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. 
a.  All such machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person or persons who may frequent or be in any place of business where such devices are kept or used. However, no machine shall be placed within five feet of any public entrance or exit. 
b.  Nothing in this article shall be construed to authorize, permit or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police or his or her designee shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine or machines are operated or set up for operation, and inspect, investigate and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any registrant to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Refunds and adjustments. Refunds and adjustments to all customers shall be the responsibility of the registrant of the location of the machine in question. Provided, however, that such should not include refunds for any unused games or credits. 
(5)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter within the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder or for any person, firm or corporation licensed to operate an arcade room or amusement center to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place. 
(6)  Underage persons. Registrants shall not allow any unaccompanied person under the age of 18 years to operate coin-operated amusement machines on their premises during the following hours: 
a.  Monday through Thursday during normal public school terms, after 11:00 p.m. 
b.  Monday through Friday during normal public school terms, individuals unaccompanied by an adult who is 18 years of age or older, who are under 18 years of age shall not be allowed on the premises until after 3:00 p.m. 
(7)  Sunday operation. No location owner or location operator of any business location which offers to the public one or more bona fide coin-operated machines shall allow coin-operated amusement machines to be operated on Sunday prior to 12:30 p.m., nor shall they allow said machines to be operated any later than 11:00 p.m. 
(8)  Alcoholic beverages. No location owner or location operator of any business location which offers to the public one or more bona fide coin-operated machines other than those holding a valid license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall allow alcoholic beverages onto their premises. 
(9)  Location owners and location operators of any business location which offers to the public one or more bona fide coin-operated machines shall be required to post prominently a notice including the following language: 
GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF THIS MACHINE. 
(10)  Where a business offers one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines to the public for play it shall be required to post its business license or occupational tax certificate. 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 7, 6-4-2013) 
Sec. 11-6-11. - Violation of article penalties. 
    Violation of this article shall: 
(1)  Be punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with section 1-1-8 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances; and 
(2)  Result in suspension or revocation or both of any license or permit issued by the City subject to the due process guidelines set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b). 
(Ord. No. 2013-07, § 8, 6-4-2013) 
ARTICLE 8. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 11-8-1. - License required. 
(a)  A careful review and consideration of the pawnbrokerage industry in the city, the prevalence of crime associated with these establishments, the impact of that industry on city resources, and the quantity of law enforcement resources consumed by the operation of these establishments, it is the finding of the mayor and council that there is a need to regulate pawnbrokerage within the city and to impose certain limitations upon the operation and number of establishments within the city. 
(b)  No person shall conduct business as a pawnbroker or maintain an establishment for the purposes of conducting business as a pawnbroker, until a business license has been obtained from the city clerk. Such license application shall be made to the city clerk and license issued only upon approval by the mayor and council of the city. 
(c)  No further pawnbrokers licenses shall be issued when the total number of licenses issued and in effect would number more than one for 5,000 persons residing in the city. It is the intent of this provision to require a population of 5,000 persons for each license issued. For purposes of complying with this section, the most recent decennial census of the United States as published by the United States Bureau of the Census shall be used. Examples: 
(1)  Population equals less than 5,000, then no license may be issued; 
(2)  Population equals 5,000 to 9,999, then one license may be issued; 
(3)  Population equals 10,000 to 14,999, then two licenses may be issued, etc. 
If a licensee shall go out of business or if a license is revoked and the number of such licenses in effect shall continue to exceed the limit prescribed herein, such license may not be reinstated. 
(d)  The term "pawnbroker" as used in this article shall mean any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. The term "person" as used in this article shall mean an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
(Code 1959, § 13-44; Code 1981, § 9-4-71; Ord. No. 93-7, 2-2-1993; Ord. No. 98-06, § 1, 3-19-1998; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 1, 12-7-2010) 
Sec. 11-8-2. - Review of application. 
    No action on any application for a pawnbroker's license shall be taken until the chief of police has reviewed such application and forwarded his recommendation thereon to the mayor and council for the city for their consideration, approval or denial. 
(Code 1959, § 13-45; Code 1981, § 9-4-72) 
Sec. 11-8-3. - Limitation on issuance. 
    No pawnbrokers' license shall be issued to any person or persons who have been convicted of any crime involving as an element thereof the theft of property. 
(Code 1959, § 13-46; Code 1981, § 9-4-73) 
Sec. 11-8-4. - Fee established. 
    The annual business license fee for each pawnbroker doing business within the city or for each individual establishment maintained for the purpose of doing business as a pawnbroker within the city shall be $150.00. 
(Code 1959, § 13-47; Code 1981, § 9-4-74) 
Sec. 11-8-5. - Report to police; required format. 
    All businesses regulated by this article shall make a computer-generated daily report, in such form as prescribed by the chief of police, of all transactions that occurred during the immediately preceding 24-hour period, ending at 9:00 p.m. on the date of the report. A report shall be made for each day the pawnbroker transacts business. Daily reports shall be filed electronically by posting to a law enforcement web site designated by the chief of police. Where technological problems prevent posting the daily report electronically, a printed, typed or legibly handwritten report shall be delivered to the police department in lieu thereof. The furnishing of such report as required herein shall be in conjunction with and in addition to the maintaining of those records required by state law and shall in no way be considered as relieving such person of the duty to maintain those records or to make them available for inspection as required by state law. 
(Code 1959, § 13-48; Code 1981, § 9-4-75; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 2, 12-7-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-14, § 2, adopted December 7, 2010, changed the title of section 11-8-5 from "Records" to "Report to police; required format." The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 11-8-6. - Weapons. 
    No pawnbroker shall receive as a pledge or purchase any revolver, pistol or other firearm or weapon prohibited by section 26-2-10, and no pawnbroker shall display in the window or shop any such firearms or weapons for sale. 
(Code 1959, § 13-49; Code 1981, § 9-4-76) 
Sec. 11-8-7. - Minors. 
    No pawnbroker shall have any business dealings as a pawnbroker with a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker's license be issued to a minor, nor shall a pawnbroker employ a minor to assist him in his business. 
(Code 1959, § 13-50; Code 1981, § 9-4-77) 
Sec. 11-8-8. - Stolen goods. 
    It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him or which is sought to be pledged with him, if he shall have reason to believe the article was stolen, or lost and found by the person attempting to pledge it in the case of a lost article. 
(Code 1959, § 13-51; Code 1981, § 9-4-78) 
Sec. 11-8-9. - Requirements upon receiving items in pawn for purchase. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall secure from every person from whom he or she receives any used or previously owned tangible property, whether by purchase or through pledge, trade, pawn, or exchange, the following: 
(1)  Government-issued photo identification card, such as a driver's license, military identification card, state identification card, or passport; 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, race, sex, height, weight, date of birth, and Social Security number or driver's license number; 
(3)  A digital photography clearly showing a frontal view of the person's face (digital images shall be labeled with the date and time of the transaction and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption); 
(4)  The fingerprint of the right hand index finger, unless such finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger available on the right hand shall be obtained with a notation of the exact finger printed; and 
(5)  Written description of the property or item received, including serial number or other identifying marks, if available, and digital photography of the property or item, labeled with the date and time of the transaction. 
    All businesses regulated by this article shall maintain the above information, including the digital photographs and fingerprints, for a period of three years and make the same available to law enforcement personnel upon request. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any business regulated by this article to receive, pawn, trade, or buy from a minor goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purposes of this article, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(c)  This section shall not be construed to prevent sponsorships, contributions, scholarships, or the purchase of items of de minimis cost such as candy, wrapping paper, candles, cookies, or popcorn for the purpose of contributing to nonprofit organizations, charitable organizations, churches or school systems. The term de minimis, for the purposes of this section, shall be defined as items or goods of a cost of no more than $50.00. Exceptions to this section for sponsorships, contributions, scholarships or donations based on purchases from minors may be presented to the mayor and council for approval. If the mayor and council determine such purchase serves the health, safety or welfare of the minor and constitutes a sponsorship, contribution, scholarships or donation, then such purchase shall be approved. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-79; Ord. No. 2000-17, § 1, 6-6-2000; Ord. No. 2010-14, § 3, 12-7-2010) 
ARTICLE 9. - PRIVATE DETECTIVES 

Sec. 11-9-1. - Definition. 
    Private detectives or private detective agencies are defined as those following the business or vocation pursued by all persons or agencies making investigations for others, when such investigations involve the conduct, life or affairs of the person investigated. Such terms shall not include lawyers and accountants in the course of their practice or incident thereto. 
(Code 1959, § 13-23; Code 1981, § 9-4-91) 
Sec. 11-9-2. - Prerequisites to licensing. 
(a)  Police committee recommendation. No person shall carry on or be engaged in the business of a private detective or detective agency, unless he has been first recommended for a license or permit for such detective business or agency by the police committee; provided that in all cases in which such recommendation is made and certified by the police committee to the city clerk, a license or permit shall be thereupon issued for such business. 
(b)  Age. No person shall be granted a license to engage in the business of private detective unless such person has attained his 21st birthday. 
(Code 1959, § 13-24; Code 1981, § 9-4-92) 
Sec. 11-9-3. - Effect of issuance of license. 
    When licensed hereunder, the licensee shall take the oath of a city detective and shall be subject to police supervision. 
(Code 1959, § 13-25; Code 1981, § 9-4-93) 
Sec. 11-9-4. - Application for license. 
(a)  Required annually. All private detectives and all private detective agencies operating within the city shall apply annually to the police committee for a license or permit to follow such business or vocation, and this requirement shall be in addition to the requirement of section 11-9-2, providing for a permit before undertaking to follow that vocation or carry on any business. 
(b)  Character of applicant. All private detectives or private detective agencies or their employees shall be of good moral and professional character. 
(c)  Photograph of applicant. Such private detectives shall attach to each application a photograph of the private detective making application; or where it is made by a firm, then the photograph of each member of the firm shall be attached thereto; or where it is made by a private detective agency, the photograph of each detective employed by the agency shall be attached to the application. 
(d)  Filing application. This application and these photographs shall be filed in the office of the chief of police. It shall be unlawful for any private detective or private detective agency to carry on or undertake to perform the business of a private detective or detective agency within the limits of the city, without filing annually the application herein provided for and attaching the photograph herein required, and without having the application granted or approved, as provided by this article. Each investigation shall be deemed a separate offense and punishable as herein provided. 
(e)  Scope of section. This section is declared to be a statement of policy of the mayor and council and shall not be binding on the police committee or the mayor and city council in the matter of granting licenses or permits. Permits or licenses granted where there is a variation from the terms of this section shall nevertheless be valid. 
(Code 1959, § 13-26; Code 1981, § 9-4-94) 
Sec. 11-9-5. - Character, proficiency of applicant to be approved by police committee and chief of police committee and chief of police; certificate to be issued. 
    No private detective agency licensed by the city shall send out or employ for detective work any person or agent unless the character and proficiency of that person or agent has been approved by the police committee and the chief of police and a certificate to that effect lodged with the detective agency. Any detective agency licensed by the city that sends out any person or agent to do detective work without approval shall thereby forfeit the license granted for that agency, and if it thereafter continues, the agency, any person acting for it as agent, officer, manager or employee shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, be punished by a fine of $300.00 for each violation. 
(Code 1959, § 13-27; Code 1981, § 9-4-95) 
Sec. 11-9-6. - Bond required. 
    All persons licensed under authority of the mayor and council to operate a detective agency, or following the occupation of private detective, shall give a bond in the sum of $5,000.00 payable to the city, for the use of any person injured or damaged on account of any illegal act of any detective or agency, or of persons employed as detectives by a licensed agency or detectives, or of any employee in and about the business licensed as aforesaid. 
(Code 1959, § 13-28; Code 1981, § 9-4-96) 
Sec. 11-9-7. - Carrying of pistol. 
    No person licensed hereunder shall be authorized to carry a pistol, but any person shall comply with the laws of the state for that authority. 
(Code 1959, § 13-29; Code 1981, § 9-4-97) 
ARTICLE 10. - SECURITY GUARDS AND PRIVATE WATCHPERSONS 

Sec. 11-10-1. - Permit required. 
    Any person who in the regular course of his employment has responsibilities which include, by way of illustration and not limitation, the supervision or security of real or personal property of his employer or third persons and any other duties that are normally attributed to the jobs of night watchmen or security guard must obtain a permit from the city police department. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-181; Ord. No. 80-9, 10-7-1980) 
Sec. 11-10-2. - Registration form. 
    The permit required in section 11-10-1 shall be issued by the police department after completion of a registration form on a form to be provided by the police department, and the payment of a $5.00 registration fee. Such form shall indicate whether or not the registrant is authorized to carry a pistol. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-182; Ord. No. 80-9, 10-7-1980) 
Sec. 11-10-3. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person engaged in any of the activities described in section 11-10-1 who shall not have a valid permit shall be guilty of a violation of this article and shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-183; Ord. No. 80-9, 10-7-1980) 
Sec. 11-10-4. - Revocation of registration. 
    The mayor and council may, upon the recommendation of the chief of police and notice and opportunity to be heard, revoke the registration of any person who: 
(1)  Violates any provision of this Code; 
(2)  Hinders any officer of the police department in the performance of his official duties; 
(3)  Fails to present his registration card to any official of the city upon request; or 
(4)  Does any other act found by the mayor and council to be contrary to the health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-184; Ord. No. 80-9, 10-7-1980) 
Sec. 11-10-5. - Persons carrying pistols. 
    No person registered hereunder shall be authorized by virtue of such registration to carry a pistol, but such person shall comply with the laws of the state for such authority. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-185; Ord. No. 80-9, 10-7-1980) 
Sec. 11-10-6. - Business license required. 
    No person may be registered under the provisions of this article unless he presents evidence to the chief of police or his designated agent that either he or, if applicable, his employer possesses a valid business license issued by the city pursuant to the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-186; Ord. No. 80-9, 10-7-1980) 
ARTICLE 11. - COMMERCIAL SOLICITATIONS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, adopted April 6, 2010, amended article 11 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article 11, sections 11-11-1-11-11-6 pertained to commercial solicitations, and derived from Ord. No. 2009-07, § 1, adopted June 2, 2009. 

Sec. 11-11-1. - Applicability. 
    This article is meant to apply to commercial transactions for profit only. It is not meant to regulate solicitation or transient merchants for charitable, political, or other nonprofit purposes provided that all sales proceeds are the property of and used by the nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 2012-03, § 1, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 11-11-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    Solicit or soliciting shall mean taking orders, selling, or seeking orders or clients for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, products, subscriptions, or services of any kind, character, or description whatsoever. The terms "solicit" or "soliciting" shall not include transient merchants. 
    Transient merchant shall mean any person or entity who sets up or displays merchandise for sale outside of a building on any lot where the person or entity setting up or displaying such merchandise does not also lawfully conduct business regularly in a building located on that lot. A transient merchant shall not include a person conducting a yard sale at a private residence. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
Sec. 11-11-3. - Soliciting. 
(a)  Registration required to solicit. Any person desiring to solicit upon public areas or homes/units occupied for residential purposes shall register with and obtain a written permit from the city clerk by paying a $50.00 fee and filing an application, on a form to be supplied by the city clerk, including the following: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address of the applicant; 
(3)  Name and address of employer, firm, corporation or organization represented; and 
(4)  Nature of any goods, wares, merchandise, foodstuffs, products, subscriptions, or services to be sold or offered for sale in conjunction with the soliciting. 
    In addition, as part of the registration process, the applicant shall submit to a criminal background check and fingerprinting by the city police department. No permit shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude within five years of the date of the application, or to any person who has been convicted of a violation of the provisions of this article, or to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as provided herein. 
(b)  Issuance of permit to solicit; presentation. Upon proper registration in accordance with this section, a written permit to solicit shall issue, to be valid for one calendar year from the date of issuance. Each person shall at all times while soliciting upon public areas or homes/units occupied for residential purposes carry upon his or her person the permit so issued and shall display such permit whenever he or she is requested to do so by any police officer or any person solicited. 
(c)  Revocation of permit to solicit. A permit to solicit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the city clerk if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her home address set forth in the application. 
    Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void and must be turned into the city clerk. 
(d)  Hours of soliciting. Soliciting upon public areas or homes/units occupied for residential purposes shall only occur between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(e)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person soliciting to do any of the following: 
(1)  To remain on private premises after being asked to leave the premises; 
(2)  To solicit at any residence, office, or business clearly displaying a sign stating "No Solicitation" or other similar language; and 
(3)  To continue soliciting after being refused. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 2011-05, § 1, 6-7-2011) 
Sec. 11-11-4. - Transient merchants. 
(a)  Registration required for transient merchants. It shall be unlawful for transient merchants to do business within the city unless a written permit has first been obtained in accordance with this section. A transient merchant shall register with and obtain a written permit from the city clerk by paying $50.00 fee and filing an application, on a form to be supplied by the city clerk, providing the following: 
(1)  Name of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address of the applicant; 
(3)  Names and addresses of employer, firm, corporation, or organization represented; 
(4)  Nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale; 
(5)  Location at which the merchandise will be sold or offered for sale; 
(6)  The date(s) the merchandise will be sold or offered for sale; 
(7)  Written permission from the property owner authorizing the transient merchant to sell or offer to sell merchandise at the location; and 
(8)  If the vendor meets the definition of "transient merchant" under O.C.G.A. § 43-46-2, a valid transient merchant license pursuant to Title 43, Chapter 46 of the Georgia Code. 
The application shall be accompanied by a surety bond in the amount of $5,000.00 guaranteed by an insurance company licensed to do business in the state, payable to the city and conditioned to pay the city or anyone else suing in its name for their use for injuries or damages arising from dishonest or fraudulent conduct in the administration of the business so permitted. 
No permit shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a violation of the provisions of this article or to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as provided herein. 
(b)  Issuance of transient merchant permit; presentation. Upon proper registration in accordance with this section, a written permit shall issue to allow a transient merchant to sell merchandise at a specified location, to be valid for 30 days from the date of issuance. A transient merchant shall at all times while conducting business carry upon his or her person the permit so issued and shall display such permit whenever he or she is requested to do so by any police officer. 
(c)  Revocation of transient merchant permit. A transient merchant permit shall be revoked by the city clerk if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a permit under the terms of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her home address set forth in the application. 
    Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void and must be turned into the city clerk. 
(d)  Regulations for transient merchants. 
(1)  A transient merchant shall comply with the city's ordinances for zoning, occupational taxes, and all other issues. 
(2)  A transient merchant shall not sell or offer to sell merchandise between the hours of 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
(3)  A transient merchant cannot obtain more than four transient merchant permits per calendar year. 
(4)  A transient merchant cannot obtain a transient merchant permit for consecutive 30-day periods. 
(5)  A transient merchant cannot obtain more than one transient merchant permit at any given time. 
(6)  A business cannot have more than one transient merchant per location at any given time unless in connection with a city approved special event. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 2012-03, §§ 2, 3, 4-17-2012) 
Sec. 11-11-5. - Penalties. 
    Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2010-01, § 1, 4-6-2010) 
ARTICLE 12. - SPECIAL SALES 

Sec. 11-12-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    City means the City of Hapeville. 
    Clerk means the city clerk. 
    Fire and other altered goods sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the sale will offer goods damaged or altered by fire, smoke, water or other means. 
    Going-out-of-business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that upon the disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued, including but not limited to the following sales: adjuster's; adjustment; alteration; assignee's; bankrupt; benefit of administrators; benefit of creditors; benefit of trustees; building coming down; closing; creditor's committee; creditor's; end; executor's; final days; forced out; forced-out-of-business; insolvents'; last days; lease expired; liquidation; loss of lease; mortgage sale; receiver's; trustee's; quitting business. 
    Goods means and includes any goods, wares, merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Removal of business sale means a sale held out in such a manner as to reasonably cause the public to believe that the person conducting the sale will cease and discontinue business at the place of sale upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand and will then move to and resume business at a new location in the city or will then continue business from other existing locations in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 13-16; Code 1981, § 9-4-111) 
Sec. 11-12-2. - License required. 
    A license issued by the clerk shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following kinds: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sale; 
(2)  Removal of business sale; and 
(3)  Fire and other altered stock sale. 
(Code 1959, § 13-17; Code 1981, § 9-4-112) 
Sec. 11-12-3. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  Provisions supplement general licensing ordinance. The provisions of this article are intended to augment and be in addition to the provisions of the general licensing ordinance of this city. Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon persons, premises, businesses or practices than is imposed by the general licensing ordinance of this city, this article shall control. 
(b)  Period of ownership requirement; exceptions. 
(1)  Established business requisite. Any person who has not been the owner of a business advertised or described in the application for a license hereunder for a period of at least 12 months prior to the date of the proposed sale shall not be granted a license. 
(2)  Exception for survivors of businessmen. Upon the death of a person doing business in this city, his or her heirs, devisees or legatees shall have the right to apply at any time for a license hereunder. 
(c)  Interval between sales. Any person who has held a sale, as regulated hereunder, at the location stated in the application, within one year last past from the date of such application shall not be granted a license. 
(d)  Restricted location. Where a person applying for a license hereunder operates more than one place of business, the license issued shall apply only to the one store, or branch specified in the application and no other store or branch shall advertise or represent that it is cooperated with it, or in any way participating in the licensed sale, nor shall the store or branch conducting the licensed sale advertise or represent that any other store or branch is cooperating with it or participating in any way in the licensed sale. 
(e)  Persons exempted. The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)  Persons acting pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials. 
(3)  Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auctions. 
(4)  Persons conducting a sale of the type regulated herein on the effective date of this article, unless such sale is continued for a period of more than 30 days from and after such effective date, in which event, such person, at the lapse of the 30-day period, shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication, who publishes in good faith any advertisement, without knowledge that the provisions of this article have not been complied with. 
(Code 1959, § 13-18; Code 1981, § 9-4-113) 
Sec. 11-12-4. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Written information required. A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the clerk setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The true name and address of the owner of the goods to be the object of the sale. 
(2)  The true name and address of the person from whom he purchased the goods to be sold and the price therefor, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition. 
(3)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held. 
(4)  The nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of the termination of such occupancy. 
(5)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted. 
(6)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted. 
(7)  The means to be employed in advertising the sale together with the proposed content of any advertisement. 
(8)  A complete and detailed inventory of the goods to be sold at such sale as disclosed by the applicant's records. The inventory shall be attached to and become part of the required application. 
a.  Bona fide orders. All goods included in such inventory shall have been purchased by the applicant for resale on bona fide orders without cancellation privileges and shall not comprise goods purchased on consignment. 
b.  Goods purchased for sale hereunder. Such inventory shall not include goods ordered in contemplation of conducting a sale regulated hereunder. Any unusual purchase, or additions to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within 30 days before the filing of an application hereunder shall be deemed to be of such character. 
(b)  License fee. Any applicant for a license hereunder shall submit to the clerk with his application a license fee of $135.00. Any applicant for a renewal license hereunder shall submit to the clerk with his renewal application a renewal license fee of $135.00. 
(Code 1959, § 13-19; Code 1981, § 9-4-114) 
Sec. 11-12-5. - Effect of license. 
    A license shall be issued hereunder on the following terms: 
(1)  Licensing period. The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30 consecutive days, Sundays and legal holidays excluded, following the issuance thereof. 
a.  The clerk shall renew a license for one period of time only, this period to be in addition to the 30 days permitted in the original license and not to exceed 30 consecutive days, Sundays and holidays excluded, when he finds: 
1.  That facts exist justifying the license renewal; 
2.  That the licensee has filed an application for renewal; and 
3.  That the licensee has submitted with the application for renewal a revised inventory showing the items listed on the original inventory remaining unsold and not listing any goods not included in the original application. 
b.  For the purpose of this subsection, any application for a license under the provisions of this article covering any goods previously inventoried as required hereunder shall be deemed to be an application for renewal, whether presented by the original applicant, or by any other person. 
(2)  Nature of sale. The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein. 
(3)  Saleable goods. The license shall authorize only the sale of goods described in the inventory attached to the application. 
(4)  Surrender of general license. Upon being issued a license hereunder for a going-out-of-business sale, the licensee shall surrender to the clerk for all other business licenses he may hold at that time applicable to the location and goods covered by the application for a license under this article. 
(5)  Nontransferability. Any license herein provided for shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(Code 1959, § 13-20; Code 1981, § 9-4-115) 
Sec. 11-12-6. - Duties of licensee. 
    A licensee hereunder shall: 
(1)  Adhere to inventory. Make no additions whatsoever, during the period of the licensed sale, to the stock of goods set forth in the inventory attached to the application for license. 
(2)  Advertise properly. Refrain from employing any untrue, deceptive or misleading advertising. 
(3)  Adhere to advertising. Conduct the licensed sale in strict conformity with any advertising or holding out incident thereto. 
(4)  Keep duplicate inventory. Keep available at the place of sale a duplicate copy of the inventory submitted with the application and shall present such duplicate to inspecting officials upon request. 
(5)  Segregate noninventoried goods. Keep any other goods separate and apart from the goods listed in the filed inventory as being objects of sale and shall make such distinction clear to the public by placing tags on all inventoried goods in and about the place of sale apprising the public of the status of all such goods. 
(Code 1959, § 13-21; Code 1981, § 9-4-116) 
Sec. 11-12-7. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or organization violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for each offense. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-138) 
ARTICLE 13. - TEMPORARY AGENCIES 

Sec. 11-13-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed thereto: 
    Labor pool shall be defined as in section 93-1-2(c). 
    Short-term assignment of labor means a work assignment for a term of 40 hours or less, where an individual is assigned to work for a business entity by labor pool or temporary agency. 
    Temporary agency means a business entity which operated by: 
(1)  Contracting with other entities or persons to supply them with temporary employees for short-term assignments of labor; 
(2)  Hiring persons to fulfill these contracts, but not requiring such persons to come to the temporary agency business location to receive an assignment; and 
(3)  Employing each individual employee for the time period required to complete the assignment for which that individual was hired, although an individual may be eligible for rehire when additional temporary assignments are available. 
    Temporary employees mean individuals who are assigned by a labor pool or a temporary agency to complete a work assignment with another entity or person. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-250; Ord. No. 98-07, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 11-13-2. - License requirement; procedure. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a labor pool within the city shall apply for and obtain a license from the city clerk. The annual fee for such license shall be $200.00. 
(b)  The application shall include a scale drawing of the premises, including interior walls, and also any drop off areas and parking area reserved for the licensed establishment. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-251; Ord. No. 98-07, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 11-13-3. - Operating standards; conduct; exceptions. 
(a)  Labor pools must have sufficient seating inside the establishment for all temporary employees who report to the business for job assignments, and each temporary employee shall remain inside the establishment while he or she is waiting for an assignment. In no event shall temporary employees congregate outside a labor pool while they are waiting for an assignment. 
(b)  Labor pools must not allow any person attracted to their business establishment to congregate or loiter in any area which is owned or leased by the labor pool and which is exposed to view from any right-of-way or adjoining property. 
(c)  Labor pools shall have separate restroom facilities for men and women of sufficient size to accommodate all persons awaiting employment. Such restrooms shall be handicapped accessible in accordance with state and federal standards. 
(d)  Labor pools shall have sufficient dressing rooms or locker rooms for both men and women for all temporary employees to change clothes before reporting to or returning from work. The manager of each labor pool will be responsible for ensuring that such facilities are used by temporary employees in connection with all work assignments. No labor pool shall permit any temporary employee or other individual associated with the establishment to change clothing in any area other than provided herein. 
(e)  Each labor pool must maintain general liability insurance and premises liability insurance in the minimum amount of $100,000.00 per occurrence. 
(f)  Labor pools shall limit their hours of operation from 5:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(g)  Labor pools shall not allow littering by any person upon its premises. Each labor pool shall maintain a daily detail of workers to ensure compliance with this subpart. 
(h)  Labor pools shall not allow the consumption of alcohol or other intoxicants by any person upon their premises. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-252; Ord. No. 98-07, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
ARTICLE 14. - MEDIA PRODUCTIONS AND PERMITS 

Sec. 11-14-1. - Definitions. 
(a)  Film, filming or film activity shall mean creating motion picture or still photographic images, and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, commercials and student films produced to satisfy a post-secondary school course requirement at an educational institution in any medium including film, tape or digital format, including, but not limited to, motion pictures, television or commercial still photography. 
(b)  Charitable films shall mean commercials, motion pictures, television, videotapes, digital recording or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization which qualifies under Section 501(C)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing films, tapes or photos. 
(c)  News media shall mean the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or camerapersons. 
(d)  Student film shall mean a film where the producer is a student enrolled in an accredited educational institution and who is enrolled in a filmmaking or television class at such accredited educational institution, either on the undergraduate or graduate level and where the primary purpose of such film is a learning experience in which the producer fulfills whatever educational requirements such project is produced for. The producer and/or corresponding educational institution must own the film, which may only be used for non-profit purposes. 
(e)  Studio shall mean a fixed place of business where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted upon the premises. 
(f)  Facility shall mean any structure or building, regardless of the presence of active utilities, located on public or private property. 
(g)  Residence shall mean any single family home, mobile home, trailer, multi-family housing unit or units, apartments, condominiums, dormitory or any other structure wherein persons are legally permitted to reside. 
(h)  Exigent circumstances shall mean conditions of property, weather, lighting, scheduling, or filming equipment that are necessary for the scheduled filming activity which, if forced to wait at least five business days, would make them unavailable for use by the production through no fault of any agent of the production responsible for same, and which was not known or could have reasonably been ascertained at least five business days prior to the scheduled filming activity. 
(i)  Expedited review shall mean a permit application submitted for review pursuant to this article less than five business days prior to the scheduled film activity, but at least 18 hours prior to the scheduled film activity, as a result of exigent circumstances. 
(j)  Film liaison shall mean the city manager or designee appointed to oversee all permitting activity under this article, to review permit applications and make recommendations to the city council for approval or denial or, in the case of expedited review or as otherwise authorized by this article, to approve or deny the same. The film liaison shall guide applicants through the process of review, assist in coordinating needed city services such as police, fire, sanitation, etc. and coordinate any other licenses and permits that may be necessary to stage the filming activity. 
(k)  Private property shall mean real property owned or leased by an individual or non-governmental entity, including, for example, residential homes and commercial developments. 
(l)  Public property shall mean real property owned, leased or controlled by the city, including, without limitation, parks, streets, sidewalks, other rights-of-way and buildings. 
(m)  Producer shall mean an individual, organization, corporation or other entity that is ultimately responsible for the filming activity that is the subject of the application and permit. 
(n)  Impact , with regards to public property, shall mean (1) use of intellectual property belonging to the city; (2) closure of a city or state street, lane and/or sidewalk; (3) use of pyrotechnics or other explosives; (4) smoke effects, water effects or flame effects; (5) display of real or artificial firearms, grenades or other weapons that would cause the public to fear violence; (6) vehicle chases and/or vehicle crashes; (7) use of large or any other equipment that has a reasonable likelihood of causing damage to public property; (8) use of wild animals controlled under federal or state law or county and/or municipal ordinances; (9) use of city or state streets and/or lanes for the parking of trailers or vehicles associated with the filming activity that are likely to restrict the flow of traffic; (10) if another permit and/or license or any type of inspection is required by the ordinances of the city for the filming activity; or (11) any combination of the above. 
(o)  Disturbing the peace shall mean (1) real or simulated fighting visible from public property or right-of-way; (2) using offensive words in public that are likely to incite violence; (3) shouting in a public place that could be heard from a radius of 100 yards and that could have the effect of disturbing the health, safety and/or welfare of the surrounding public; (4) use of non-domestic animals or domestic animals that will be loud and audible to a reasonable person in a radius of 200 feet that is inside a structure with the windows and doors closed; (5) playing of music or other noise loud enough to be heard by a reasonable person within a radius of 500 feet or 200 feet if inside a structure with the windows and doors closed; (6) presence of public nudity or what would be considered indecent exposure under the City Code; (7) simulated (or real) drug use; and (8) what would otherwise be considered disorderly conduct under the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-2. - Permit and exemptions. 
(a)  Permit required. No person shall use any public property or facility, or private property, facility or residence where such use will have an impact on public property for the purpose of filming without first applying for and obtaining a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Exemptions. 
(1)  News media. The provisions of this article shall not apply to film activities for the purpose of news media. 
(2)  Personal/family video. The recording of visual images (motion or still photography) solely for private use and not for commercial use. 
(3)  Studio filming. Film activities (motion or still photography) conducted at or within a properly licensed studio. 
(4)  Small business. The owner of any small business, as defined by the size standards of the small business administration (SBA), may film a commercial for said business at their properly licensed business location without a permit, so long as the filming takes place wholly inside the private premises of the business location or immediately outside the premises so long as the filming does not substantially interfere with any vehicular or pedestrian traffic on the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-3. - Administration. 
(a)  The city manager may designate a city employee to serve as the film liaison. Said employee shall be employed in the city's economic development department and shall be responsible for administering the provisions of the article. If no film liaison is designated then the city manager shall serve as the film liaison. 
(b)  Issuance of permits and other decisions rendered pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be based upon the following: 
(1)  The health and safety of all persons, including citizenry and customers of any businesses located within the city; and 
(2)  Mitigation of disruption to all persons and businesses within the affected area; and 
(3)  The safety of all public and private property within the city; and 
(4)  Traffic congestion at particular locations within the city; and 
(5)  Ability of the applicant to organize the filming activity and comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, and/or the city to coordinate the necessary services within the period of time between submittal of application and scheduled date of filming activity; and 
(6)  Whether any other legal and/or permitted activity is taking place at the location of the scheduled film activity at the same time. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-4. - Applications and issuance of permits. 
(a)  Applications shall be made on a form prescribed by the film liaison and shall include the following information: 
(1)  The representative of the property, the address, e-mail address and any available telephone number of the place at which the activity is to be conducted; and 
(2)  A written description of the specific location at such address or place including a description of any facilities on the location where filming will take place; and 
(3)  The inclusive hours and dates film activities will occur; and 
(4)  A general statement of the character or nature of the proposed film activity; and 
(5)  The name, address, e-mail address and telephone number of the person or persons in charge of such film activity; and 
(6)  The exact number of personnel to be involved with such film activities; and 
(7)  A detailed description of any film activity that may cause public alarm such as the use of any animals, gunfire or pyrotechnics and low flying aircraft; and 
(8)  The exact amount and type of vehicles and equipment to be employed along with a parking plan. 
(b)  Deadline for applications. Subject to the expedited review exception, applications must be submitted a minimum of five business days in advance to the office of the film liaison. If the film activity interferes with traffic or involves potential public safety hazards, the application shall be submitted a minimum of seven business days in advance. 
(c)  With the exception of those applications requesting the use of pyrotechnics or explosives, all applications shall be reviewed and issued by the film liaison. The film liaison shall review and act on the application no later than seven calendar days following the submittal of the completed application. For those applications submitted less than eight days prior to the filming activity, but more than three days prior to the filming activity, the film liaison shall review and act on the application no later than three days after the filing of the application. The applicant may appeal any denial of the application by the film liaison to the mayor and city council by filing an appeal within five days of the decision, and which will be placed on the next regular city council meeting which is at least 24 hours after the filing of the appeal. 
(d)  The film liaison shall review and assess any application requesting the use of pyrotechnics or explosives based on the criteria stated above and make recommendations for approval or denial to the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall review and act on the application no later than seven calendar days following the submittal of the completed application, unless the application is not submitted at least eight days prior to the filming activity in which case the mayor and council shall act on the application no later than three days after the filing of the completed application, but with at least 24 hours' notice as required by the Georgia Open Meetings Act. If no regular meeting is scheduled within this period of time, the mayor shall call a special called meeting to conduct such review within the prescribed period of time. 
(e)  An application submitted for expedited review shall be assessed administratively by the film liaison who, based on the criteria above, shall approve or deny the permit. The decision of the film liaison must be communicated to the applicant in writing in the most expeditious method available and requested by the applicant at the applicant's expense. In case of a denial, and only if the applicant so directs, the film liaison shall forward the application for de novo review by the mayor and city council at the next regularly scheduled council meeting, but no later than 30 days after the issuance of the denial. The written letter of denial shall serve as the film liaison's recommendation to the mayor and council. 
(f)  Change of date. Upon the request of the permittee, the film liaison shall have the power, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which a film permit has been issued, provided the date change does not extend the length of the permitted film activity originally approved or substantially change any required filming regulation factor detailed in this article or any condition placed on the permit when originally approved. 
(g)  The issuance of a permit shall not grant the producer a constitutionally protected property interest. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-5. - Application fee, reimbursement for cost, waiver. 
(a)  Application fee. With the exception of student films and charitable films, which shall be exempted, the application fee for any filming permit must be submitted together with the application required in section 11-14-4 above. The fee shall be based on how far in advance of the scheduled film activity the completed application is filed as established by resolution of mayor and council. Presentation of proof to the city that the final film product contains end-credit attribution to the city and the city logo shall result in reimbursement of 40 percent of the application fee. 
(b)  Reimbursement for personnel. The production company shall reimburse the city for any employees provided to the company (e.g., police, fire, traffic) for the purpose of assisting the production, whether at the request of the applicant or as a condition of the permit. The rate for an employee and minimum hours of hire for employees shall be established by resolution of mayor and council in consultation with the chief of police or fire chief, if applicable. Such payment shall be made directly to the employee(s) at least 24 hours prior to the use of the employee(s) and is non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-6. - Filming regulations. 
(a)  Residential locations. Filming in residential neighborhoods shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Eastern Standard Time or 11:00 p.m. Eastern Daylight Time. 
(b)  Notification. Permittees must provide all residents, businesses and merchants within a 200-foot radius of the film location written notice of the dates, times, location addresses and production company contact at least 72 hours prior to the first film activity, or 12 hours in case of expedited review applications. If a permittee requires on-street parking for production vehicles, residents, businesses and merchants impacted by the parking requirements must receive written notice at least 24 hours prior to the arrival of the vehicles. 
(c)  Clean up. The permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use and the cleanup of trash and debris. The filming activity area, facilities and residences used shall be cleaned of trash and debris upon completion of shooting at the scene and restored to the area's, residence's or facility's original condition before leaving the site. 
(d)  Filming on private property. A permittee must obtain permission, consent and/or secure a lease for any use of property not owned or controlled by the city. 
(e)  Traffic control. 
(1)  In the event any filming impairs traffic flow, permittees may be required to use city police department employees for traffic purposes and comply with other traffic control requirements as deemed necessary by the city's film liaison. Permittees shall pay for the use of such personnel. 
(2)  Permittees shall furnish and install advance warning signs and any other traffic control devices in conformance with the National Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices ("MUTCD"). All appropriate safety precautions must be taken. 
(3)  For any lane closure or intermittent traffic control, the period of time that traffic may be restricted will be determined by the chief of police of the city, based on traffic volumes for location and time of day. Requests for such closures must be submitted as part of the application and applicant must diligently assist the chief of police, or designee, in developing a traffic control plan if so requested. 
(4)  Traffic shall not be detoured across a double line without prior authorization of the chief of police. 
(5)  Cars with cameras mounted or held by a passenger and/or driver must still be driven in the direction of traffic and observe all traffic laws while filming, unless otherwise authorized by the film liaison, after consultation with the chief of police. 
(6)  Any emergency road work by city employees and/or private contractors under permit or contract to the city shall have priority over filming activities. 
(f)  Municipal parking lots. Permittees shall not be required to pay any fee for parking in any municipal parking lot. 
(g)  Fireworks, explosives, etc. No film activity which involves the use of explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or other special effects may be undertaken unless specifically approved by the city fire department. Indication of the use of such devices shall be included on the permit form submitted to the city, and such form must be reviewed and signed by the chief of the city fire department or his or her designee before such devices can be used. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-7. - Liability. 
(a)  Liability insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in the amount not exceeding $1,000,000.00 naming the city as an additional insured for protection against claims of third persons, including but not limited to, personal injury, wrongful death, and property damage. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days' written notice to the city. A copy of the certificate shall remain on file in the city clerk's office. A copy of the certificate shall be attached to the permit for filming filed with the city. 
(b)  Worker's compensation insurance. A permittee shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit. Proof of workers compensation insurance shall be attached to the permit for filming filed with the city. 
(c)  Hold harmless agreement. A permittee shall execute a hold harmless agreement on a form created by the city prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(d)  Security deposit. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, a permittee may be required to submit a refundable deposit (amount to be determined). Such deposit shall be paid at the time a filming permit is filed with the city. Upon completion of the filming and inspection of the site by the city, if no verifiable damage has occurred, the security deposit should be returned to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-8. - Violations; revocation. 
(a)  Any producer that performs filming activity requiring a permit under this article without such a permit, shall be in violation of this article and subject to a $1,000.00 fine for each day of non-permitted filming activity. 
(b)  In addition to revocation of a filming permit, a permittee violating any provisions of this article shall be subject to a $1,000.00 fine for each violation. In the event of any such violation, the film liaison or other city official shall provide the permittee with verbal or written notice of such violation. If the permittee fails to correct the violation within a reasonable time as specified by the film liaison or other city official, the filming liaison shall direct all filming activity to cease immediately. Permitted filming activity shall not resume until the violation is corrected. 
(c)  If the violation is not corrected within the following 48 hours, the film liaison may revoke the permit by giving written notice to the producer or designated representative on site. The producer may appeal such revocation to the mayor and city council by submitting a written appeal within five days of the revocation notice to the film liaison, who shall place said appeal on the next regularly scheduled city council meeting for de novo review by the mayor and city council, but not later than 30 days following the receipt of the appeal notice. At the appeal hearing, the revocation may not be reversed unless the producer convinces the mayor and city council, by preponderance of the evidence, that no violation occurred or that said violation was corrected prior to receipt of the revocation notice. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Sec. 11-14-9. - Appeals. 
    Appeals of any decisions of the mayor and city council under this article shall be by petition for writ of certiorari in the Fulton County Superior Court in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 2018-03 , § 1, 5-15-2018) 
Chapter 17 - FINANCE AND TAXATION 
ARTICLE 2. - FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Fiscal control, charter, § 5-301 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local government financial management standards and procedures act, O.C.G.A. § 23-3601 et seq. 

Sec. 17-2-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and shall end on June 30 of each year. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1-1; Ord. No. 92-4, 6-2-1992) 
Sec. 17-2-2. - Annual budget; appropriations ordinance. 
(a)  An annual budget and appropriations ordinance shall be adopted by the mayor and council prior to the first day of the fiscal year, provided if such budget and appropriations ordinance is not adopted, the previous year's budget and appropriations ordinance shall continue as the budget for the ensuing fiscal year and until the new budget and appropriations ordinance is adopted. 
(b)  The budget as adopted shall be a balanced budget with anticipated revenues equal to appropriated expenditures. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1-2) 
Sec. 17-2-3. - Amendments. 
    All amendments to the budget shall be by ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1-3) 
Sec. 17-2-4. - Appropriations to lapse. 
    All appropriations which are not obligated, encumbered or expended at the end of the fiscal year shall lapse and become a part of the unencumbered surplus of the city which may be appropriated for the next fiscal year. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1-4) 
Sec. 17-2-5. - Method of accounting. 
    To the extent possible, the modified accrual basis of accounting shall be used so that expenditures, other than accrued interest on long-term debt, are recorded at the time liabilities are incurred and revenues are recorded when cash is received, except for material or available revenues which shall be accrued to reflect properly the taxes levied and the revenues earned. All receipts and disbursements shall be posted promptly and at least on a monthly basis. To the extent possible, all interfund transfers shall be cleared by the end of the fiscal year. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1-5) 
Sec. 17-2-6. - Responsibility for financial administration. 
    The responsibility for administering the city's financial and fiscal affairs is hereby vested in the director of finance and administration of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 3-1-6) 
Sec. 17-2-7. - Credit card payments. 
    The city finance director, with the approval of the city manager, may establish procedures for acceptance of credit card payments for amounts due the city. A convenience fee may be charged for the use of a credit card when said fee is permitted by the operating rules and regulations of the credit card issuer. 
(Ord. No. 2013-13, § 1, 9-17-2013) 
ARTICLE 3. - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING 
DIVISION 1. - Purchasing Agent 

Sec. 17-3-1. - Appointment. 
    The mayor and council shall appoint the purchasing agent for the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-7; Code 1981, § 3-2-1) 
Sec. 17-3-2. - Duties. 
(a)  The purchasing agent, hereinafter called "the agent," shall have the power and it shall be his duty to purchase or contract for the purchase of all supplies and contractual services needed by any agency of the city, except as otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  The agent shall: 
(1)  Act to procure for the city the highest quality in supplies and contractual services at the least expense to the city; 
(2)  Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases and sales; 
(3)  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing by other governmental jurisdictions; 
(4)  Prescribe and maintain such forms as he shall find reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter; 
(5)  Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk so as to take full advantage of discounts; and 
(6)  Act so as to procure for the city all federal tax exemptions to which it is entitled. 
(c)  The agent shall also have the authority to declare vendors who default on their quotations irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any business for the city for a stated period of time. 
(Code 1959, § 2-8; Code 1981, § 3-2-2) 
Secs. 17-3-3-17-3-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SUPPLIES AND CONTRACTS 

Sec. 17-3-21. - Methods of source selection. 
    Except as otherwise authorized by law, all contracts shall be awarded by: 
(1)  Competitive sealed bidding pursuant to section 17-3-22; 
(2)  Competitive negotiation pursuant to section 17-3-23; 
(3)  Noncompetitive negotiation pursuant to section 17-3-24; or 
(4)  Small purchase procedures pursuant to section 17-3-25. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-11; Ord. No. 94-21, 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 17-3-22. - Competitive sealed bidding. 
    Conditions for use of competitive sealed bidding are as follows: 
(1)  Award by competitive sealed bidding. Contracts exceeding the amount provided by section 17-3-25 (small purchases) shall be awarded by competitive sealed bidding whenever practicable. Factors in determining whether competitive sealed bidding is not practicable shall include whether: 
a.  The specifications permit award on the basis of the lowest bid price or lowest evaluated bid price, as determined in accordance with objective, measurable criteria set forth in the invitation for bids; and 
b.  The available sources, the time and place of performance, and other relevant circumstances are appropriate for use of competitive sealed bidding. Nothing in this article is intended to authorize letting contracts without competitive sealed bids when such bids are required by state law. 
(2)  Public notice. 
a.  The invitation for bids shall be given adequate public notice a sufficient time prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. 
b.  Such notice may include publication in a newspaper of general circulation a reasonable time prior to bid opening. 
(3)  Bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. After opening each bid, it shall be recorded and be open to public inspection. 
(4)  Award. The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by written notice to the responsive and responsible bidder whose bid is determined to contain the lowest bid price or the lowest evaluated bid price. 
(5)  Excessive prices; rebid. In the event that all bids submitted pursuant to a competitive sealed bidding invitation for bid result in bid prices in excess of the funds available for the purchase, then new invitations for competitive sealed bids may be issued and the project may be rebid or the project may be changed or abandoned. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-12; Ord. No. 94-21, 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 17-3-23. - Competitive negotiation. 
(a)  When used. When it is determined by the mayor and council that the use of competitive sealed bidding is not practicable, a contract may be awarded by competitive negotiation in accordance with this article and regulations promulgated hereunder. Competitive negotiation shall not be used where state law, the city Charter, or any applicable federal statute or regulation requires another method such as competitive bidding. 
(b)  Use after unsuccessful competitive sealed bidding. Contracts may also be competitively negotiated when it is determined by the mayor and council that the bid prices received by competitive sealed bidding either are unreasonable as to all or part of the requirements, or were not independently reached in open competition, and for which: 
(1)  Each responsible bidder has been notified of the intention to negotiate and is given reasonable opportunity to negotiate; 
(2)  The negotiated price is lower than the lowest rejected bid of any responsible bidder; and 
(3)  The negotiated price is the lowest negotiated price offered by any responsible supplier. 
(c)  Public notice. The request for proposals shall be given adequate public notice in the same manner as provided in section 17-3-22. 
(d)  Evaluation factors. When an award is not to be made solely on the basis of the lowest evaluated price, the request for proposals shall indicate the relative importance of price and other significant evaluation factors. 
(e)  Award. Award shall be made to the bidder whose proposal is determined to be more advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. 
(f)  Discussion with all responsible offerors. Written or oral discussions may be conducted with all responsible offerors who submit proposals reasonably susceptible of being selected for award. Discussions should not disclose any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors. Discussions need not be conducted: 
(1)  With respect to prices, where such prices are fixed by law or regulation, except that consideration shall be given to competitive terms and conditions; 
(2)  Where time of delivery or performance will not permit discussions; or 
(3)  Where it can be clearly demonstrated and documented from the existence of adequate competition or accurate prior cost experience with the procured items that acceptance of an initial offer without discussion would result in fair and reasonable prices, and the request for proposals notifies all offerors of the possibility that award may be made on the basis of the initial offers. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-13; Ord. No. 94-21, 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 17-3-24. - Noncompetitive negotiation. 
    When, as determined by the mayor and council prior to an award, the needs of the city cannot be met by the other methods of procedure outlined hereunder, a contract may be made by noncompetitive negotiation, as determined prior to award. Noncompetitive negotiation shall not be used where state law, the city Charter, or any applicable federal statute or regulation requires another method such as competitive bidding. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-14; Ord. No. 94-21, 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 17-3-25. - Small purchases. 
(a)  Budgeted purchases of supplies and services of less than the estimated value of $5,000.00 may be made in the open market without newspaper advertisement and without observing the procedure prescribed in section 17-3-22 et seq., for the award of formal contracts. 
(b)  Budgeted purchases of supplies and services in an amount of less than $5,000.00 may be made by department heads of the city with the approval of the council chairman of the appropriate standing committee. 
(c)  The city shall not be deemed to be contractually bound unless Charter section 5-401 has been complied with. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-15; Ord. No. 94-28, 11-1-1994; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 1(3-2-15), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 17-3-26. - Cancellation of invitations for bids or requests for proposals. 
    When it is in the best interest of the city, any invitation for bids, request for proposals or other solicitation may be cancelled, and all bids or proposals in response thereto may be rejected. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-16; Ord. No. 94-28, 11-1-1994) 
Sec. 17-3-27. - Responsibility of bidders and offerors. 
(a)  Determination of responsibility. The responsibility of a bidder or offeror shall be determined in accordance with this article. 
(b)  Inquiry authorized. A reasonable inquiry to determine the responsibility of a bidder or offeror may be conducted in accordance with this section. The unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information in connection with such an investigation may be grounds for a determination that the bidder is not responsible. 
(c)  Right of nondisclosure. Except as otherwise provided by law, information disclosed by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this section may not be disclosed outside of the agency requesting the bids and the department of finance and administration without the prior written consent of the bidder or offeror. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-17; Ord. No. 94-21, 8-2-1994) 
Sec. 17-3-28. - Regulations for procedure. 
    The city administrator may prepare regulations for procedure under this article. The regulations shall be consistent with the terms of this article and shall specify details and forms to be used. The regulations shall be in full force and effect after they are approved by the city council. 
(Code 1981, § 3-2-18; Ord. No. 94-21, 8-2-1994) 
Secs. 17-3-29, 17-3-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTS 

Sec. 17-3-31. - Written contracts; when required. 
    All public improvement projects costing in the aggregate of $5,000.00 or more should be completed and performed under and by virtue of a written contract by and between the city and the performing party and which contract shall be drawn, prepared and executed in accordance with ordinances and resolutions in effect in the city, unless otherwise specified by mayor and council after consultation with the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 2-23; Code 1981, § 3-2-31; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 2(3-2-31), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 17-3-32. - Procedure for awarding contracts. 
(a)  Whenever the mayor and council deem it necessary or desirable to undertake any public works or other public improvements costing in the aggregate $5,000.00 or more, they shall adopt a resolution declaring such work or improvements necessary. The resolution shall state the type of work or improvement to be done, as well as define the extent and character of the same. 
(b)  Upon the adoption of the resolution, it shall be the duty of the city engineer or engineering firm designated by the mayor and council to proceed to prepare an estimate of the cost of such proposed improvements, as well as all plans and specifications as may be necessary. Said plans, specifications and cost estimates shall thereupon be delivered to the mayor and council, who, after examining the same, shall determine whether to proceed with the improvements. 
(c)  Should the mayor and council determine, after studying the estimate furnished by the engineer, to proceed with the improvements, they shall adopt a resolution setting forth the facts. The resolution shall set forth such terms and conditions as they shall deem proper or necessary with reference to the letting of the contract and the provisions thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 2-24; Code 1981, § 3-2-32; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 2(3-2-32), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 17-3-33. - Bid deposits. 
    The city shall require a bid deposit of at least five percent on proposed improvement contracts with the city. All unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to return of any deposit and/or release of any surety. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit and/or penalty imposed against a surety on any contract upon failure of the contracting party with the city to enter a contract within ten days after the award to that party, or such other times as the city clerk shall direct. 
(Code 1959, § 2-25; Code 1981, § 3-2-33; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 2(3-2-33), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 17-3-34. - Rejection of bids. 
    The city shall reserve the right to reject all bids, or parts of all bids, when the public interest will be served thereby, and shall have the further right to waive all technicalities. 
(Code 1959, § 2-26; Code 1981, § 3-2-34) 
Sec. 17-3-35. - Lowest responsible bidder. 
    Contracts for municipal improvements shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. In determining the "lowest responsible bidder," in addition to price, the purchasing agent shall consider: 
(1)  The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform the contract; 
(2)  Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service promptly, or within the time specified without delay or interference; 
(3)  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of the bidder; 
(4)  The quality of the performance of previous contracts; 
(5)  The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and ordinances relating to the contract; 
(6)  The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder to perform the contract; 
(7)  The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance for the use of the subject of the contract; and 
(8)  The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid. 
(Code 1959, § 2-27; Code 1981, § 3-2-35) 
Sec. 17-3-36. - Award to other than low bidder. 
    No award for a contract for municipal improvements shall be given to other than the lowest bidder without the express consent of the mayor and council, as evidence by a resolution adopted for such purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 2-28; Code 1981, § 3-2-36) 
Sec. 17-3-37. - Tie bids. 
    If all low bids received are for the same amount or unit price, all other things being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a local bidder. Where no local bidder is involved, the purchasing agent shall award the contract for municipal improvements to one of the tie bidders by drawing lots in public. 
(Code 1959, § 2-29; Code 1981, § 3-2-37) 
Sec. 17-3-38. - Preparation of plans, estimates, etc., and execution of public works by engineer; when required. 
    In all public works costing $5,000.00 or more, the plans and specifications and estimates of cost shall be prepared by and the construction executed under the direct supervision of a registered professional engineer or the city engineer. 
(Code 1959, § 2-30; Code 1981, § 3-2-38; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 2(3-2-38), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 17-3-39. - Performance bond required for contracts of designated amount. 
    No contract for any public works or improvements, costing more than $5,000.00, shall become valid until the contract therefor shall have been duly executed and the contractor shall have executed and delivered to the city good and sufficient surety bond conditioned for the faithful performance and completion of such contract and the bond shall have been approved by the city attorney. 
(Code 1959, § 2-31; Code 1981, § 3-2-39; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 2(3-2-39), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 17-3-40. - Award of contracts of less than specified amount. 
    All public works contracts costing less than $5,000.00 shall be awarded in such manner as shall be directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 2-32; Code 1981, § 3-2-40; Ord. No. 2004-21, § 2(3-2-40), 12-21-2004) 
ARTICLE 4. - PROPERTY AND SANITARY TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 17-4-1. - Date due, method of collection when delinquent. 
(a)  All real property taxes shall be due and payable within a period of 45 days from the date of the real property tax notice, and if not paid within such period, shall be subject to collection by fi. fa. and execution. 
(b)  All personal property taxes shall be due and payable within a period of 45 days from the date of the personal property tax notice, and if not paid within such period, shall be subject to collection by fi. fa. and execution. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-1; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 1, 5-5-2009) 
Sec. 17-4-2. - Penalty and interest after due date. 
(a)  Penalty on failure to pay tax. Failure to pay any ad valorem tax by the tenth day after the date said tax is due shall result in a penalty of ten percent of the amount of tax due and not paid. 
(b)  Interest on unpaid taxes. In addition to a penalty, any ad valorem tax due the city remaining unpaid after the due date of the year will bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date the tax is due until the date the tax is paid. For purposes of this Code section, any period less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-2; Ord. No. 94-14, 5-3-1994; Ord. No. 2009-05, § 2, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2014-08 , § 1, 9-16-2014) 
State Law reference- Interest rate on unpaid taxes, O.C.G.A. § 91A-239.2. 
Sec. 17-4-3. - Issuance of fi. fa. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk to issue tax fi. fas. against all persons owing taxes for the year in which such taxes have not been paid. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-3) 
Sec. 17-4-4. - Sanitary tax; as prescribed annually. 
    There is levied a sanitary tax as prescribed by the mayor and council at the beginning of each year. 
(Code 1959, § 19-9; Code 1981, § 3-3-4) 
Charter reference- For authority to levy, § 5-102. 
Sec. 17-4-5. - Same; constitutes a lien. 
    Such sanitary tax shall be a lien against the property on which it is levied, and such lien will attach in the same way and manner as the ad valorem tax levied and prescribed in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 19-10; Code 1981, § 3-3-5) 
Sec. 17-4-6. - Same; enforcement and collection. 
    Such sanitary tax will be collected and its payments enforced in the same way and manner as the ad valorem tax in the city is now collected and enforced, including the right to issue execution therefor, and enforce the same in the same way and manner as the executions for ad valorem taxes are issued and enforced. 
(Code 1959, § 19-11; Code 1981, § 3-3-6) 
Sec. 17-4-7. - Hotel/motel/high-rise structures special tax district. 
(a)  Pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI of the Georgia Constitution, there is hereby established a special tax district within the city to be known as the "Hotel/Motel/High-Rise Structures Special Tax District." Said hotel/motel/high-rise structures special tax district shall include and encompass all structures and related personal property that are not exempt from ad valorem taxation as designated on the map entitled "Hotel/Motel/High-Rise Structures Special Tax District Map" attached to Ord. No. 2014-13 as Exhibit "A" and incorporated herein by express reference. A copy of the "Hotel/Motel/High-Rise Structures Special Tax District Map" shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. The mayor and council of the city may amend such map from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Purpose. The hotel/motel/high-rise structures special tax district was established for purposes allowed under state law. The tax is assessed against any owner of real property and personal property included within the said special tax district. 
(c)  Rate. There is hereby assessed and levied upon all real and personal property in this district for each year, until changed, a tax, the rate of which shall be determined annually by the city and adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. Said tax revenues shall be used for all purposes allowed by Georgia Constitution of 1983, Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VI. 
(Ord. No. 2014-13 , § 1, 12-2-2014) 
Secs. 17-4-8-17-4-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR ELDERLY RESIDENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Homestead exemptions generally, O.C.G.A. § 91A-1110 et seq. 

Sec. 17-4-21. - Persons eligible. 
    Each resident of the city who is 65 years of age or over and who does not have an income from all sources, including the income of all members of the family living in the home of that resident, exceeding $8,000.00 per annum, and each resident of the city who is totally disabled and who does not have an income from all sources, including the income of all members of the family living in the home of the resident, exceeding $8,000.00 per annum, is hereby granted an exemption of $10,000.00 on his homestead from all ad valorem taxation by the city as long as any such resident of the city actually occupies that homestead as his residence. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-21; Ord. No. 87-1, 1-6-1987) 
Sec. 17-4-22. - Limit on amount. 
    There shall be no more than one $10,000.00 exemption per homestead and the value of the homestead in excess of such exemption shall be subject to ad valorem taxation by the city. 
(Code 1959, § 19-41; Code 1981, § 3-3-22; Ord. No. 87-1, 1-6-1987) 
Sec. 17-4-23. - Affidavit; required to be filed; contents. 
    Each such resident claiming a homestead exemption shall not receive such benefits unless he files an affidavit with the governing authority of the city, or with a person designated by the governing authority of the city, giving his age and the amount of income he received and the income which members of his family living in his home receive. 
(Code 1959, § 19-42; Code 1981, § 3-3-23) 
Sec. 17-4-24. - Same; filing time; additional information. 
    Such affidavit must be filed between January 1 and April 1 and will furnish such additional information relative to the receiving of such benefits as will enable the governing body of the city, or the person designated by the governing body, to make a determination as to whether the owner is entitled to such exemption. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-24) 
Sec. 17-4-25. - Same; providing forms. 
    The governing authority of the city or the person designated by such governing authority shall provide such affidavit forms for this purpose. 
(Code 1959, § 19-44; Code 1981, § 3-3-25) 
Sec. 17-4-26. - Applicability of division. 
    This division shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1972. 
(Code 1959, § 19-45; Code 1981, § 3-3-26) 
Secs. 17-4-27-17-4-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR CITY RESIDENTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this division are derived from Senate Bill 653, which was adopted by referendum. 

Sec. 17-4-31. - Homestead defined. 
    For purposes of this division, the term "homestead" means such term as defined and qualified in of O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-41) 
Sec. 17-4-32. - Exemption granted. 
    Each resident of the city is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all city ad valorem taxes in the amount of $10,000.00. The value of the homestead in excess of the exempted amount shall remain subject to taxation. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-42) 
Sec. 17-4-33. - Administrative authority. 
    The governing authority of the city may, by ordinance, provide the procedures and requirements necessary for the proper administration of the homestead exemption provided for by this division. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-43) 
Sec. 17-4-34. - Nonapplicability. 
    The exemption granted by this division shall not apply to or affect any county school taxes, state taxes or county taxes for county purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-44) 
Sec. 17-4-35. - Effective date. 
    The exemption granted by this division shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1988. 
(Code 1981, § 3-3-45) 
ARTICLE 5. - OCCUPATIONAL TAXES 

Sec. 17-5-1. - Tax levied; required for business dealings in city. 
    For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, an occupation tax is levied, and each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia but exerting substantial efforts within the city or owning real or personal property located within the city from which income is generated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7(b), shall register the business, trade, profession or occupation and shall pay the occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable occupation tax certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such occupation tax certificate shall be shown to the business tax clerk or this officer's deputies or to any police officer of the city, upon request. Realtors selling property within the city but maintaining no fixed place of business within the city shall be liable for a tax based on gross receipts for real estate transactions with respect to property located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-1; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-2. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
    Employee means: 
(1)  An individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(2)  An individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual is an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2. 
    Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business, trade, profession or occupation for the period. 
(1)  "Gross receipts" includes, without limitation, the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  "Gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations, as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent which contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services which are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
    Location or office includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
    Number of employees means the number of full-time equivalents resulting when all employees of the business, trade, profession or occupation, regardless of full-time, part-time or seasonal status, are counted. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in a business, trade, occupation, or profession. Such tax is imposed for revenue raising purposes. 
    Occupational tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
    Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofits, or any other form of business organization. 
    Practitioners of professions or occupations are those persons who engage in a profession, trade, business or occupation identified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (c)(18). "Practitioners of professions or occupations" shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fee means a payment, whether designated as a license fee, permit fee, or by another name, which is required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, trade, profession, or business. Except where otherwise authorized by state statute, the amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. Development impact fees, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8), or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-2; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-3. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $25.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial startup, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on applicable businesses for which regulations under the city's police power are adopted. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-3; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-4. - Occupation tax structure. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b), the occupation tax is imposed upon businesses, and practitioners of professions and occupations based upon gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, trade, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget in its Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 edition. 
(b)  Where gross receipts, as defined by this article, do not exceed $25,000.00 per year; or where federal law precludes the imposition of a gross receipts tax on a particular class of business, trade, occupation or profession including but not limited to the airline industry, which business, trade, occupation or profession is otherwise subject to taxation by the city, such occupation tax is imposed based on the number of employees of the business, trade, occupation or profession. 
(c)  Occupation tax schedule shall be as follows: 
(1)  Number of employees. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows: 
Employees Tax Liability 1-2 $30.00 3-9 $60.00 + $15.00/employee over 2 10-99 $165.00 + $15.00/employee over 9 100-499 $1,299.00 + $10.40/employee over 99 500 or more $5,459.00 + $7.40/employee over 499  
(2)  Profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts. The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows: 
Profitability Ratio/ 
Tax Class Tax Rate 
on Gross Receipts 
(per $1,000.00) Class 1 $0.85 Class 2 0.96 Class 3 1.02 Class 4 1.14 Class 5 1.29 Class 6 1.43  
(d)  The following additional limitations shall apply: 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business' or practitioner's gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers' agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(5)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the city or, for those businesses not maintaining a location in state, on receipts earned in the state. 
(6)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in Georgia shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as set out in section 17-5-5. 
(7)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay an occupation tax of more than $75,000.00. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-4; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-5. - Businesses with no location in the state. 
(a)  Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state if the business' or practitioner's largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(b)  Any person, business or practitioner engaged in the activities identified in subsection (a)(1) and (a)(2) above shall be required to register with the city and shall be presumed to be subject to taxation under this article; provided no tax shall apply where: 
(1)  Such person, business or practitioner provides proof of gross receipts generated within the state to another local government which exceed the gross receipts generated within the city and on which a tax is paid to the other jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Proof of payment of a tax on receipts generated in the state to a government outside the state is provided. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-5; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-6. - Each line of business identified on business registration. 
    The business registration of each business operated in the city's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the business tax clerk and that line of business being noted by the business tax clerk upon the occupation tax certificate form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-6; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-7. - The number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
    Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-7; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-8. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (c)(18). 
(a)  Practitioners of professions and occupations as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (c)(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 17-5-4; or 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business that qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(b)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 of each year. 
(c)  Payment of this tax shall not be a preexisting condition before practicing law in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-8; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-9. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to register or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-9) 
Sec. 17-5-10. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such business, profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses, trades, occupations, and professions which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses, trades, occupations and professions are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-10; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-11. - When tax due and payable; delinquency. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year, beginning in 1996 and continuing in succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be due and payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by April 1 of each year, be subject to ten percent penalty for delinquency. On any new profession, trade, profession or occupation begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a penalty of ten percent imposed. The occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the business tax clerk and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kind of business, profession, trade, or occupation subject to this article without having first obtained such certificate, such offender shall, upon conviction by the municipal judge, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, either or both in the discretion of the judge. No occupational tax certificate shall be issued to any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupational tax certificate until all outstanding taxes or assessments or any other debts owed to the city by such person, firm, corporation, or owner thereof, or any business owned by such person, firm, or corporation, are paid in full. 
(b)  In addition to the above remedies, the chief of police may proceed to collect the tax in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-11; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995; Ord. No. 2009-16, § 1, 12-1-2009; Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 2-1-2011) 
Sec. 17-5-12. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses and practitioners having multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-14(a)(2). At the time of annual registration, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business or practitioner has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied by a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local government, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-12; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-13. - Business operated for charitable purpose, exemption. 
    No person for which an occupation tax certificate is required or an occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-13; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-14. - State registration required; displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-14; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-15. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
    Any person required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter as a condition of engaging in business shall first, before the issuance of a city tax certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met and, where applicable, that annual application for continuance of the business has been submitted to the appropriate agency. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-15; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-16. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levied pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary tax certificate for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a tax certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the tax certificate herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having so obtained said tax certificate shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-16; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-17. - Penalty for article violation. 
    Any person who fails to pay occupation taxes or regulatory fees when they become due and payable may be charged all costs and fees allowed by law and in addition may be charged all costs of attorney's fees spent towards collection as well as being subject to a civil fine set by a municipal judge not to exceed $500.00. Such fine may be enforced by the contempt powers of the municipal court. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-17; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995; Ord. No. 99-14, § I, 10-5-1999) 
Sec. 17-5-18. - Business tax clerk; subpoena and arrest powers. 
    The business tax clerk and his duly designated officers and inspectors or successors shall be classified as deputy marshals-business inspectors with full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-18; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-19. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
    The following businesses and activities are not covered by the provisions of this article, but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, chapter 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-19; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-20. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited or provided for pursuant to other law. 
    An occupation tax based on gross receipts shall not apply to any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-20; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-21. - Taxes levied on business transacted during current year; filing returns; adjustments. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each person subject to the occupation tax levied in section 17-5-1 hereof shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the business tax clerk the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payment of the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. 
(b)  Where a person subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has conducted business for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(c)  The owner, proprietor, manager, or secretary officer of the business subject to said occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before February 15 of the current calendar year, file with the business tax clerk of the city, on a form furnished by said officer, a signed return setting forth the amount of actual gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(d)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of tax provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said person based on the estimate filed pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, the difference in such amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on April 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before that date. 
(e)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by such person based on the estimate filed pursuant to subsection (a) hereof, the difference in such amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if said business continues to conduct business in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by such person for the current year. This election is to be taken by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-21; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-22. - Payment of tax by businesses. 
    In the case of a business or profession subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager, or executive officer of the business or profession liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from the commencing date to the end of the calendar year, and such tax shall be paid in advance of a tax certificate being issued. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-22; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-23. - More than one place or line of business. 
    Where a business or profession is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the business or profession shall be required to obtain the necessary tax certificate for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-23; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-24. - Returns confidential. 
    Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee or agent of the city, or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees or agents of the city using the returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States, and other local governments. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-24; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-25. - Inspections of books and records. 
    In any case, the business tax clerk of the city, through his officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business or profession for which the returns are made. The business tax clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business or profession for which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the business tax clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax certificate. Adequate records shall be kept in the city, for examination by the business tax clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, interest in the amount of 11/2 percent per month in addition to a ten percent penalty will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-25; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-26. - Failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection; revocation of certificate. 
    Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required herein, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any occupation tax certificate granted by the city under this article shall be automatically revoked. No new occupation tax certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the business tax clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 17-5-25. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-26; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-27. - Failure to comply with chapter; continuing business after revocation. 
    Any person, his manager, agent, or employee, who does business in the city after the tax for such business becomes delinquent, or who is required to make occupation tax returns, and who fails to make those returns within the time and in the manner herein provided, or who refuses to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who makes false returns; and any person, his manager, agent, or employee who refuses to permit an inspection of books in his charge when the officer, agent, employee, or representative of the city requests such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns herein provided for, shall be subject to penalties provided in section 17-5-17. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-27; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
Sec. 17-5-28. - Lien taken for delinquent tax. 
    In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, the business tax clerk of the city, upon any tax or installment of such tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the person liable for such tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 11/2 percent per month from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property in the city of the person liable for such tax. The lien for occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the chief of police of the city upon the property of defendant located in such jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as provided by the laws of the state, and the defendant in such execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the business tax clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him or her as though he or she had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1981, § 3-4-28; Ord. No. 95-07, § 1, 12-5-1995) 
ARTICLE 6. - TAX ON ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BY THE DRINK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages generally. O.C.G.A. § 58-101 et seq. 

Sec. 17-6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
    Alcoholic beverage. Any beverage containing alcohol obtained by distillation including rum, whisky, gin and other spirituous liquors by whatever name called; but not including malt or vinous beverage or fortified wines. 
    City. The city, and variously, the incorporated area of Hapeville, wherein the city is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
    City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk or his/her designee. 
    Due date. The 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
    Licensee. Any person who holds a permit from the city to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
    Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
    Person. An individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States, the state and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
    Tax. The sales tax on alcoholic beverages by the drink imposed by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-1; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-2. - Imposition: rate of tax. 
    There is hereby imposed, and there shall be paid, a tax of three percent on the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink in the city. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-2; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-3. - Collection by licensee. 
    Every licensee shall collect a tax of three percent on the sale of liquor by the drink at his/her pouring outlet. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-3; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-4. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed for failure to pay any amount of tax when due and payable to the city. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Return; time of filing; persons required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed by every licensee with the city clerk showing the gross sales of liquor by the drink and the amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(d)  Collection fee allowed licensees. Licensees collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act," as now and hereafter amended. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-4; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-5. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recalculation of tax; authority to make; basis of recalculation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return, or returns of the tax, or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he/she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his/her possession, or that may come into his/her possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. The penalty which shall be applied shall be the same as the penalty designated under section 17-6-4(b), Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. A specific penalty of 15 percent is imposed upon the amount of any determination. Additionally, the amount of any determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the due date of taxes until the date of payment. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the licensee written notice of his/her determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the licensee at his/her address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-5; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-6. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any person fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the licensee from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink, or as the case may be, of the amount of total such receipts in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 17-6-5. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. The penalty which shall be applied shall be the same as the penalty designated under section 17-6-4(b). 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-6; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-7. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Duty of successors or assignees of licensee to withhold tax from purchase money. If a licensee liable for any amount under this article sells out his/her business or quits the business, his/her successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(c)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he/she shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(d)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the city clerk. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the city clerk, the excess amount paid the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-7; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-8. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from licensees, etc.; form. Every licensee shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all records, receipts, invoices and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he/she may require. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him/her may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, inventory, equipment and other facilities of any licensee liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the sale of liquor by the drink. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the gross sales from the sale of liquor by the drink, the amount of tax collected thereon, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-8; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-9. - Preparation of forms. 
    The city clerk is authorized to develop, use and revise such forms as are not inconsistent with this article to effectuate the purposes of this article. The city Return of Tax on Sale of Alcoholic Beverages By-The-Drink Form, attached as exhibit "A" and incorporated here by reference, is adopted for use by the city clerk. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-9; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
Sec. 17-6-10. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 60 days. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any licensee who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other date required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. Persons who submit false or fraudulent returns shall be punished by a court of appropriate jurisdiction for violations of O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. 
(Code 1981, § 3-5-10; Ord. No. 2000-13, § 1, 4-4-2000) 
ARTICLE 7. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, adopted March 5, 2013, amended the Code by, in effect, repealing former art. 7, §§ 17-7-1-17-7-12, and adding a new art. 7. Former art. 7 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1981, §§ 3-6-2-3-6-8; Ord. No. 2000-12, adopted April 4, 2000; Ord. No. 2000-18, adopted July 11, 2000; Ord. No. 2007-02, adopted January 26, 2007; and Ord. No. 2011-12, adopted October 4, 2011. 
State Law reference- Municipalities authorized to impose, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 17-7-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
    City. The City of Hapeville and, variously, the incorporated territory of the City of Hapeville, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq. 
    City clerk. The duly appointed city clerk of the city or his/her designee. 
    Due date. The twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
    Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
    Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
    Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
    Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
    Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
    Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
    Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
    Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
    Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50, et seq., specifically § 48-13-51(a)(4.5). 
    Tourism product development. The expenditure of funds for the creation or expansion of physical attractions which are available and open to the public and which improve destination appeal to visitors, support visitors' experience, and are used by visitors. Such expenditures may include capital costs and operating expenses. Tourism product development may include: (1) lodging for the public for no longer than 30 consecutive days to the same customer; (2) overnight or short-term sites for recreational vehicles, trailers, campers, or tents; (3) meeting, convention, exhibit, and public assembly facilities; (4) sports stadiums, arenas, and complexes; (5) golf courses associated with a resort development that are open to the general public on a contract or fee basis; (6) racing facilities, including dragstrips, motorcycle racetracks, and auto or stock car racetracks or speedways; (7) amusement centers, amusement parks, theme parks, or amusement piers; (8) hunting preserves, trapping preserves, or fishing preserves or lakes; (9) visitor information and welcome centers; (10) wayfinding signage; (11) permanent, nonmigrating carnivals or fairs; (12) airplanes, helicopters, buses, vans, or boats for excursions or sightseeing; (13) boat rentals, boat party fishing services, rowboat or canoe rentals, horse shows, natural wonder attractions, picnic grounds, river-rafting services, scenic railroads for amusement, aerial tramways, rodeos, water slides, or wave pools; (14) museums, planetariums, art galleries, botanical gardens, aquariums, or zoological gardens; (15) parks, trails, and other recreational facilities; or (16) performing arts facilities, and any other purposes allowed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(6)). 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 1, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 17-7-2. - Tax rate. 
(a)  Tax rate. There is hereby set and levied on the occupant of a guest room of any hotel/motel/cabin/residence/lodge located within the special district a tax in the amount of eight percent of the gross rent for such occupancy. 
(b)  Effective date. This article shall take effect on the 1st day of July, 2018. 
(c)  Use of revenue. The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b)(5) and O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(6), with proceeds to be collected and used for the following statutory purposes: 
(1)  The first five percent shall be collected and allocated towards any and all uses permitted under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3). Of that five percent, the first three percent shall be allocated and used in the city's general revenue fund. The remaining two percent shall be allocated expended for purposes of promoting and marketing tourism conventions and trade shows through a contract with one or more destination marketing organizations ("DMOs") as defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(1). 
(2)  Of the remaining three percent, no less than one and one-half percent shall be collected and allocated towards tourism, convention(s), and tradeshow(s) promotion and marketing activities by one or more of the aforementioned DMOs contracted with the city. 
(3)  Proceeds from no less than the final one and one-half percent shall be collected and allocated towards activities of tourism product development as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50.2(6). 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 2, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 17-7-3. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
    Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 17-7-4. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this sub-section shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 3, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 17-7-4. - Exceptions. 
    In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h), the tax imposed by this article shall not apply to the following charges: 
(1)  Charges made for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided to any persons who certify that they are staying in such room, lodging, or accommodation as a result of the destruction of their home or residence by fire or other casualty; 
(2)  The use of meeting rooms and other such facilities or any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations provided without charge; 
(3)  Any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations furnished for a period of one or more days for use by state or local governmental officials or employees when traveling on official business. Notwithstanding the availability of any other means of identifying the person as a state or local government official or employee, whenever a person pays for any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations with a state or local government credit or debit card, such rooms, lodgings, or accommodations shall be deemed to have been furnished for use by a state or local government official or employee traveling on official business for purposes of the exemption provided by this paragraph. For purpose of the exemption provided under this paragraph, a local government official or employee shall include officials or employees of counties, municipalities, consolidated governments, or county or independent school districts; or 
(4)  Charges made for continuous use of any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations after the first 30 days of continuous occupancy pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(h). 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013; Ord. No. 2018-04 , § 4, 6-5-2018) 
Sec. 17-7-5. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 17-7-6. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and section 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the state commissioner of revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 17-7-7. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 17-7-6. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 17-7-8. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 17-7-7(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 17-7-6. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 17-7-9. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 17-7-10. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
Sec. 17-7-11. - Violations. 
    Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 17-7-3 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 17-7-6, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 2013-03, § 1, 3-5-2013) 
ARTICLE 8. - RENTAL VEHICLE EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 17-8-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    Rental charge means the total value received by a rental motor vehicle concern for the rental or lease for 31 or fewer consecutive days of a rental motor vehicle, including the total cash and nonmonetary consideration for the rental or lease, including, but not limited to, charges based on time or mileage or charges for insurance coverage or collision damage waiver but excluding all charges for motor fuel taxes or sales taxes. 
    Rental motor vehicle means a motor vehicle designed to carry ten or fewer passengers and used primarily for the transportation of persons that is rented or leased without a driver, regardless of whether such vehicle is licensed in this state. 
    Rental motor vehicle concern means a person or legal entity which owns or leases five or more rental motor vehicles and which regularly rents or leases such vehicles to the public for value. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-1; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-2. - Assessment and levy; responsibility for payment. 
(a)  There is hereby assessed and levied an excise tax upon the rental charge collected by a rental motor vehicle concern when such charge constitutes a taxable event for purpose of state sales and use tax, under this article. Such tax shall be three percent of the rental charges as defined herein. The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time when, and place where, the customer pays sales tax with respect to the rental charge. 
(b)  Such tax is imposed upon the customer who pays the rental charge, and such customer shall be liable for the tax until such tax is paid over to the rental motor vehicle concern by the customer. 
(c)  The owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern shall collect the excise taxes as set forth in this article and shall remit the same to the city as hereinafter provided. Any owner or operator who shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect the tax herein provided shall be liable for, and shall pay the tax personally. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-2; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-3. - Exemptions. 
    The following rentals are exempt from the excised tax imposed under this article: 
(1)  Rental charges associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle if either: 
a.  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle outside this state and returns it in this state; or 
b.  The customer picks up the rental motor vehicle in this state and returns it outside this state; 
(2)  Rental charges associated with the rental or lease of a rental motor vehicle in excess of 31 consecutive days. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-3; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-4. - Use of proceeds. 
(a)  The tax proceeds levied and imposed by this article shall be dedicated to and expended for the following projects: 
(1)  Capital outlay projects consisting of: 
a.  Improvement and renovation to recreational facilities including the Recreation Center and Master Park, pool and facilities; 
b.  Improvement and renovation of pedestrian walkways and right-of-way in the downtown area; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction and/or renovation of public safety facilities; 
(3)  Additional public improvements associated with any of the capital outlay projects outlined above, or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; 
(4)  Maintenance and operation expenses associated with qualified capital outlay projects as set out above. 
(b)  In addition, the tax proceeds levied and imposed by this article shall be dedicated to and expended for the following purposes: 
(1)  Promoting industry, trade, commerce, and tourism; 
(2)  Capital outlay projects consisting of the construction of convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities, or public safety facilities, including the acquiring, constructing, renovating, improving, and equipping of parking facilities, pedestrian walkways, plazas, connections, and other public improvements associated with such convention, trade, sports, and recreational facilities or public safety facilities or the retirement of debt issued with respect to such capital outlay projects; and 
(3)  Maintenance and operation expenses or security and public safety expenses associated with capital outlay projects funded pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-4; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-5. - Intergovernmental agreements concerning use of proceeds. 
    The city acting as an entity or through the city development authority may contract with a county, municipality, development authority, downtown development authority, urban redevelopment authority, recreation authority, or any combination of two or more such entities for the purpose of expending the proceeds authorized by this chapter, and in accordance with the purposes outlined in section 17-8-4 above. Such intergovernmental contracts may pertain to the construction and maintenance of facilities located outside the city, but the existence and operation of which the city deems beneficial to the residents of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-5; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-6. - Monthly report and remittance; penalties. 
    The rental motor vehicle concern liable for the taxes set out herein shall on or before the 20th day of each month, for the preceding calendar month, transmit to the city administrator a statement showing the gross sales and gross taxes collected by authority of this article. Along with such statement, the rental motor vehicle concern shall submit to the city administrator the net taxes due. Failure to remit taxes by the due date shall subject the rental motor vehicle concern to a penalty of five percent of the tax due, and in addition to such penalty, to interest on the unpaid amount computed at the rate of one percent per month. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-6; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-7. - Collection fee for rental motor vehicle concern. 
    For the purpose of compensating the rental motor vehicle concern for collecting, accounting for and remitting the tax levied by this article, such rental motor vehicle concern shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the city in the form of a deduction, provided such report and remittance is submitted to the city by the due date thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-7; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-8. - Records to be kept by rental motor vehicle concern. 
    In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and to collect all the tax imposed, all rental motor vehicle concerns are hereby required to keep a record of all sales and charges for rental motor vehicles and the taxes collected. Said records shall be open for inspection by any duly authorized agent of the city during regular business daytime hours. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-8; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-9. - Inadequate returns; powers of city administrator. 
(a)  If the city administrator is not satisfied with the return or returns of the excise tax and the amount of tax required to be paid to the city by any rental motor vehicle concern, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  The amount of the determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof from the due date of taxes. 
(c)  If the city administrator or a designated representative shall give to the rental motor vehicle concern written notice of the determination, the notice may be served personally or by mail, if by mail the service shall be addressed to the operator or the owner of the rental motor vehicle concern at the address as it appears in the records of the city administrator. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee. 
(d)  Except in cases of failure to make a return, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month, following the monthly period in which the amount proposed to be determined or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period expires last. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-9; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-10. - Failure to make return; powers of city administrator. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern fails to make a return, the city administrator shall make an estimate of the rental tax due. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect for which such rental motor vehicle concern failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is, or may come into the possession of, the city administrator. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 17-8-9. 
(b)  The amount of determination shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period, for which the amount or any portion thereof should have been returned, until the date of payment. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-10; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-11. - Audit authority of city. 
    Duly authorized employees of the city upon exhibiting of written credentials and during regular business hours may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of a rental motor vehicle concern, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the rental motor vehicle concern, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-11; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-12. - Withholding tax on sale of business. 
(a)  If any rental motor vehicle concern liable for any amount under this article sells out its business or quits the business, its successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover the amount required until the former owner or operator of the rental motor vehicle concern produces a receipt from the city administrator showing that the indebtedness has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(b)  If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount outstanding tax required to be withheld by him to the extent of such purchase price. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-12; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Sec. 17-8-13. - Penalties for violations. 
    In addition to the interest and delinquent penalties specified in section 17-8-6, any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by the city court in accordance with limits established by the city Charter. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by that person and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Code 1981, § 9-6-13; Ord. No. 96-05, § 1, 7-9-1996) 
Chapter 20 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 

Sec. 20-1-1. - Adoption of fire prevention code. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, the state minimum fire safety standards adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 25, chapter 2, as amended. Provided, however, every building and structure existing as of April 1, 1968, which building or structure is not listed in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13(b)(1) shall comply with the minimum fire safety standards which were in effect at the time such building or structure was constructed. A less restrictive provision contained in any subsequently adopted minimum fire safety standard may be applied to any existing building or structure. All other buildings and structures presently existing shall comply with the minimum fire safety standards which were in effect at the time such building or structure was constructed, relocated or modified. 
(Code 1959, § 10-2; Code 1981, § 4-2-1; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-2-1990; Ord. No. 92-3, § 1, 5-5-1992) 
Sec. 20-1-2. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the mayor and council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance, respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment of not less than ten days nor more than 30 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1959, § 10-3; Code 1981, § 4-2-2) 
Sec. 20-1-3. - Establishment and duties of bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The fire marshal in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department of the city on the basis of examination to determine his qualifications. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service, and he shall not be removed from office except for cause after public trial. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The chief of the fire department shall recommend to the mayor and council the employment of technical inspectors, who, when such authorization is made, shall be selected through an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an indefinite term with the removal only for cause. 
(d)  A report of the bureau of fire prevention shall be made annually and transmitted to the chief executive officer of the municipality; it shall contain all proceedings under this Code, with such statistics as the chief of the fire department may wish to include therein; the chief of the fire department shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable. 
(Code 1959, § 10-4; Code 1981, § 4-2-3) 
Sec. 20-1-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the City of Hapeville. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city. 
(c)  Where the chief of the bureau of fire prevention is given the title fire marshal, the words chief of the bureau of fire prevention as used in the fire prevention code shall be held to mean the fire marshal. 
(Code 1959, § 10-5; Code 1981, § 4-2-4) 
Sec. 20-1-5. - New materials, processes or occupancies which may require permits. 
    The mayor, the chief of the fire department and the fire marshal shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the code. The fire marshal shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1959, § 10-15; Code 1981, § 4-2-14) 
Sec. 20-1-6. - Adoption of rules and regulations of safety fire commissioner. 
    The rules and regulations now and hereafter promulgated for the prevention of destruction of life and/or property by fire, explosion and related hazards in this state by the state safety fire commissioner shall be and are hereby adopted as the rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 10-1; Code 1981, § 4-2-17; Ord. No. 89-7, 1-2-1990) 
Sec. 20-1-7. - Regulation of open burning. 
(a)  No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning in any area of the city except as follows: 
(1)  For outdoor cooking of food for immediate human consumption; 
(2)  Operation of devices using open flames such as tar kettles, blow torches, welding torches, portable heaters and other flame making equipment; 
(3)  Fire set for purposes of training fire fighting personnel when authorized by the mayor and council and in compliance with state air quality control regulations; or 
(4)  From October 1 to April 30 each calendar year the persons may engage in prescribed open burning. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section only, "prescribed open burning" shall be defined as the controlled application of fire to existing vegetative fuels only under specified environmental conditions and following appropriate precautionary measures, which causes the fire to be confined to a predetermined area and accomplishes one or more land management objectives including removal of vegetative matter. 
(c)  Prescribed open burning conducted under the requirements of this part shall: 
(1)  Be accomplished only when a person 18 years of age or older; and of sound mind; and competent physical ability is in charge of the burn; and is present on site until the fire is adequately confined to reasonably prevent escape of the fire from the area intended to be burned; 
(2)  Not create a public nuisance under local ordinances when permitted unless evidence of negligence is shown in starting, controlling or completing the burn; 
(3)  Be considered a property right of the permittee; 
(4)  Be conducted in accordance with a permit issued without charge to a party requesting the permit by the City of Hapeville Fire Department; and 
(5)  Comply with the regulations of the state environmental protection division and the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1981, § 4-2-18; Ord. No. 83-7, 10-4-1983; Ord. No. 2000-03, § 1, 3-7-2000) 
Sec. 20-1-8. - Fire prevention code supplements. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Residential sprinkler system shall mean the sprinkler system in multifamily dwellings. 
    Commercial sprinkler system shall mean the sprinkler system in buildings used for commercial purposes consisting of 5,000 square feet or more. 
    New, for the purpose of this section, shall include any addition to existing buildings, whether vertical or horizontal, or any existing building or structure which shall be deemed to be new in the event such building or structure is subject to substantial renovation or a fire or other hazard of serious consequence. 
    Substantial renovation shall mean any construction project involving exits or internal-external features of such building or structure costing more than or equal to 50 percent of the building's or structure's gross assessed value according to county tax records at the time of such renovation, repair, remodeling, or replacement thereof. 
(b)  Rules and regulations. The following rules and regulations affecting fire prevention are hereby adopted in their entirety to further supplement section 20-1-1, the fire prevention code of the city, and incorporated fully as if set out at length herein. Copies of all fire prevention regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where they shall be available for public inspection. In case of conflict between the codes, enforcement priority will be given to the regulation which contains the most stringent conditions, stipulations or requirements. 
(1)  Rules and regulations of the office of insurance and safety fire commissioner, chapter 120-3-3 entitled "Rules and Regulations for the Prevention of Loss of Life and Property from Fire, Panic from Fear of Fire, Explosions or Related Hazards" in its entirety; more specifically chapter 120-3-3 entitled "Rules and Regulations for the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards" in Buildings, Structures, Occupancies and Facilities as specified in the 1949 Georgia Fire Act, as amended, by reference; volumes 1 through 12 of the 2006 edition of the National Fire Codes; the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, title 30, section 30-3-3, regarding accessibility to buildings and facilities by physically disabled persons; 
(2)  Any other provisions of the City Code of Ordinances which do not adopt state law by reference and which are more restrictive than the rules of the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner; 
(3)  National Fire Protection Association Codes and Standards, 2006 Edition, shall include referenced publications and their appendices in their entirety. 
(4)  If there are any provisions of the City Code of Ordinances which are in conflict with this section, this section shall be controlling. 
(5)  The fire prevention personnel shall be vested with the necessary power and authority to carry out all adopted codes and ordinances of the city. Said persons shall be administered an oath of office to uphold the laws of the state and the city. The fire prevention personnel may be vested with full authority and authorized to write citations; investigate fires; and appear in court for the purpose of providing sworn testimony. 
(6)  Amendments to the preceding NFPA codes and rules and regulations of the office of insurance and safety fire commissioner shall be deemed to be adopted as if fully set out herein. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 20-1-9. - Automatic sprinkler systems. 
(a)  Buildings of any type construction or occupancy of 5,000 square feet or more per floor, or having a fire department apparatus access distance or hose reach of 200 feet or more to the building entrance from the nearest point of fire apparatus shall be protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the current state-adopted edition of NFPA 13, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. This shall not include any building meeting this criteria which is used solely as a single-family detached residential home. A sprinkler control valve and water flow device shall be provided for each floor. This is not to restrict the fire official having jurisdiction or the fire marshal from requiring the installation of a water-based fire protection system and/or smoke detection system if, in the opinion of the fire official, and for the public interest, the health and welfare of the firefighters, and the protection of human life, such a system would serve to benefit all parties that may be affected by the type of construction, hazard of content, limited access to the structure, and for other purposes. 
(b)  (1)  Buildings of two or more stories in height shall be protected throughout by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system as specified in subsection (a) above. These types of buildings and structures shall include commercial, multifamily dwellings, motels, hotels, and townhouses, but excludes single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Working smoke detectors, hardwired with battery backup, shall be provided in the following locations of all buildings: bedrooms; offices; halls; mechanical rooms; and other hazardous locations as deemed by the fire official, fire marshal, or inspector. Working smoke detectors shall be included in single-family detached residential, commercial, multifamily dwellings, motels, hotels, and townhomes. 
(c)  All hotels, motels, dormitories, apartments, lodgings, townhouses, rooming houses, and all residential board and care facilities shall be protected by an approved supervised automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with the current state-adopted edition with amendments for NFPA 13 or 13R as modified, Standards for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and including three stories in height. Based on the type of construction and the tenants' ability to evacuate, the fire official shall reserve the right to designate which system is best suited in each situation. 
(d)  Existing buildings, when required to have automatic sprinkler protection by subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, shall be retrofitted for automatic sprinklers as required by the fire official in accordance with NFPA 13 or 13R, when the cost of renovation exceeds 50 percent of the latest approved assessed value of the building. These buildings shall be required to upgrade in the renovation to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances as applicable to required fire protection and life safety systems. Historical buildings may require an equivalency concept and working through of the process in conjunction with the historical preservation regulations. The owner is responsible for having the system inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 25. 
(e)  Where a garage or carport is in a townhouse, condominium, apartment, single-family split-level home, or other residential facility where residential living space is located above the garage or carport the garage or carport shall have an automatic sprinkler system. 
(f)  Where required, post indicator valves (PIV) and fire department connections (FDC) shall be located at or near the main entry to the site but no closer than one and one-half times the height of the building. Appropriate signage shall be provided to designate PIV and FDC connections. 
(g)  All water-based fire protection systems shall be provided with electronically supervised monitoring, and all fire alarm systems installed in commercial buildings shall be supervised at all times. The fire alarm systems shall be required to include the installation of horns and strobes as designated by the fire official, fire chief, or fire marshal. 
(h)  Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be installed in all newly constructed multifamily dwellings regardless of the type of construction or square feet as listed above and all commercial buildings of 5,000 square feet or more. Definitions of "new" and "substantial renovation" are found in section 20-1-8. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 20-1-10. - Automatic sprinkler system not to be disabled. 
    No person shall shut off or disable any automatic fire sprinkler system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, a sprinkler system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire department. 
    A fire watch may be required during the time the water-based fire protection system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire officials, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 20-1-11. - Fire alarm systems. 
    No person shall shut off or disable any fire alarm system, and no owner, occupant, or resident of any building shall disarm such system. Provided, however, an alarm system may be shut off in order to perform maintenance work on the system during the time that qualified maintenance personnel are on the premises performing necessary maintenance work. Such maintenance work shall be conducted after notice to and approval by the fire department. 
    A fire watch may be required during the time the fire alarm system is removed from service as outlined above. If required by the fire officials, the fire watch shall remain in place until such time as the system(s) are returned to their full capacity. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 20-1-12. - Standpipe systems. 
(a)  Commercial or multifamily residential buildings of two or more stories in height with more than 3,500 square feet per floor area or with more than 5,000 total square feet shall be protected throughout by a class I wet standpipe system in accordance with NFPA 14, Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems. 
(b)  Commercial or multifamily residential buildings of three or more stories in height, or greater than 30 feet in height, shall be protected throughout by a class I wet standpipe system in accordance with NFPA 14. 
(c)  Commercial or multifamily residential buildings in which the nearest point of fire department vehicle access is 200 feet or more to the building entrance or which would otherwise prohibit the nozzle from reaching the seat of the fire shall be protected throughout by a class I wet standpipe system in accordance with NFPA 14. 
(d)  Existing buildings, when required to have standpipe systems by subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, shall be retrofitted for standpipe systems as required by the fire official in accordance with NFPA 14, when the cost of renovation exceeds 35 percent of the latest approved assessed value of the building. These buildings shall be required to upgrade in the renovation to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances as applicable to required fire protection and life safety systems. Historical buildings may require an equivalency concept and working through of the process in conjunction with the historical preservation guidelines. 
(e)  A standpipe system shall be installed in all new or renovated multitenant dwellings with or without multiple classifications of occupancy(s) regardless of size and shall be installed per NFPA 14 guidelines as a minimal code. The fire official may modify these requirements as necessary for cause. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 20-1-13. - Key boxes. 
    Key boxes shall be required on all new and existing building sites to allow the fire and police departments to enter a building quickly in case of an emergency. The key boxes shall be marked, conspicuous, and accessible. Reference Standard Fire Prevention Code, chapter 6, entitled Fire Protection, section 603.18. The fire officials shall approve the key boxes used. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 20-1-14. - Smoke exhaust devices. 
    Roof vents or other approved smoke/heat exhausting/ventilation devices or systems shall be required in commercial buildings and be installed to conform to the following codes and standards as determined by the fire official: NFPA 101, 204M, 92A, 92B, and 90A. 
    Existing buildings shall be retrofitted for roof vents or other approved smoke and heat venting devices as required by the fire official when the cost of renovation exceeds 35 percent of the latest approved assessed value of the building. These buildings shall be required to upgrade in the renovation to meet all current codes, standards, and ordinances as applicable to required fire protection and life safety systems. Historical buildings may require an equivalency concept and working through of the process in conjunction with the historical preservation guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 1, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 1, 2-5-2008) 
Chapter 23 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 23-1-1. - Chief of police; powers and duties. 
    The chief of police shall: 
(1)  Attend any meetings of the mayor and council as requested; 
(2)  Execute all orders and directions of the mayor and council; 
(3)  Abate or remove any nuisance when so directed by the mayor upon order of the council; 
(4)  Maintain the peace, good order and tranquility of the city by the enforcement of all municipal ordinances and state or federal laws; 
(5)  Place upon the judge's docket the names of all persons violating any of the municipal ordinances and arrest and take into custody all persons who violate any city ordinances, state or federal laws; 
(6)  Under the general direction of the mayor, be in charge of the police department and have supervision over the members thereof in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority; 
(7)  Serve subpoenas and warrants of the municipal court and the mayor and council; 
(8)  Issue and serve summons for any violation of any law or ordinance and serve all processes, executions and attachments of the city clerk, municipal court or the mayor and council; and 
(9)  Perform such other duties required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1-1) 
Sec. 23-1-2. - Patrol and arrest powers. 
(a)  The police officers of the city shall have the authority to patrol over any street, alley, path, sidewalk or park, in and around any stores, cafes, taverns, restaurants, dancehalls, service stations or any other establishment in the city. 
(b)  An officer while on duty for the city shall have authority to enter any type of business while open to the public and check to see if everything is being carried on in a lawful manner. After business hours, and while closed to the public, an officer for the city has authority to check places of business, to see if the doors and windows are safely locked. 
(c)  An officer for the city shall have the authority to check and investigate, enter and patrol any park, business, residence or public place within the city limits if the officer has probable cause or sufficient reason to believe some act is being committed which would involve the violation of a law or a city ordinance; a personal injury or damage to property; or if any of the above appear to be imminent. 
(d)  No police officer shall enter a private dwelling without a search or arrest warrant unless he or she has the voluntary consent of the owner or occupant or he or she is in pursuit of a fugitive who the officer has personal knowledge or probable cause to believe has committed or attempted to commit a felony. 
(e)  Any person committing any offense against any state or federal law or provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the city in the presence of any police officer or any member of the council shall be immediately arrested, and a warrant for such arrest shall be secured as soon as possible thereafter. The arrested person shall be brought before the municipal court or confined until the next session of the municipal court unless released as provided in this Code. 
(f)  An officer shall not make an arrest until an arrest warrant has been issued in any case where information of an offense against any state or federal law or provision of this Code or other ordinance of the city is derived from another person. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1-2) 
Sec. 23-1-3. - Abuse of position. 
(a)  No police officer shall use official position or official identification cards or badges: 
(1)  For personal or financial gain; 
(2)  For obtaining privileges not otherwise available to the officer except in the performance of duty; or 
(3)  For avoiding consequences of illegal acts. 
(b)  Police officers may not lend their identification cards or badges to another person, or permit them to be photographed or reproduced without the approval of the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1-3) 
Sec. 23-1-4. - Abuse of process; withholding evidence. 
    Police officers shall not convert to their own use, manufacture, conceal, falsify, destroy, remove, tamper with, or withhold evidence or information or make false accusations of a criminal or traffic charge. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1-4) 
Sec. 23-1-5. - Disposition of unclaimed property. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the term: 
    Civil forfeiture proceeding shall have the same meaning as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 9-16-2. 
    Firearm means any handgun, rifle, shotgun, or similar device or weapon which will, or can be converted to, expel a projectile by the action of an explosive or electrical charge. 
    Police department or city police department means the City of Hapeville Police Department. 
    O.C.G.A. means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
    Rightful owner means a person claiming ownership of property which is the subject of a crime or has been abandoned. 
    U.S.C. means the United States Code. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Personal property which is the subject of any civil forfeiture proceeding; 
(2)  Any property which is the subject of a disposition pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 17-5-50 through 17-5-53; and 
(3)  Any abandoned motor vehicle for which the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 40, ch. 11 are applicable. 
(c)  Generally. When the city police department comes into possession of any personal property which is the subject of a crime or has been abandoned, a disposition of such property shall be made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(d)  Disposal of personal property used as evidence in a criminal proceeding. The police department shall make every reasonable effort to locate the rightful owner of any personal property used as evidence in a criminal proceeding, and in the event the owner can be located, the procedure for disposition shall be as follows: 
(1)  When a final verdict and judgment is entered finding a defendant guilty of the commission of a crime, any personal property used as evidence in the trial shall be returned to the rightful owner of the property within 30 days following the final judgment; provided, however, that if the judgment is appealed or if the defendant files a motion for a new trial and if photographs, videotapes, or other identification or analysis of the personal property will not be sufficient evidence for the appeal of the case or new trial of the case, such personal property shall be returned to the rightful owner within 30 days of the conclusion of the appeal or new trial, whichever occurs last. 
(2)  In order to recover their property, the rightful property owner must make an application to the city for return of their property. The property owner must provide 1) proof of ownership, and 2) picture identification. 
(3)  The owner of the property must sign an oath stating that property belongs to him or her. 
(4)  If after a period of 90 days, the rightful property owner has not claimed the property, the property used as evidence is considered abandoned; and the city police department may dispose of the property per the following procedure: 
a.  After 90 days, the police department shall file an application with the county superior court for an order directing the agency to sell, retain, discard, or destroy the property. 
b.  The application must categorize, and otherwise state with particularity, each item that is to be sold, retained, discarded, or destroyed. 
c.  If the property is ordered by the county superior court to be discarded or destroyed, the police department shall dispose of that property in the same manner the police department would dispose of any other equipment that cannot be salvaged and is not serviceable. 
d.  If the property is ordered by the county superior court to be retained by the seizing agency, then the agency must use the seized property for official, law enforcement purposes only. 
e.  If the property is ordered by the county superior court to be sold, the police department is required to place an advertisement in the legal organ of the city and county that specifically describes each item up for sale, and also alerts any other potential owners who might claim the property how to contact the agency. 
f.  If an item is worth $75.00 or more in value, then the item must be advertised and sold separately from any other item. 
g.  Any item worth less than $75.00 can be described and sold with other like-valued items in lots. 
h.  If such personal property has not been bid upon in two successive sales, the law enforcement agency may retain the property for official use or the property will be considered as salvage and disposed of as other county or municipal salvage or nonserviceable equipment. 
i.  With respect to unclaimed perishable personal property or animals or other wildlife, an officer may make application to the superior court for an order authorizing the disposition of such property prior to the expiration of 90 days. 
(5)  This subsection shall not apply to unclaimed firearms. 
(e)  Disposal of personal property used as evidence where owner unknown. If law enforcement comes into possession of any personal property that is evidence in a judicial proceeding, and the owner is unknown, after such property has been in the possession of the police department for a period of 90 days: 
(1)  The city shall dispose of the property as abandoned per the guidelines of subsection (d)(4). 
(2)  This subsection shall not apply to unclaimed, lost, or abandoned firearms. 
(f)  Disposal of personal property not used as evidence. If the police department comes into possession of any personal property that is not evidence, but was abandoned or lost, the police department shall make every reasonable effort to locate the rightful owner. 
(1)  If the rightful owner can be located, then the personal property shall be returned to the owner per the guidelines in subsections (d)(2) and (3). 
(2)  If the rightful property owner is located but does not claim their property, or if the rightful property owner cannot be located, then after the property is in the possession of the police department for 90 days, the police department shall dispose of the property per the guidelines of subsection (d)(4). 
(3)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to unclaimed, abandoned, or lost firearms. 
(g)  Motor vehicle exception. If the police department comes into possession of personal property that is a motor vehicle, which is the subject of a crime or has been abandoned (but which is not the subject of any civil forfeiture proceeding), the police department shall contact the Georgia Crime Information Center to determine if such motor vehicle has been stolen and to follow generally the procedures contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-11-2 to ascertain the registered owner of such vehicle. 
(h)  Disposal of unclaimed firearms. 
(1)  Any property that is a firearm, and the rightful owner can be located, then the firearm shall be returned to the rightful owner per the guidelines in subsections (d)(2) and (3). 
(2)  Any property that is a firearm, has been unclaimed, and is in possession of the seizing agency for 90 days (regardless if it used or claimed as evidence), that firearm is subject to disposal per the conditions of this subsection only. 
(3)  With respect to unclaimed firearms, if the city chief of the police department, or the designee of the city chief of police, certifies that a firearm is unsafe because of wear, damage, age, or modification or because any federal or state law prohibits the sale or distribution of such firearm, at the discretion of such city official, the unsafe firearm shall be either 1) transferred to the division of forensic sciences of the state bureau of investigation, or 2) transferred to the city police departments forensic laboratory for training or experimental purposes, or 3) the firearm shall be destroyed. 
(4)  If a seized firearm in the possession of the police department is not unsafe, is unclaimed, and is worth more than $500.00, then that firearm is to be sold to the highest bidder through either sealed bid or auction according to the following guidelines and restrictions: 
a.  Prior to receiving sealed bids or prior to holding any auction, an advertisement for sale must run in the county organ or a newspaper that has general circulation in the local community. 
b.  The advertisement must run no sooner than 60 days or no later than 15 days before the last day to receive sealed bids; or 15 days before an auction. 
c.  The legal notice shall include a general description of the firearm to be sold. 
d.  Neither the city nor the police department has the right to reject any bids or to cancel any sale of firearms under this subsection. 
e.  Firearms may only be sold to such persons who are licensed firearm collectors, dealers, importers, or manufacturers as defined under 18 U.S.C. § 921. 
f.  Auctions required by this subparagraph may occur online on a rolling basis or at live events, but in no event shall such auctions occur less frequently than once every 12 months during any time in which the police department has an inventory of five or more saleable firearms. 
(5)  If the firearm is worth $500.00 or less, then the firearm may be sold on the open market without advertisement or acceptance of bids. However, firearms may only be sold to such persons who are licensed firearm collectors, dealers, importers, or manufacturers as defined under 18 U.S.C. § 921. 
(6)  Determining the valuation of any firearm is in the sole discretion of the city or the city's duly appointed agent. 
(7)  The police department is required to include in their records the amount any such firearm(s) is sold for, and details of the distribution of the sale proceeds. This information is to be retained pursuant to the requirements of subsection (i) and otherwise in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 18, art. 5, the "Georgia Records Act." 
(8)  If no bids from eligible recipients are received within six months from when bidding opened on a firearm offered for sale, or if the firearm has not been sold on the open market, pursuant to subsections (3) and/or (4) of this subsection, the firearm shall either 1) be transferred to the division of forensic sciences of the state bureau of investigation, or 2) transferred to the city police department forensic laboratory for training or experimental purposes, or 3) the firearm shall be destroyed. 
(i)  Maintaining of records. Records shall be maintained showing the manner in which each personal property item came into possession of the city police department, a description of the property, all efforts to locate the owner, any case or docket number, the date of publication of any newspaper notices, and the date on which the property was retained by the law enforcement agency, sold, or discarded. The city police department shall keep records of the firearms acquired and disposed of as provided by this section as well as records of the proceeds of the sales thereof and the disbursement of such proceeds in accordance with records retention schedules adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 18, art. 5, the "Georgia Records Act." 
(j)  Proceeds of sale of personal property items. The proceeds from the sale of personal property by the city police department pursuant to this section shall be paid into the general fund of the city treasury. 
(k)  Contraband items. Contraband items which have no foreseeable evidentiary value will be disposed of by the police department in such a manner that will ensure that the items are no longer of value and cannot be recovered by anyone; or the items will be turned over to the proper county, state or federal agency for disposal. Records will be made and maintained of contraband items pursuant to the requirements in subsection (i) of this section and otherwise in accordance with O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 18, art. 5, the "Georgia Records Act." 
(l)  City liability. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 17-5-54(j), neither the city nor any of its police officers, other officers, agents, or employees shall be liable to any person, including the purchaser of a firearm, for personal injuries or damage to property arising from the sale of a firearm under subsection (h) of this section unless the city acted with "gross negligence or willful or wanton misconduct." 
(Code 1981, § 4-1-5; Ord. No. 79-5, 5-14-1979; Ord. No. 2016-10 , § 1, 5-3-2016) 
Sec. 23-1-6. - False alarms. 
(a)  Definition. A "false alarm" is hereby defined as any incident or occurrence wherein a private alarm system of any type is activated by any cause and, which summons any public officer of the city to the location of said alarm or which causes any public officer of the city to begin traveling en route to the location of said alarm, when there in fact exists no emergency or other condition requiring the presence of such public officers. 
(b)  Excessive false alarms. It is hereby declared by the mayor and council of the city that more than two false alarms in any one month period or more than three false alarms in any one-year period is excessive and constitutes a danger to the public safety by hindering public safety officials from performing their necessary and proper function. 
(c)  Fee. Any person who owns or occupies a building or lot upon which is located a private alarm system which experiences excessive false alarms as defined above shall be assessed a fee by the city for each false alarm over and above those defined above as excessive, in the amount of $25.00 for the first occurrence, $50.00 for the second occurrence and $75.00 for any subsequent occurrence or occurrences. 
(Code 1981, § 4-1-6; Ord. No. 82-3, 4-6-1982) 
Chapter 26 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE 2. - PERSONAL CONDUCT 

Sec. 26-2-1. - Disorderly conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby a reasonable person would be placed in fear of safety for life or limb; 
(2)  Place the property of another in serious danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Use fighting words directed toward another, who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(4)  Violently interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(5)  Congregate with others to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear the way when ordered by lawful authority to do so; 
(6)  Engage in any violent, tumultuous, obstreperous or similar disorderly conduct tending to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city; or 
(7)  Be upon the public streets, alleyways, sidewalks, parks, or grounds, or in any other public place in the city, in an intoxicated condition, in such a manner as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to infringe on the peace and repose of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1-1; Ord. No. 81-5, § 1, 9-9-1981) 
State Law reference- Joint jurisdiction with state law on disorderly conduct, O.C.G.A. §§ 16-11-34, 16-11-41. 
Sec. 26-2-2. - Aiding or abetting violation. 
    Any person who shall counsel, aid or abet any violation or failure to comply with any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1959, § 14-2; Code 1981, § 11-1-2) 
Sec. 26-2-3. - Air rifles, BB guns, slingshots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot an air rifle, BB gun or slingshot on or in, or into, any public street, public alley, public property, residential property or business property located in the city; provided it shall not be unlawful to shoot an air rifle or BB gun or slingshot on any private property where permission of the owner has been secured and where the shots or pellets discharged from the air rifle, BB gun or slingshot do not hit or pop upon any public street, public alley, public property or neighboring residential or business property. 
(Code 1959, § 14-3; Code 1981, § 11-1-3) 
Sec. 26-2-4. - Firearms, fireworks; discharging prohibited; fireworks special use permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge firearms or guns anywhere in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, use, ignite, or cause to be ignited any fireworks or firecrackers anywhere in the city without first being issued a special use permit as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(c)  Fireworks special use permit. 
(1)  An application fireworks special use permit for the discharge, use, or ignition of fireworks shall be made to the city code enforcement and shall include the following information: 
a.  The name of the person, firm, corporation, or partnership seeking the special use of the fireworks. 
b.  The name of any official event or events associated with the special use of fireworks. 
c.  The time or times of the requested use of fireworks. 
d.  The street address location or locations of the requested use of fireworks. 
(2)  The application for the fireworks special use permit shall require an administrative fee of $100.00, which is non-refundable and due at the time the application is submitted. 
(3)  Applications for a fireworks special use permit must be submitted no later than ten days before the planned discharge, use, or ignition of fireworks within the city. 
(4)  City code enforcement will receive the application and make a determination as to whether or not the special use of fireworks is appropriate on a case-by-case basis. 
(d)  Fireworks or firecrackers shall not be discharged, used, or ignited, and no special permit shall allow for the discharge, use, or ignition of fireworks or firecrackers, within the city during times and hours in conflict with the city's general noise ordinance contained in section 26-2-17 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1959, § 14-9; Code 1981, § 11-1-6; Ord. No. 2018-11 , § 1, 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 26-2-5. - Posting bills, painting or marking property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post any bills, advertisements or other notices of any kind on any public or private buildings, property or grounds in the city, or write, paint, draw, carve or cut any letter, wood or device on any such property in the city without the owner's consent, and in cases made under this section, the person committing such acts must show such consent, or he will be presumed not to have had it. 
(Code 1959, § 14-11; Code 1981, § 11-1-9) 
Sec. 26-2-6. - Damaging property or flowers in parks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently destroy the equipment in the city parks or to pluck or destroy the flowers or shrubbery in city parks. 
(Code 1959, § 14-12; Code 1981, § 11-1-10) 
Sec. 26-2-7. - Knives, razors, similar weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, except within his own domicile, any of the following implements unless same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close. 
(4)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except that this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Code 1959, § 14-14.1; Code 1981, § 11-1-11) 
Sec. 26-2-8. - Mobile homes and campers. 
(a)  Parking mobile home in residential or commercial district. The parking of a mobile home in a residential or commercial district is hereby prohibited, except that one mobile home may be parked or stored in an approved enclosed garage or on any lot or plot provided that no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in such mobile home while such mobile home is stored or parked. 
(b)  Maintenance of living quarters in campers. No living quarters shall be maintained in any camper, whether the same shall be a self-propelled camper, a trailer type or mounted on a truck body. 
(c)  Attachment to sewer system. No mobile home or camper of any type shall be attached to the permanent sewer system of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 14-16.1; Code 1981, § 11-1-13) 
Sec. 26-2-9. - Night lights in business places required. 
(a)  The owner and operator of every place of business located within the city shall provide a night light or watchman light to be located within the premises of such place of business. 
(b)  The night light or watchman light referred to in subsection (a) shall be turned on during the hours of darkness and such light shall be sufficient to establish enough light over the entire part of the building so as to provide sufficient illumination to disclose whether any person is inside the building. 
(Code 1959, §§ 14-17, 14-18; Code 1981, § 11-1-14) 
Sec. 26-2-10. - Pocket pistols, revolvers, derringers; sale, possession, etc.; penalty for violation of section. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess for sale, exhibit for sale, display or advertise for the purpose of sale, any 0.22 caliber pistol, revolver or derringer with a barrel three inches or less in length, which sells at a retail price of less than $39.00. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, to possess for sale, exhibit for sale, display or advertise for the purpose of sale, any pistol, revolver or derringer described in subsection (a), designed and manufactured to fire blank cartridges and ammunition containing explosive charges only, if that pistol, revolver or derringer may be adapted to fire cartridges and ammunition containing projectiles; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any pistol, revolver or derringer to be used in any organized high school, college, professional or other recognized athletic events. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or confinement for 90 days. 
(Code 1959, § 14-21; Code 1981, § 11-1-17) 
Sec. 26-2-11. - Railroads; getting on or off while moving; lounging around grounds. 
    No person but railroad employees or bona fide railroad passengers shall get on or off a moving train, or loaf or lounge in or around any depot or grounds of any railroad in the city. 
(Code 1959, § 14-23; Code 1981, § 11-1-18) 
Sec. 26-2-12. - Display of adult materials to minors. 
(a)  No seller and/or distributor of any magazine, periodical and/or publication of any nature depicting or portraying the human body, male or female, in any state of nudity, either on the cover or the back page or on any page included in the magazine, periodical and/or publication shall display said magazine, periodical and/or publication in such a manner that the magazine can be seen or accessed by persons 17 years of age or younger. 
(b)  In order to comply with this section, it will be sufficient for sellers and/or distributors to wrap such publications in an opaque or nontransparent wrapper so that only the title may be seen. In addition, any stand or display containing such materials shall not place such materials in a position where persons 17 years of age or younger can have unsupervised access to such materials. Further, any display and/or stand containing such materials must maintain such materials at least five feet in height from the floor. 
(c)  No seller and/or distributor shall allow persons 17 years of age or younger to scan, read and/or peruse such materials while in the possession of such seller or distributor. 
(d)  For the purposes of this section, the term "nudity" shall include photographic depictions of any person unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing so as to expose to view any portion of the female areola, any portion of the anus, vulva, male or female genitals, cleft of the buttocks, or attached male or female pubic hair, which, in the totality of the circumstances taken as a whole, predominantly appeal to the prurient, shameful, or morbid interests of minors; is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors; and is, when taken as a whole, lacking in serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value for minors. 
(Code 1959, § 14-27; Code 1981, § 11-1-20; Ord. No. 95-05, § 1, 7-11-1995) 
Sec. 26-2-13. - Operation of public address system within city limits. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a public address system within the city limits unless before operating the system, the operator shall have received a permit from the police department. 
(b)  Upon conviction for violation of this section, a fine of $50.00 or ten days or both may be levied by the municipal court. 
(Code 1959, § 14-28; Code 1981, § 11-1-21) 
Sec. 26-2-14. - Depositing material on property; removing material therefrom. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any stones, dirt, brush, rubbish, debris, or other unsightly articles or matter of any kind on any sidewalks, public streets, parks, church lot, school-house lot, railroad right-of-way, or anywhere else in the city, except on his own premises or on the premises of others with their consent, or to take any earth, sand or rocks from any of such places without the consent of the owner thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 14-13; Code 1981, § 11-1-23) 
Sec. 26-2-15. - Alcoholic beverages on premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has been issued a license to do business in the city to allow any person to carry on or consume alcoholic beverages at or in that location for which the license has been issued; except, however, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit lawful consumption at places otherwise authorized by this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1-24) 
Sec. 26-2-16. - Drinking in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous, malt or alcoholic beverage in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way or public place in the city, or within any public building except at city-sponsored events where alcoholic beverage consumption is allowed and at places with on-premises alcohol beverage licenses. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1-25) 
Sec. 26-2-17. - Noises prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person willingly to make, continue or cause to be made or continued, or to allow to continue after warning, any loud, unnecessary, unusual or excessive noise between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time in residential areas, which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of a normal sensitiveness residing in the area. Such noise sensitiveness shall be deemed breached by evidence of noise in excess of 70 decibels as measured at the nearest receiving property line. Where a violation is perceived by the city to be occurring absent a report of noise disturbance from a nearby property, or the nearest receiving property line is not readily apparent or accessible, such measurement shall take place from the public right-of-way adjacent to the property from which the noise source originates. 
(b)  In the event such prohibited noise is accompanied by the use of alcohol, a separate violation shall be committed pursuant to this subsection 26-2-17(b). In addition to the penalties authorized by section 1-1-8, a violation of this subsection 26-2-17(b) may also provide a basis for revocation, refusal to renew, suspension, or probation of an alcohol beverage license under subsection 5-6-21(b). 
(c)  The discharge, use, or ignition of fireworks within the city limits is generally prohibited as violation of this section, which serves as the city's general noise ordinance, unless otherwise permitted for use under the requirements of section 26-2-4. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1-27; Ord. No. 81-6, § 2, 9-9-1981; Ord. No. 2014-02, § 1, 2-4-2014; Ord. No. 2014-03, § 1, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 2018-10 , § 1, 8-21-2018) 
Sec. 26-2-18. - Indecent exposure by entertainers or employees. 
    No person engaged in entertaining at, nor any employees of, an establishment licensed to do business in the city shall appear on the premises at any time in clothing where the unclothed display of the human mammary glands, nipples or any part of the glands below the nipples, or buttocks occurs or is thinly disguised, nor shall any pasties or "g-strings" be permitted to be worn except as underwear. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1-28; Ord. No. 81-6, 9-9-1981) 
Sec. 26-2-19. - Loitering. 
(a)  Loitering shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idling, loafing, walking around aimlessly, or sitting on cars, trucks, or other vehicles, and also include the colloquial expression, "hanging around." It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in the city on public property or private property that is open to the general public in such a manner so as to: 
(1)  Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace; 
(2)  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(3)  Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place; 
(4)  Be at a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law abiding individuals under circumstances which would warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property within the vicinity; or 
(5)  Seek to, solicit, pander, or otherwise engage in any conduct or activity in public for purposes of procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, as defined in section 26-2-19, in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting, pandering, or procuring another to commit a sexual act for hire. This section is not intended to limit any person from exercising their right to assemble or engage in any other constitutionally protected activity. This section applies to all persons with the requisite intent to induce another to engage in a sexual act for hire. 
(c)  A police officer who observes a person loitering under circumstances that provide the officer with an articulable suspicion to believe a sexual act for hire has occurred or is occurring, may detain the individual for the purpose of investigating whether the person is in violation of this section. 
(d)  A police officer may detain an individual under this section if an element from subsection (1) and an element from subsection (2) or both elements from subsection (3) below are satisfied: 
(1)  The person engages in one or more of the following behaviors: 
a.  Repeatedly circling the block in a motor vehicle; 
b.  Stopping a motor vehicle in a county roadway to beckon to, stop, or engage with persons on the side of the road; 
c.  Repeatedly stopping or attempting to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any bodily gesture; 
d.  Driving around or sitting in a parked car in a parking lot or vacant lot; and 
(2)  One of the following factors applies: 
a.  The officer has knowledge of a specific reliable tip concerning unlawful prostitution-related activity at a specific location, and the person who is found loitering is doing so at a time, in a place or in a manner that is otherwise consistent with the details provided in the tip; 
b.  The person is loitering in an area that is known to be a common location for prostitution-related activity; 
c.  The person is on the premises of a hotel or other business that is associated with an advertisement for prostitution-related activity; 
d.  The person is a non-resident of the area, and is present in the area outside of normal business hours and without legitimate business in the area; 
e.  The officer knows that the person has been previously convicted of loitering with the intention of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire under this section; or 
f.  Any vehicle the person has approached or communicated through is registered to an individual who has been convicted of an unlawful prostitution-related activity in the previous three years, and the officer is aware of that fact. 
(3)  a.  The person enters or is present in a hotel room that is not registered to said person; and 
b.  The person is on the premises of a hotel that is associated with an advertisement for prostitution-related activity. 
(e)  For purposes of this section "sexual act for hire" means conduct which constitutes an offense defined in O.C.G.A. title 16, chapter 6, as amended; conduct which constitutes complicity to commit such an offense; or conduct which constitutes conspiracy to commit such an offense. 
(f)  Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of the offense of loitering for the purpose of committing a sexual act for hire and shall be subject to the maximum fine of $1,000.00 for the first offence. 
(g)  Notwithstanding the provisions set in subsection (f), no citation shall be issued for violation of subsections (a)(1) through (a)(3) of this section unless a duly authorized law enforcement officer has made at least one warning that such person's conduct is a violation of this section. No citation for violation shall be issued for violation of subsection (a)(4) of this section unless a duly authorized law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this provision, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under subsection (a)(4) if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. Relocating from one position to another and regrouping or generally "hanging around" shall be prima facie evidence of intent to continue an unlawful act under this section and shall constitute a new offense after having been dispersed or cited for an offense under this provision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11 , § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-2-20. - Brown-bagging. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  "Brown-bagging" means the bringing, taking, or carrying of any alcoholic beverage into a business licensed to operate within the city, but not licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises, provided that bringing an alcoholic beverage into a house, apartment, room or other units designed for private residential occupancy shall not fall within this definition. 
(2)  Brown-bagging shall include the following prohibited acts: 
a.  Any person who brown-bags; 
b.  Any person participating in consumption of any alcoholic beverage being brown-bagged; 
c.  Any person who consumes an alcoholic beverage on any premises holding a business license, except for those premises licensed for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages or otherwise exempted from the definition of brown-bagging by virtue of the private residential character of the occupancy; 
d.  Any employee of the business establishment in whose presence brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs. 
(b)  Brown-bagging is prohibited within the city. 
(c)  The business license of any premises upon which brown-bagging knowingly or with reckless indifference occurs shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the mayor and council. Such a suspension or revocation action shall follow the procedures outlined in section 5-2-1 of this Code. Any conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the municipal court to a charge of brown-bagging shall be admissible in any license suspension or revocation proceeding. 
(d)  Temporary exemption. Nothing within this section shall prohibit a licensed establishment from engaging in alcohol related activities in a manner which is expressly permitted by the state under the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code. This exemption shall remain in effect until December 31, 2016 or until the effective date of the city's pending comprehensive update of chapter 5 of the city's Alcohol Beverages Code, whichever occurs sooner. 
(Code 1981, § 11-1-32; Ord. No. 94-29, § 1, 11-1-1994; Ord. No. 2016-14 , § 2, 6-21-2016; Ord. No. 2016-23 , § 2, 9-20-2016) 
Sec. 26-2-21. - Obstructing, resisting public officers and employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to hinder, obstruct or impede any police officer, firefighter, or other city employee in the discharge of any duty, or to menace or threaten such officer, firefighter, or employee in the discharge of any duty. No person shall, within the city, follow any police officer while in charge of a prisoner after such person has been commanded to desist, or after any crowd shall have been commanded to disperse. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 26-2-22. - Impersonating public officers and employees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card, or any other insignia of office, like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted, worn, or carried by any officer or employee of the city, unless such person is an official officer or employee of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 26-2-23. - False reports of crime. 
    No person within the city shall make to, or file with, the police department of the city, or any police officer of the city, any false, misleading, or unfounded statement, or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any ordinance violation occurring within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 26-2-24. - Indecency in public prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to appear wholly or partially naked in public. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 26-2-25. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful in the city for any person: 
(1)  To offer to commit, or to commit, or to engage in, prostitution; 
(2)  To solicit, induce, entice or procure another to commit prostitution; 
(3)  To reside in, enter or remain in any place, structure or building, or to enter or remain in any conveyance, for the purpose of prostitution. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 26-2-26. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess one ounce or less of marijuana within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No person alleged to have violated subsection (a) above shall be allowed to elect to be treated as an ordinance violator other than on the first such occasion of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 2011-09, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 26-2-27. - Juvenile curfew. 
(a)  Title of section. This section shall be known as the City of Hapeville Juvenile Curfew Ordinance. 
(b)  Findings and purpose. It is the responsibility of the mayor and council to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens. The mayor and council are concerned about the criminal activity engaged in by and against minors especially those crimes that occur after hours and/or at times in which juveniles should be at home. A child curfew ordinance is one initiative in protecting our children from being the victims and perpetrators of crime. In an effort to keep our communities drug free and our streets safe by reducing the number of crimes that are committed by and against minors after hours, the mayor and council believe that a child curfew ordinance is in the best interest of the citizens of the city. Accordingly, the city finds and declares that the purpose of this section is to reduce the number of crimes committed by and against juveniles after hours, and to safeguard the welfare of our citizens. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult means a person who is at least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor, or is an emancipated minor. 
    Curfew hours means 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day, and 11:59 p.m. on any Friday or Saturday until 6:00 a.m. on the following day. 
    Emancipated minor means: 
(1)  Any person under the age of 18 years who is or has been married or who is not under the care, custody, and control of a parent, parents, guardian, person standing in locus parentis, or the juvenile court of competent jurisdiction; or 
(2)  Any person under the age of 18 years who has had the disabilities of minority removed by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
    Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term "emergency" includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
    Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    Guardian means a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court. 
    Minor means any person 17 years of age or under. 
    Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term "operator" includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and officers of a corporation. 
    Parent means a person who is a natural parent, an adopted parent, or stepparent of another person. 
    Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access that includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops. 
    Remain means linger or stay, or fail to leave premises when requested to do so by an officer or the owner, operator, or the person in control of the premises. 
    Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that causes death or creates a substantial risk of serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(d)  Persons 17 years of age or younger. Curfew for persons 17 years of age or younger is as follows: 
(1)  It is unlawful for any minor, to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public places, streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, establishments, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any place in the city unsupervised by an adult, parent, or guardian having the lawful authority to be in such places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. on the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays the effective hours are between 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian, or other person having custody or control of any minor 17 years of age or younger to knowingly or, by insufficient control, to allow such minor to be in or upon the public place, streets or any other places listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided by subsection (f) of this section. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a minor to be in or upon the premises of an establishment in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. the following day, or on Fridays and Saturdays between the hours of 11:59 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day, except as provided by subsection (f) of this section. 
(e)  Offenses. 
(1)  Minor. A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  Parent or guardian. A parent or a guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  Owner, operator or employee. An owner, operator, or employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain in or upon the premises of any establishment in the city during curfew hours. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(f)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian, or other adult having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  When the minor is upon an errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of such minor, or if such minor is seeking medical treatment; 
(3)  When the minor is returning directly home from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity, or dance; 
(4)  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  When the minor is attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly, or free exercise of religion; 
(6)  When the minor is in a motor vehicle of parental consent for normal travel. All cases of interstate travel through the city are excepted from the curfew; 
(7)  When the minor is an emancipated minor; 
(8)  When the minor is involved in an emergency; 
(9)  When the minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting (a) the minor's residence, or (b) the residence of the minor's next-door-neighbor(s), if said neighbor has not complained to the police. 
(g)  Violations and penalties. Penalties for violation of this section are as follows: 
(1)  Adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee. Upon conviction of a violation of this section for the first time, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be given a warning citation. Upon further convictions, an adult, parent, guardian or owner, operator or employee of an establishment shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for not more than 180 days, or by both. 
(2)  Minor. Adjudication of violations of this section by minors shall be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-11-1 et seq. 
(h)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, the police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and the reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances that no exception listed in subsection (f) of this section is present. 
(Ord. No. 2012-09, § 1, 2-5-2013) 
Secs. 26-2-28-26-2-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-09, § 1, adopted July 20, 2010, repealed the former section 26-2-30 in its entirety, which pertained to trees which present a dangerous condition, and derived from the Code of 1981, § 11-1-33, and Ord. No. 94-34, § 1, adopted December 6, 1994. 
Sec. 26-2-40. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section shall have the following meanings ascribed to them: 
    Aerosol paint container means any canister, can, bottle, container, or other receptacle which contains any substance commonly known as paint, stain, dye, and/or any other pigmented substance which is and/or can be modified to contain pressure, or be pressurized, in order to impel and/or propel any such substance. 
    Etcher means any tool, device, instrument, and/or mechanism including, but not limited to, any tool, device, instrument, or mechanism commonly known as "glass etcher," "metal etcher," "cutting instrument," or "drill bit," that can be applied by pressure or contact with any surface to cause markings on said surface. 
    Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, symbol, design, word, figure, painting, and/or other defacement that is written, drawn, scribed, etched, marked, painted, stained, scratched, sprayed, engraved, stuck on or affixed to any surface, public or private. 
    Graffiti implement means an aerosol paint container, marker, paint stick, etcher, brush, gum label, or any other instrument or device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or manmade surface. 
    Gum label means any substance consisting of a material such as, but not limited to, paper, fabric, cloth, plastic, vinyl, and/or any other similar material, where the material also contains one or more surfaces containing a substance such as, but not limited to, any material commonly known as an adhesive or glue, which cannot be removed from the surface in an intact condition and with minimal efforts, including, but not limited to, decals, stickers, patches, stamps, or labels. 
    Marker means any implement commonly known as an indelible or permanent-ink marker and/or marking pen and/or any other similar implement which contains any pigmented substance including, but not limited to, ink or any other substance which cannot be easily and completely removed with water after said substance has dried and where the width of the marking is 1? of one inch or greater. 
    Paint stick means any device which contains any substance, solid or liquid, including, but not limited to, any form of any substance commonly known as paint, ink, chalk, wax, epoxy, and/or any other similar substance, which can be applied to any surface by such means as applying pressure to and/or contacting any surface in such a way as to leave any visible mark measuring at least 1/16 of one inch at any point. 
(b)  Prohibition of graffiti placement. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or apply graffiti to any public or private property. 
(c)  Prohibition of possession of graffiti implements. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in, on, at, or about any private property without the owner's or occupant's permission. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any graffiti implement while in, on, at, or about any public property, including, but not limited to, city hall, the Hapeville War Memorial, fire departments, the police department, public works, public parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, recreational facilities, schools, school grounds, libraries, court houses, utility stations, storm drains, or any other publicly owned, operated, and/or maintained facility. Exceptions to this subsection are as follows: 
a.  Any minor who is enrolled in an education class which requires possession of any graffiti implement for use in such education class may possess such graffiti implement at the school and on the school grounds of such education class provided the minor is authorized to do so by a school official or the minor has written consent from his or her parent or lawfully designated guardian, dated and signed; and 
b.  Any officer, employee, or agent of the public entity that owns the public property may possess graffiti implement thereon if such possession of the graffiti implement is authorized by the public entity. 
(3)  This section does not apply to prohibit the possession of graffiti implements on public sidewalks or streets. 
(d)  Graffiti placement and possession penalties. Any person who is convicted of placing or possessing graffiti in violation of subsections (b) or (c) shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with section 1-1-8 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. Additional fines and/or imprisonment may be assessed for any conviction related to public property as outlined in subsection (c). The court may suspend or probate a portion or its entire sentence upon such conditions to include, but not limited to, restoring the property so defaced, damaged, or destroyed, paying restitution to the person or entity that paid for the restoration of the property so defaced, damaged, or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(e)  Removal of graffiti. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any property to permit property that is defaced with graffiti to remain so defaced for a period in excess of seven days after written notice is given. In the event the period for removal will exceed seven days, a reasonable plan of action shall be submitted by the property owner within three days of written notice. 
(2)  Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti or any property, a police officer or code enforcement officer shall give or cause to be given written notice to the property owner to remove such graffiti therefrom. 
(3)  The notice required by this section may be served by personal service or registered or certified mail addressed to the owner or the last known address of said owner. If this address is unknown, the notice shall be sent to the property address. Such notice shall allow seven days from the date of notice for removal of the identified graffiti or three days from the date of notice to provide a reasonable plan of action. 
(4)  For the purposes of giving notice to the owner of the property, the person shown as the owner of said property on the tax records of the city shall be sent such notice at the address shown thereon unless the city receives actual notice that another person owns said property. In addition, the owner of the property may notify the city that the tenant, pursuant to a written lease, has control of the property or has control of that portion of the building on which the graffiti is located and, in the event the city receives such notice, the city shall notify the tenant of the notice of removal as provided in this section and proceed against the tenant and not the owner. 
(5)  A property owner or tenant that has received proper notice of the presence of graffiti on the property as set forth above shall have seven days from the date of that written notice to remove the graffiti themselves or through the use of a third party or three days from the date of that written notice to provide a reasonable plan of action. 
(f)  Penalties for failure to remove graffiti. 
(1)  Any property owner or tenant who fails to remove the graffiti prior to the expiration of the seven days following the written notice provided or fails to provide a reasonable plan of action prior to the expiration of the three days from the date of the written notice pursuant to subsection (e) is in violation of this section. 
(2)  Upon a property owner's or tenant's failure to remove the graffiti before the expiration of the seven days following the written notice or failure to provide a reasonable plan of action prior to the expiration of the three days from the date of the written notice as provided pursuant to subsection (e), the city may take any necessary action to remove, repaint, or repair the graffiti-damaged property and may use public funds for such action, the cost of which shall be a lien on the property served. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to undertake such repair, repainting, or removal. 
(3)  Any property owner or tenant who is found guilty of violating subsection (a) shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each seven-day period past the expiration of the seven-day period that the graffiti remains on the property or for each seven-day period past the expiration of the three-day period to provide a reasonable plan of action. Said fines shall not exceed the limits set forth in section 1-1-8 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2008-06, § 1, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 2017-10 , § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 26-2-41. - Human trafficking notice. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Adult entertainment establishment. Any place of business or commercial establishment wherein: 
a.  The entertainment or activity therein consists of nude or substantially nude persons dancing with or without music or engaged in movements of a sexual nature or movements simulating sexual intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, or masturbation; 
b.  The patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee or required to make a purchase in order to view entertainment or activity which consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments; or 
c.  The patron directly or indirectly is charged a fee to engage in personal contact by employees, devices, or equipment, or by personnel provided by the establishment. 
    Such term shall include, but shall not be limited to, bathhouses, lingerie modeling studios, and related or similar activities. Such term shall not include businesses or commercial establishments which have as their sole purpose the improvement of health and physical fitness through special equipment and facilities, rather than entertainment. 
(2)  Agricultural products. The raising, growing, harvesting, or storing crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock, equine, or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, equine, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, Christmas trees, fowl, equine, or animals; or producing aquacultural, horticultural, viticultural, silvicultural, grass sod, dairy, livestock, poultry, egg, and apiarian products. 
(3)  Bar. An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
(4)  Day hauler. Any person who is employed by a farm labor contractor to transport, or who for a fee transports, by motor vehicle, workers to render personal services in connection with the production of any farm products to, for, or under the direction of a third person; provided, however, that such term shall not include a person who produces agricultural products. 
(5)  Farm labor contractor. Any person who, for a fee, employs workers to render personal services in connection with the production of any farm products to, for, or under the direction of a third person, or who recruits, solicits, supplies, or hires workers on behalf of an employer engaged in the growing or producing of farm products, and who, for a fee, provides in connection therewith one or more of the following services: furnishes board, lodging, or transportation for those workers; supervises, times, checks, counts, weighs, or otherwise directs or measures their work; or disburses wage payments to such persons; provided, however, that such term shall not include a person who produces agricultural products. 
(6)  Government building with public access. A building or portion of a building owned or leased by a government entity. 
(7)  Government entity. An office, agency, authority, department, commission, board, body, division, instrumentality, or institution of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the state government and any county, municipal corporation, or consolidated government within this state. 
(8)  Hotel. Any hotel, inn, or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire. 
(9)  Massage therapist. A person licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-24A. 
(10)  Primary airport. A commercial service airport that has more than 10,000 passenger boardings each year. 
(11)  Substantially nude means dressed in a manner so as to display any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or displaying any portion of any person's pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, or genitals. 
(12)  Truck stop means a privately owned and operated facility that provides food, fuel, shower or other sanitary facilities, and lawful overnight truck parking. 
(b)  The following businesses and other establishments shall post the notice described in subsection (c) of this Code section, or a substantially similar notice, in English, Spanish, and any other language deemed appropriate by the director of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, in each public restroom for the business or establishment and either in a conspicuous place near the public entrance of the business or establishment or in another conspicuous location in clear view of the public and employees where similar notices are customarily posted: 
(1)  Adult entertainment establishments; 
(2)  Bars; 
(3)  Primary airports; 
(4)  Passenger rail or light rail stations; 
(5)  Bus stations; 
(6)  Truck stops; 
(7)  Emergency rooms within general acute care hospitals; 
(8)  Urgent care centers; 
(9)  Farm labor contractors and day haulers; 
(10)  Privately operated job recruitment centers; 
(11)  Safety rest areas located along interstate highways in this state; 
(12)  Hotels; 
(13)  Businesses and establishments that offer massage or bodywork services by a person who is not a massage therapist; and 
(14)  Government buildings; provided, however, that in the case of leased property, this paragraph shall only apply to public restrooms that are a part of such lease for exclusive use by the government entity. 
(c)  The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall develop a model notice that is available for download from its Internet website. Such notice shall be at least eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size and printed in a 16 point font in English, Spanish, and any other language deemed appropriate by the director of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation. Such model notice shall provide information giving individuals a method to contact the National Human Trafficking Hotline and the statewide Georgia Hotline for Domestic Minor Trafficking. 
(d)  Every government entity shall, on the homepage of its website, provide an identified hyperlink to the model notice that is on the Georgia Bureau of Investigation website as provided for in subsection (c) of this Code section. 
(e)  (1)  A law enforcement officer shall notify, in writing, any business or establishment that has failed to comply with this Code section that it has failed to comply with the requirements of this Code section and if it does not correct the violation within 30 days from the date of receipt of the notice, the owner of such business or establishment shall be charged with a violation of this Code section and upon conviction shall be guilty of the misdemeanor offense of failure to post the National Human Trafficking Resource Center hotline number and may be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00; but the provisions of chapter 11 of title 17 and any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the costs of such prosecution shall not be taxed nor shall any additional penalty, fee, or surcharge to a fine for such offense be assessed against an owner for conviction thereof. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, the owner shall be guilty of a high and aggravated misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $5,000.00. The notice required by this subsection may be hand delivered to the noncomplying business or establishment or mailed to it at the address of such business or establishment. 
(2)  This subsection shall not apply to government entities. 
(Ord. No. 2018-16 , § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Chapter 29 - PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL AFFAIRS 

Sec. 29-1-1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the terms below are defined as follows: 
    Authorized official shall mean any referee, coach, umpire, manager, city employee, nonprofit executive board member or other person designated, pursuant to an act of the director, as an individual empowered to exercise any authority concerning a city facility. 
    City shall mean the City of Hapeville. 
    Department shall mean the department of recreation, parks, buildings and grounds. 
    Director shall mean the director of the department of recreation, parks, buildings and grounds. 
    Facility shall mean any or all city parks and recreation facilities. 
    Glass beverage container shall mean any bottle, pitcher, cup, or similar container or object made of glass, in whole or in part, and that is intended for use or is otherwise used to resent, store, or contain beverages or consumable liquids of any form. 
(Code 1981, § 7-1-1; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 29-1-2. - Park hours; violations. 
(a)  All city facilities shall be opened as authorized by the director or by the mayor and council. The director shall from time to time file with the city clerk a schedule of hours of operation for such facilities as he deems appropriate. The director may post the hours of operation of each facility in the places he and the mayor and council deem appropriate. 
(b)  Any group or individual desiring to use such city facilities at times not permitted by the then existing schedule of hours of operation may make application for an activity permit to the director. The director may grant any such permit he deems to be a fit and proper use of the facility. 
(c)  City facilities are available for use by any group or individual, subject to applicable laws and rules, without regard to race, creed, color, gender, national origin or any other basis impermissible under city, state or federal law. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in any city facility when the facility is closed unless such person is engaged in activities authorized by the department or by the mayor and council. Any person convicted of violating this section may be punished in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 7-1-2; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 29-1-3. - Powers of the director. 
(a)  Rules and regulations. The director is hereby empowered to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, consistent with city, state and federal law, governing the use, maintenance, and operation of city facilities. 
(b)  Designation of officials. The director is hereby empowered to designate and classify such city authorized officials as he deems appropriate for the care and maintenance of city facilities and the operation of the department. This power is subject to budgetary constraints imposed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Fees and charges. 
(1)  The director or the mayor and council shall have the power to authorize nonprofit organizations to collect entrance/admission fees to city parks and recreation facilities for activities scheduled through the director. 
(2)  A schedule of fees and charges for all recreational activities may be established by the director or mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 7-1-3; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 4-7-1998) 
Sec. 29-1-4. - Certain conduct prohibited. 
(a)  Disorderly conduct in parks. 
(1)  In addition to the behavior proscribed by section 26-2-1, when any person is on the premises of a city facility, it shall be unlawful and disorderly conduct for any person to: 
a.  Congregate with other individuals to halt recreation activities scheduled by the department; 
b.  Refuse to leave a facility due to misconduct or violation of rules and regulations of the department when directed by an authorized city official; 
c.  Carry or use anything as a weapon; 
d.  Be in possession of any alcoholic beverage except as otherwise provided in subsection 5-3-2(o); 
e.  Smoke except in designated areas during city-sponsored events. 
(2)  Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 or by more severe punishment in the discretion of the municipal court in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(b)  Glass beverage containers prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of a glass beverage container within any city facility. 
(2)  Upon conviction for violation of this section, a fine of up to $100.00 may be levied by the municipal court. 
(Code 1981, § 7-1-4; Ord. No. 98-09, § 1, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 2009-04, § 2, 4-7-2009; Ord. No. 2011-13, § 1, 10-4-2011) 
Chapter 32 - SECONDHAND GOODS 
ARTICLE 2. - YARD SALES 

Sec. 32-2-1. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, a "yard sale" is defined as the sale or trading, of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course or business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as outlined above, by a person not regularly engaged in such business. Such goods or merchandise do not need to be attended for a sale to be deemed to be in existence. The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, carport sales and similar types of sales or events. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-1; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-2. - Permit required. 
(a)  At least 24 hours prior to conducting a yard sale, a permit for the yard sale shall be secured from the building official of the city. Upon application for a permit, an applicant shall be given the opportunity to review the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Information presented by the applicant for a yard sale permit shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the person conducting, operating, sponsoring, and/or promoting a sale regulated herein; 
(2)  Location at which the sale is to be conducted; 
(3)  The date or dates on which the sale is to be conducted; and 
(4)  The time period or periods of the day during which it is proposed to carry on the sale. 
(c)  If information submitted by the applicant indicates that the proposed yard sale activity will be in compliance with the provisions of this article, a permit for the yard sale shall be issued without charge by the building official of the city. If it is determined by the building official that a permit should not be issued, that determination shall be appealable to the mayor and council. All permits shall be available for official inspection at any and all times during the sale. Each permit shall be valid only for the time and place specified in the application. The word "person" herein shall be taken to mean individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, clubs, associations or any other such groups. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-2; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-3. - Time restrictions. 
    Yard sales shall not be allowed at the same location for more than a total of two days in any calendar year. Permits will be issued in one- or two-day increments only. Yard sales shall be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-3; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981; Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 2-2-2010) 
Sec. 32-2-4. - Area restrictions. 
    Yard sales shall be allowed only on lots within the city containing a residence thereon and zoned for residential purposes or currently being used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-4; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-5. - Traffic and parking. 
    The individual in charge of the premises upon which the sale is conducted shall control the parking of vehicles of patrons so as to avoid congestion and hazardous conditions. Failure to do so shall be sufficient cause for the sale to be immediately terminated by officials of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-5; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-6. - Signs; advertising. 
    No signs advertising or calling attention to or giving directions to or in any way advertising or concerning a yard sale shall be permitted other than as provided in article 3.3 of chapter 93 of this Code; except one nonilluminated sign, not to exceed two square feet, may be posted advertising the sale, only on the property listed on the permit and application, as the premises on which the sale is to be conducted. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-6; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-7. - Display of merchandise. 
    All display of yard sale merchandise shall be limited to that portion of the front yard area which is at least five feet back from the property line on all sides, and ten feet back from any curb or road edge. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-7; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-8. - Commercial promotion of sale activity. 
    No individual, firm, corporation, or partnership shall be permitted to engage in the business of promoting or conducting yard sales for others for a fee or other consideration. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-8; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-9. - Inspection for violation. 
    For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, the city, its proper nominees, representatives and employees shall have the right to enter upon any premises showing evidence of a garage sale and may close the premises to such a sale where any provisions of this article are being violated. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-9; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Sec. 32-2-10. - Penalty. 
    Violation of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 8-6-10; Ord. No. 81-2, 3-3-1981) 
Chapter 35 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Obstructions in street, grant of right to erect, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1-1. - Street repairs. 
    The public service department shall maintain and repair the streets and sidewalks of the city as may be needed and shall have authority to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-1; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-2. - Permit to dig in street, sidewalk or right-of-way-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or any other public place for the installation, repair or removal of any pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole, or any other facility or installation or for any other purpose without first obtaining from the director an excavation permit in compliance with this chapter. As used in this chapter, the term "person" shall mean any person, company, partnership, agency or other public or private entity, excepting the city or a contractor performing an excavation for the city, and the term "director" shall mean the director of the department of public services for the city or his or her authorized representative. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-2; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-3. - Same-Application requirements. 
(a)  Before issuing an excavation permit, the director shall require a written application on a form furnished by the director, setting forth: 
(1)  The name and residence or business address of the applicant; 
(2)  The location and approximate area of the excavation, including its approximate length and width, and, if the excavation is in a street, whether it is parallel or transverse to the direction of the travel lanes; and 
(3)  The purpose of the excavation. The applicant shall attach to the application form a plan showing the location of the proposed excavation, the dimensions thereof, and any other details the director may require. As used in this chapter, the term "applicant" shall mean the person applying for an excavation permit, as well as the person owning the facility or installation for which the excavation will be made. The director may establish different requirements for blanket permits issued under section 35-1-14. 
(b)  At the time the permit is issued, the applicant shall pay a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to defray the city's costs to process the application and to inspect the excavation. The fee may also include any costs incurred by the city to maintain an inventory or database of facilities that are installed, repaired or removed during the excavation for which the permit is issued. In any case where the director determines the fee to be inappropriate based on the amount of work to be done to process the application, to inspect the excavation and to maintain said inventory or database, or for other good cause shown, the director may waive the fee, in whole or in part. 
(c)  At the time any permit is issued for excavation of a paved street, the applicant shall pay a trench cut cost recovery fee, in addition to the fee required by subsection (b) above. The fee shall not exceed an amount reasonably necessary to recover the estimated costs for all future maintenance, repair or resurfacing that would be necessary to fully mitigate the damage and degradation caused by the excavation to the pavement located adjacent to the trench where the excavation occurs. The fee shall be highest for excavations in newly surfaced streets and shall decrease as the age of the street surface being excavated increases. The amount of the trench cut cost recovery fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(d)  The trench cut cost recovery fee required by subsection (c), above, shall not be charged for the following excavations: 
(1)  Excavations in a street that the city has scheduled for resurfacing either during the fiscal year (July 1 through June 30) when the excavation permit is issued or during the immediately following fiscal year; 
(2)  Excavations for potholing or to install utility poles; 
(3)  Excavations that will include resurfacing of the street where the excavation is made, provided that the resurfacing is approved by the director; and 
(4)  Excavations made for a utility relocation required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of a street, alley, sidewalk right-of-way, or other public place. As used in this chapter, the term "resurfacing" shall mean any repaving, overlay, seal or reconstruction which constructs a new pavement surface over the entire width of the street, excluding crack seals. 
(e)  All moneys paid to the city under subsection (c), above, shall be deposited in a special fund or funds and shall be expended only for the resurfacing of city streets and rights-of-way where excavation has occurred after the effective date of the ordinance adopting subsection (c). 
(f)  Except for requirements subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of another regulatory agency, the location, depth and other physical characteristics of any facilities for which an excavation permit is issued shall be subject to approval of the director, and all backfilling, compaction and pavement restoration performed for any excavation shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. In reviewing a permit application, the director shall consider: 
(1)  The degree of interruption of traffic flow; 
(2)  Degree of soil and street disturbance; 
(3)  Current utility services laid within the proposed area of excavation; 
(4)  The need for future expansion of existing services within the proposed area of excavation; and 
(5)  Such other considerations deemed appropriate by the director. 
(g)  No fee or requirement authorized or imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be construed to affect or alter in any way any obligation of public and private utilities with facilities installed in any street, alley, sidewalk or other public place to relocate the facilities at no cost to the city, in the event that relocation is required by the city to accommodate a proper governmental use of the street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-3; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-4. - Same-Issuance. 
(a)  Upon receiving a written application for an excavation permit and a plan, the director shall set forth all requirements, approve or disapprove the application, sign and return it to the applicant. Excepting only excavations made pursuant to section 35-1-13, Emergency excavations, and section 35-1-14, Blanket permits, at least three working days prior to the start of work, the applicant shall telephone the public services department and request a permit number, informing the city the date the work will commence. A permit number shall then be assigned to the job and a permit shall be sent to the applicant. 
(b)  No permit shall be transferable. A permit shall be void unless the excavation to be made pursuant thereto is commenced within 30 days from the date of its issuance and the work diligently completed. 
(c)  Each permit shall state a time period for completion of all the work to be done thereunder. The director may grant extensions of time for good cause. 
(d)  No person in violation of any requirement of this chapter shall be issued an excavation permit, nor shall any contractor or agent apply for or be issued an excavation permit on the person's behalf, until the outstanding violation is corrected or a plan for correction is approved by the director, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. The foregoing requirement is in addition to any penalty or remedy for violation that may be imposed or sought by the city at law or equity. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-4; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-5. - Compliance with safety regulations. 
    The permittee shall be responsible to comply with all current federal, state and local safety regulations and requirements. As used in this chapter, the term "permittee" shall mean the person to whom an excavation permit is issued, as well as the person owning the facility or installation for which the excavation permit is issued. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-5; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-6. - Excavations not in accordance with permit declared unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, cause or permit to be made any excavation, or to install, cause or permit to be installed any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, utility pole or other utility or appliance in or under the surface of any public street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or other public place, at any location, other than that described in the application for the excavation permit and as shown on the plans filed with the director, and in accordance with the requirements of the permit. If the circumstances appearing after the excavation is commenced make it impossible to comply with the permit, the director may grant a waiver to take the circumstances into account. 
(b)  Failure to comply with requirements set forth in this chapter or on any permit shall be cause for revocation of the permit until the violations have been corrected or alternative requirements have been approved by the director. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-6; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-7. - Restoration of pavement. 
    Unless otherwise specified in the permit, restoration of the asphalt pavement of any street, alley or other public place shall be performed by city forces or pursuant to contract with the city. Nothing in this section shall relieve the person opening or tearing up any pavement from the responsibility to maintain the excavation or installation in a safe condition until it is repaved by city forces or otherwise restored. In addition to all other applicable fees or charges, the person making the street cut shall pay for repaving at a rate to be established by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-7; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-8. - Opening, backfilling and paving trenches. 
(a)  No trench shall be opened in any street, sidewalk, public right-of-way or other public place for the purpose of laying pipes, conduits or ducts more than 400 feet in advance of the pipe, conduit or ducts being placed in the trench, except when the prior written consent of the director has been obtained. 
(b)  All excavations shall comply with the standards and requirements established from time to time by the director for compaction, backfill and pavement restoration. The standards and requirements may impose different requirements for different excavations, taking into consideration relevant factors, such as: 
(1)  The location, type and extent of excavation performed; 
(2)  The condition of the surface being excoriated; and 
(3)  The period of time elapsed since the construction or most recent resurfacing of the surface being excavated. 
The standards and requirements shall be reviewed at least once every five years to determine whether any changes can be made to prevent or substantially reduce the degradation and damage caused to the street surface by excavation. As part of such review, the director shall provide affected utilities with an opportunity to review and comment upon the standards and requirements and any changes proposed thereto. 
(c)  The debris from pavement excavations and other rubble shall be removed, together with any surplus excavated material, within one working day from the time such material is placed upon the street, provided that exceptions to this requirement may be approved by the director. After backfilling is completed, and prior to repaving the cut, the contractor or permittee shall remove all loose paving material and sawcut the edges of the excavation at the street surface to the satisfaction of the director. 
(d)  Whenever any caving occurs in the sidewalls of any excavation, the pavements above such caving shall be cut away. In no case shall any void under a pavement be filled by any side or lateral tamping. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-8; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-9. - Excavation cleanup. 
    In every case and at all times, the work of removing from the streets, sidewalks, public rights-of-way, or other public places all obstructions, surplus materials, debris and waste matter of every description caused by and accumulated from the excavation shall be the responsibility of the permittee. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-9; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-10. - Repair of sunken pavement over excavation. 
(a)  In case the pavement, sidewalk, or the surface of the street or alley over any excavation should subside or fail due to subsidence or become broken at any time within five years after the excavation has been completed and before resurfacing of the street or alley, natural wear of the surface excepted, the permittee shall, upon written notice from the director, immediately proceed to inspect the depressed or broken area over the excavation to ascertain the cause of the failure. The permittee shall make repairs to the installation or backfill and have the pavement restored as specified by the director, within such time period as may be specified by the director. The trench cut cost recovery fee established by section 35-1-3(c) shall not be charged for work performed under this section. If the pavement is not restored as specified by the director within the time period specified by the director, and unless delayed by conditions beyond the permittee's control, the director may cause the work to be done after giving the permittee 24 hours' final notice. The cost thereof, including any inspection costs and administrative overhead incurred by city, shall be assessed against the permittee. 
(b)  After the cost is paid to the city, the city shall be responsible for any future repairs of that portion of pavement over the excavation that was repaired by city forces. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-10; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-11. - Failure to complete work within specified time. 
    If any part of the work referred to in this chapter is not completed within the time required except by reason of legal holidays or delays caused by strikes, the director may notify in writing the person performing the work to complete the work within 48 hours thereafter, legal holidays excepted. If the work is not completed within this time period, the director shall have full power to perform the work, including such work as will restore the work area to a safe and passable condition until the work can be completed. The cost thereof, including any inspection costs and administrative overhead incurred by city, shall be assessed against the permittee. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-11; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-12. - Excavation to be under supervision of the director. 
    Any person engaged in making or backfilling any excavation in any public street, alley, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public place, shall at all times while such work is in progress keep at the job location the original permit, or a copy thereof, and shall, on demand, exhibit the permit to the director or any police officer. At all times while the work is in progress, the person shall also maintain at the job location a sign, barricade, or other device bearing the person's name and telephone number. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-12; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-13. - Emergency excavations. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person maintaining any pipe, conduit, or duct in or under any street, alley, sidewalk, or other public place by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when the necessity arises, provided that the person making the excavation shall notify the director within one day after the offices of the city are first opened subsequent to the excavation. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-13; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-14. - Blanket permits. 
    The director may issue blanket permits to any person to make excavations for utility service connections, for the location of trouble in utility conduits or pipes and for making repairs thereto, or for emergency purposes. Blanket permits shall be issued on a yearly basis only, and shall authorize only excavations referred to in this section. Except as specifically provided otherwise in this chapter, excavations authorized by this section shall be subject to all fees and requirements of this chapter. Any such excavations made pursuant to a blanket permit shall be reported on a quarterly basis. Such reports shall include all information required for permit application for each such excavation. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-14; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-15. - Liability of city. 
    Neither the city nor any officer or employee thereof shall be held responsible for any damages caused by any excavations in any street, alley, sidewalk, public right-of-way, or other public place made by any person under the authority of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The permittee shall be solely liable for any damage or loss occasioned by any act or omission occurring in connection with the excavation, and shall fully indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its officers and employees from and against any and all suits, actions, judgments, losses, costs, demands, claims, expenses (including attorney's fees), damages, and liabilities of every kind to which the city, its officers or employees may be subjected for injury of any type, death or property damage arising from or connected with any such act or omission. The city shall promptly notify a permittee, at the address set forth in the permit, of any claim or suit served upon the city and alleging negligent or wrongful conduct by the permittee in connection with an excavation. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-15; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-16. - Coordination of excavations. 
(a)  Any utility owning, operating or installing in city streets and rights-of-way, alleys, sidewalks, public rights-of-way or any other public places facilities providing water, sewer, gas, electric, communication, video or other utility services shall prepare and submit to the director a utility master plan, in a format specified by the director, that shows the location of the utility's existing facilities in city streets and rights-of-way, alleys, sidewalks and other public places, and shows all of the utility's planned major utility work in city streets and rights-of-way, alleys, sidewalks and other public places. Utilities shall submit an initial utility master plan no later than 180 days after the effective date of the ordinance adopting this section. Thereafter, each utility shall submit semiannually, on the first regular business day of January and July, a revised and updated utility master plan. As used in this subsection, the term "planned major utility work" refers to any and all future excavations planned by the utility when the utility master plan or update is submitted that will affect any city street, alley, sidewalk or other public place for more than five days, provided that the utility shall not be required to show future excavations planned to occur more than five years after the date that the utility master plan or update is submitted. 
(b)  The director shall make all utility master plans submitted in accordance with subsection (a), above, available for public inspection. 
(c)  Excavations in city streets and rights-of-way disrupt and interfere with the public use of city streets and rights-of-way and damage the pavement. The purpose of this section is to reduce this disruption, interference and damage by promoting better coordination among utilities making excavations in city streets and rights-of-way and between these utilities and the city. Better coordination will assist in minimizing the number of excavations being made wherever feasible, and will ensure that excavations in city streets and rights-of-way are, to the maximum extent possible, performed before, rather than after, the resurfacing of the streets by the city. 
(d)  Coordination also provides a means for utilities to avoid payment of a trench cut cost recovery fee either by eliminating the need for a new excavation, or, if an excavation is made, by allowing the excavation to qualify for an exemption from the trench cut cost recovery fee pursuant to section 35-1-3(d). However, even utilities performing the best possible coordination will find it necessary to make excavations that do not qualify for an exemption from the trench cut cost recovery fee. For this reason, and in order to provide a further incentive for such utilities to perform the best possible coordination, if a utility coordinates its work with other utilities and/or the city so that no trench cut cost recovery fee is required for at least 80 percent of the linear feet of its total excavations in city streets and rights-of-way during a calendar year, the utility shall receive a refund, without interest, of 25 percent of the trench cut cost recovery fees the utility paid during that year. If a utility coordinates its work with other utilities and/or the city so that no trench cut cost recovery fee is required for at least 90 percent of the linear feet of its total excavations in city streets and rights-of-way during a calendar year, the utility shall receive a refund, without interest, of one-half percent of the trench cut cost recovery fees the utility paid during that year. If a utility coordinates its work with other utilities and/or the city so that no trench cut cost recovery fee is required for at least 95 percent of the linear feet of its total excavations in city streets and rights-of-way during a calendar year, the utility shall receive a refund, without interest, of 100 percent of the trench cut cost recovery fees the utility paid during that year. Upon appropriation by the city council, city funds authorized for the purpose of maintenance, repair or resurfacing of city streets shall be transferred to the special fund or funds created pursuant to section 35-1-3(e) to replace any amount refunded pursuant to this subsection. The director shall adopt procedures for implementing this subsection. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-16; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-17. - Additional requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the requirements of this chapter, cable television franchisees and licensees shall construct facilities in accordance with the provisions of chapter 38 of this Code. In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this chapter and the provisions of chapter 38, the provisions of chapter 38 shall govern. 
(b)  All utility installations permitted under this chapter shall, upon demand of the director, be relocated or lowered if required by the city to avoid potential conflicts with a proper governmental use of a street, alley, sidewalk or other public place. All expenses incurred in relocating, lowering lines, potholing or marking of facilities to determine their exact location after the original installation shall be paid for by the permittee. As used in this section, "relocating" shall mean lowering and any other adjustments. 
(c)  Upon completion of underground or surface work permitted under this chapter, the permittee shall furnish as built plans of the installation showing a correct plan view to scale, details and a profile showing the locations of all the elements of the installation based on data obtained in the field during construction. 
(d)  Private parties and nonpublic utilities shall comply with the following additional requirements: 
(1)  The permittee shall take out, pay for and maintain, during the period in which the permit is in effect, a policy of public liability and property damage insurance protecting permittee, permittee's agents and employees against any liability, injury or death sustained or suffered by the public or damage to the property of the public by reason of the work carried on under the permit. The public liability insurance shall be for the limits of at least $300,000.00 for injury to one person and $500,000.00 for injury to more than one person, and the property damage insurance limit shall be at least $100,000.00. The insurance shall be placed with a company satisfactory to the chief administrator of the city, prior to the date that work under the permit is commenced. The policy or policies of insurance shall name the city, its officers and employees as additional named insureds and shall contain an endorsement precluding cancellation or reduction in coverage without giving the chief administrator at least ten days' written notice prior thereto. 
(2)  If required on the face thereof, the permit shall not be effective for any purpose unless and until the permittee files with the chief administrator a corporate surety bond or other security approved by the chief administrator in the amount specified on the face of the permit, said bond or other security to fully assure the performance by permittee of all obligations imposed upon permittee under the provisions of the permit and this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-17; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-18. - Appeal of director's decision; protest of trench cut cost recovery fee. 
(a)  A person directly and adversely affected by a decision made by the director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal the director's decision by filing a written notice of appeal to the board of appeals with the city clerk no later than ten working days after receiving notice of the director's decision. The notice of appeal shall set forth the name, mailing address and telephone number of the person appealing. The notice of appeal shall include or attach a statement describing the action being appealed, setting forth the grounds for the appeal, and describing the action requested of the board of appeals. The scope of the appeal shall be limited to the grounds specified in the notice of appeal. No later than 30 days after the filing of a timely notice of appeal, the board of appeals shall render a decision on the appeal. The board of appeals' decision may affirm, reverse or modify the decision appealed. A copy of the board of appeals' decision shall be provided to the person appealing at the address shown on the notice of appeal. 
(b)  Any person required to pay a trench cut cost recovery fee pursuant to section 35-1-2(c) who desires to protest or otherwise challenge imposition of the fee shall tender to the city payment in full of the fee when due, accompanied by a written notice containing the following information: 
(1)  A statement that the required payment is tendered under protest; and 
(2)  A description of the factual and legal basis for the protest. 
(c)  Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside, void or annul the imposition of a trench cut cost recovery fee for which a written notice of protest is filed pursuant to subsection (b), above, shall be filed no later than 90 days after the notice is received by the city. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-18; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-19. - Construction of driveways from private property; permit required; exception; procedure. 
(a)  No person shall construct, establish, open, grade or in any manner form or use a driveway or other opening from private property into any street, highway or thoroughfare in the city, other than driveways to personal residences, without first obtaining a permit from the director of the public service department. 
(b)  Before the director may issue a permit for a driveway opening into any public street, the applicant shall submit a plot plan thereof to the director. The plot plan shall show the width of the proposed driveway and the street into which it leads, with all approaches and dimensions thereof. The proposed opening or driveway shall be approved or disapproved by the director pursuant to standards in the city zoning ordinance. 
(c)  The city police department is hereby directed to close any driveway or other opening constructed, established, opened, graded or used in violation of this section, and to arrest any persons violating any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-19; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-20. - Obstructions in streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall be allowed or permitted to obstruct any sidewalk or street in the city by putting any box, table, steps, merchandise or any other similar thing thereon or to use the streets and sidewalks for the display of goods, wares or merchandise of any kind. 
(b)  No person shall put any lumber, wood, boxes, bricks or other substances in any street, alley or sidewalk without a permit from the director of the public service department and the permit shall be issued only if the obstruction is reasonably unavoidable and interference with the use of the street, alley or sidewalk is as limited as is reasonably possible. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-20; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-21. - Building street numbers required. 
(a)  All lots, buildings and structures in the city shall be numbered according to the present numbering system in effect in the city and by numbers assigned by the director of public service. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owners and occupants of every house, building and structure in the city to have placed thereupon in a place visible from the street, or at the street, figures at least 21/2 inches high showing the street number of the house, building, or structure. Any person, firm or corporation failing to so number any house, building or structure owned or occupied by him, after receiving notice from the city, shall be in violation of this section and subject to punishment as for a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-21; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-22. - Mud and other obstructions on sidewalks. 
    Persons owning real estate within the city are required to keep the sidewalks abutting or alongside their property lines free from mud and other obstructions which hinder travel by pedestrians walking thereupon. It shall be the duty of the director of public service to notify such property owners when and in the event sidewalks abutting or lying alongside their property lines become so obstructed. Failure on the part of the property owner so notified to remove such obstructions within five days after notice shall constitute disorderly conduct and the offense shall be punishable as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-22; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-23. - Paving of sidewalks-Payment of assessments after certain time to be as provided. 
    Any assessments for the building, construction, or improvement of sidewalks in the city levied after May 7, 1952, may be paid as provided in sections 35-1-24-35-1-26. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-23) 
Sec. 35-1-24. - Same-Application to pay in installments. 
    Any person on whose property a sidewalk assessment has been levied may, upon proper application to the city clerk within 30 days after receiving notice of such assessment, be authorized to pay such assessment in monthly payments as such person desires, not to exceed 12 months, and provided all monthly payments shall be in equal amounts, and shall bear interest at a rate fixed by the mayor and council not to exceed 12 percent. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-24; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-25. - Same-Executing notes and documents, discounting upon installment plan. 
    Persons making application for deferred payments of sidewalk assessments in accordance with these provisions shall execute promissory notes and such other documents and instruments as may be required and designated by the city clerk; and provided further any promissory notes, documents, or other instruments executed in connection with deferred payment of sidewalk assessments may be discounted at the option of the city to any bank or banking institution in the Atlanta area comprising what is known as "Greater Atlanta", and in that event any applicants for deferred payment of sidewalk assessments shall agree to making monthly payments on such obligations to any bank or banking institution designated by the city for that purpose. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-25; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-1-26. - Same-Approval of installment payments. 
    Final authority for the approval of applications made under these provisions for deferred payments of sidewalk assessments shall rest with the mayor and council or any committee or individual member of the council to whom such authority is properly delegated, and any other decisions with regard to fixing the amount of such monthly payments, the interest thereon, and other details shall rest solely with the mayor and council or the persons designated by them; provided, however, any person dissatisfied with any decision made in connection herewith shall not be denied the right to appeal the same to the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-26; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
ARTICLE 2. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 35-2-1. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to move, transport or relocate any house, dwelling, building or other structure of a width of more than eight feet at its widest point, or a length of more than 48 feet at its longest point, without first obtaining a permit from the director of public service and the payment of such fee or charges therefor, as the mayor and council shall set by resolution or ordinance; provided, however, the moving of any such structure over 14 feet wide shall be moved via state routes only, save and except, when being moved to its final destination pursuant to a route approved in advance by the director of public service and the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-30; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-2-2. - Information to be furnished. 
    In applying for such permit, the applicant shall furnish the director of public service with detailed information concerning the size, height, weight and other dimensions of the object to be moved; the time and route of such proposed move which must be approved in advance by the director of public service and the chief of police; and shall furnish such other information as the director of public service and chief of police shall deem pertinent, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the mover/applicant; 
(2)  Name, address, and telephone number of the owner of the structure to be moved; 
(3)  Address of the present location of the structure to be moved; 
(4)  Destination of the structure to be moved; 
(5)  Valid and required permits necessary to move such structure through the next or adjoining jurisdiction when the final destination is not within the city; 
(6)  Name and address of the insurance company. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-31; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-2-3. - Public hearing. 
    After the receipt of the information required under section 35-2-2 supra, the director of public service shall set a date, time and place for a public hearing not less than ten days from the date of the receipt of the necessary information and not more than 30 days, and shall publish the same in two conspicuous places in the city hall and shall further notify by mail or such other personal notice, as he determines sufficient under the circumstances, each property owner whose property lies within 100 feet from the location to which the house is to be moved if the same lies within the city limits. This section shall not apply to applications for a permit to move a house to a location outside the city limits. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-32; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-2-4. - Bond required. 
    The director of public service may, in his discretion, require the posting of good and sufficient bond by the applicant for the permit required by section 35-2-1 in such amount as he deems adequate to cover possible damage to public property; provided, however, if the applicant believes that the bond specified by the director of public service is excessive or unwarranted, he may appeal to the mayor and council for relief or for reduction, as the situation may indicate. The mayor and council shall have the authority to reduce or alter in any manner the bond prescribed by the director of public service if they or the majority of them feel that the bond assessment has been excessive under the circumstances. No change, however, shall be made without hearing from the director of public service concerning his reasons for fixing the amount of the bond in question. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-33; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
Sec. 35-2-5. - Permit fees. 
    The charge for the permit described in section 35-2-2 shall be in such amount as the mayor and council may from time to time prescribe. 
(Code 1981, § 5-1-34; Ord. No. 98-15, § 1, 9-1-1998) 
ARTICLE 3. - PARADES AND PICKETS 

Sec. 35-3-1. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, conduct or accompany any organized parade, picket or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property in the city unless an application has been previously filed and a permit granted to conduct such parade, picket or procession within the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-171; Ord. No. 79-6, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 35-3-2. - Application for permit. 
    An application for permit to conduct or sponsor a parade, picket or procession shall be filed with the chief of police in writing and shall contain the following information furnished by the person in official charge of the proposed parade, picket or procession: 
(1)  The name of all organizations or persons organizing or sponsoring the parade, picket or procession. 
(2)  The purpose of the parade, picket or procession. 
(3)  The date and hours of the parade, picket or procession. 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade, picket or procession, and its beginning and termination points. 
(5)  The number and types of vehicles, marching units and floats to be used in the parade, picket or procession. 
(6)  The number of persons participating in the parade, picket or procession. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-172; Ord. No. 79-6, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 35-3-3. - Investigation. 
    The chief of police shall investigate all applications for parade permits, and may issue permits where the information specified in section 35-3-2 has been furnished, provided the proposed parade, picket or procession is otherwise lawful and can be held without undue interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the city, of which circumstances the chief of police shall exercise his discretion. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-173; Ord. No. 79-6, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 35-3-4. - Assemblies; permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a congregation of people at any public place within the city, unless a permit therefor shall have first been obtained from the chief of police. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-174; Ord. No. 79-6, 5-14-1979) 
Sec. 35-3-5. - Picket regulations. 
    Persons engaged in a peaceful picket shall observe the following: 
(1)  No picketing shall be permitted upon any street or other way designed primarily for vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Persons engaged in peaceful picketing shall remain on the outer limits of any sidewalk being used for the purpose, i.e., upon the side nearest the street, and shall keep moving at all times. 
(3)  No person, while picketing, shall impede or hinder pedestrian or vehicular traffic upon any sidewalk, street or public way. 
(4)  Persons engaged in picketing shall maintain a distance of ten feet from each other, and shall at no time prevent free and unimpeded movement of invitees and owners onto and away from any private property, or any person onto and away from any public property. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to picket between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(6)  No person, while picketing, shall carry or display any sign, symbol or other article which tends to cause or contribute to a breach of the peace, or which tends to cause a riot. 
(Code 1981, § 9-4-175; Ord. No. 79-6, 5-14-1979) 
Chapter 38 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE 2. - TELECOMMUNICATION TOWERS AND ANTENNAS 

Sec. 38-2-1. - Purpose, findings and goals. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting of telecommunication towers and antennas, and the facilities whereon such towers or antennas are located. 
(b)  The mayor and council recognize that the city is to provide for the siting of telecommunication towers and antennas pursuant to the mandates of the Telecommunications Act of 1996. While mandated to make such provisions, the mayor and council also recognize that telecommunication towers and antennas can negatively impact the aesthetic appearance of the city, and can reduce the property value of lots proximately located to such towers, particularly when they are sited adjacent to residential areas. 
(c)  The goals of this article, therefore, are to: 
(1)  Express the intent of the mayor and council that the construction of new towers be an option of last resort and, to the extent feasible, location of antennas on existing towers, building rooftops, and other suitable structures should first be sought; 
(2)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(3)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(5)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to construct them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers or antennas; 
(6)  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
(7)  Develop an inventory of existing sites with specific information about the load capacity of each existing site, remaining developable land area available at the site, and any terms or conditions of the lease which would affect the possibility of collocation at the site; and 
(8)  Provide for the disposition of towers which are abandoned by all users, and set forth the time period within which the requirements would apply and responsibility for the removal of abandoned towers. 
(9)  Encourage the use of construction methods and telecommunications conveyances which are the least visually obtrusive. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-1; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 1, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them: 
    Alternative tower structure shall mean manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    Building inspector shall mean the building inspector for the city. 
    FAA shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Guy tower shall mean a tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Height, when referring to a tower, antenna, or other structure, shall mean the distance measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest point which is defined as the average ground elevation along the structure being measured at either roof or ground level, whichever is applicable. The height of a tower shall include the height of any antenna, other than a whip-type antenna extending no more than 20 feet above the highest point on the tower, positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to the highest point on the tower. 
    Lattice or self-supporting tower shall mean a tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
    Monopole tower shall mean a telecommunication tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
    Preexisting towers and antennas shall mean any tower, antenna, or monopole for which permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this article. 
    Telecommunication facility shall mean a telecommunication tower, a monopole tower, an antenna or any and all buildings, structures, or other supporting equipment used in connection with a telecommunication tower, a monopole tower, or an antenna. 
    Tower shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers or guy towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like, but specifically excludes monopole towers. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-2; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 2, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-3. - Conditional use permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, repair, relocate, construct, or maintain within the city any telecommunication facility as defined in this article, without first obtaining a condition use permit in the manner set forth in this article or otherwise complying with the terms herein. 
(b)  The guidelines set forth in this article shall control the installation of all antennas and the location of all towers governed by this article. Provided, however, that the mayor and council may waive or vary the terms of these requirements during the conditional use permit application review process if it determines that the goals of this article are better served thereby. In considering a conditional use permit, the city may impose additional conditions, to the extent the city concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect the proposed antenna or tower may have on the value or aesthetic appeal of adjoining properties or the health safety and welfare of persons and property. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-3; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 3, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-4. - Contents of applications for conditional use permits; general information required of all applicants. 
(a)  Applications for conditional use permits to erect a telecommunication facility shall be made upon blanks provided by the building inspector, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the telecommunication facility is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Name of the person, firm, corporation or association erecting the telecommunication facility; 
(4)  Written consent of the owner of the building, structure, or land to which or upon which the telecommunication facility is to be erected; 
(5)  A site plan showing existing vegetation to be removed from the site, and vegetation to be replanted to replace the vegetation that will be removed; 
(6)  A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in Georgia that the installation and operation of the antenna, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, or other telecommunication service enjoyed by adjacent properties; 
(7)  Written certification from the FAA, the FCC, and any appropriate state review authority stating that the proposed telecommunication facility complies with regulations administered by that agency or that the facility is exempt from those regulations. In particular, an applicant must submit written certification that all emissions from the antenna will comply with FCC frequency emissions standards and that the telecommunication facility has received written clearance from the FAA. 
(b)  Each application for a conditional use permit for the installation of an antenna shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $200.00. Each application for a conditional use permit for the construction of a tower or monopole shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of $300.00. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-4; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 38-2-5. - Contents of applications for conditional use permits; information required of applicants for antennas. 
    In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 38-2-4 above, applications for conditional use permits to install an antenna shall contain or have attached thereto three sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the building or structure for the antenna. The plans for the antenna construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-5; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 38-2-6. - Contents or applications for conditional use permits, towers. 
    In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 38-2-4 above, applications for conditional use permits to construct a tower shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Three sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the ground for the tower. The plans for the tower construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes, and shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this article. Information concerning radio frequency coverage, structural integrity and failure characteristics of the tower/antenna proposed may be supplied by an electrical engineer or engineering reports from the equipment/structure manufacturer. The reports from the structural engineers and electrical engineers must contain: 
a.  Tower height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross section of the tower structure shall be included; 
b.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
c.  A map or other graphic representation modeling coverage of the proposed tower as well as all other towers of the applicant within the city (or 11/2 miles of the city limits); 
d.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure; and 
e.  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to fully contain the structure and any debris generated upon its collapse or failure; 
(2)  An inventory of the applicant's existing telecommunication towers, antennas, or monopole towers that are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, coverage, and design of each tower, antenna, or monopole. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate telecommunication towers, antennas or monopoles within the city, provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting in any way that such sites are available or suitable for telecommunication towers, antennas or monopoles; 
(3)  An inventory of existing telecommunication towers or monopoles which are owned by persons other than the applicant and are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility. In preparing such an inventory, the applicant shall provide the following information: 
a.  Identification of each existing facility by location, tax lot number, existing uses, and height of the facility; 
b.  Whether such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna without requiring that structural changes be made to the facility. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
c.  Whether each such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the facility. If so, the owner of the facility shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required, and the cost of such changes; 
d.  If structurally able, whether shared use by such existing facility would be precluded for reasons related to radio frequency (RF) or electromagnetic interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if any; and 
e.  If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing facility would charge for such shared use. Shared use is not precluded because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared facility. The city may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fees and costs are reasonable. Costs equal to or exceeding the cost of development of a new telecommunication facility are presumed unreasonable. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-6; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 4, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-7. - Monopole towers. 
    In addition to the information required to be submitted as set forth in section 38-2-4, applications for conditional use permits to construct a monopole tower shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Three sets of accurate scale drawings including a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation including, but not limited to, the method of construction and attachment to the ground for the monopole. The plans for the monopole construction shall be certified by an independent registered structural engineer licensed in the state as meeting all current safety and design standards of all applicable federal, state, and city codes, and shall show the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, monopole height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the city to be necessary to assess compliance with this article. In addition, the report from the structural engineer must contain: 
a.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated. 
b.  Failure characteristics of the monopole tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; and 
(2)  An inventory of the applicant's existing telecommunication towers, antennas, or monopole towers that are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower, antenna, or monopole. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate telecommunication towers, antennas or monopoles within the city; provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting in any way that such sites are available or suitable for telecommunication towers, antennas or monopoles; 
(3)  An inventory of existing telecommunication towers, antennas, or monopoles which are owned by persons other than the applicant and are either within the city or within one mile of the city limits, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each facility. In preparing such an inventory, the applicant shall provide the following information: 
a.  Identification of each existing facility by location, tax lot number, existing uses, and height of the facility; 
b.  Whether such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna without requiring that structural changes be made to the facility. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna; 
c.  Whether each such facility could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the facility. If so, the owner of the facility shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required; 
d.  If structurally able, whether shared use by such existing facility would be precluded for reasons related to RF or electromagnetic interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed antenna, if any; and 
e.  If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing facility would charge for such shared use. Shared use is not precluded because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adapt the existing and proposed uses to a shared facility. The city may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fees and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding the cost of development of a new telecommunication facility are presumed unreasonable. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-7; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 38-2-8. - Conditional use permits; issuance standards, denial, appeal. 
(a)  The following factors shall be considered in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit to construct or install a telecommunication tower, antenna, or monopole: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower, antenna, or monopole; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower, antenna, or monopole to residential structures and residential district boundaries, as measured from the base of the tower, monopole, or structure on which the antenna is located to the boundary of a residentially zoned lot; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and surrounding properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Whether the telecommunication facility has a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer to screen the tower, antenna, monopole, or telecommunication facility completely to a height of six feet from adjacent properties and right-of-ways; 
(6)  Design of the tower, antenna, or monopole, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)  Whether the applicant meets the standards of this article and has complied with the conditions to obtain a conditional use permit as set forth in this article; and 
(9)  Availability of suitable existing towers, monopoles and other structures for the placement of an antenna. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunication facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  No existing towers, monopoles or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers, monopoles or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers, monopoles or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause RF or electromagnetic interference with antennas on the existing structures, or the antenna on the existing tower, monopole or structure would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing facility or to adapt an existing facility for sharing are unreasonable. Costs equal to or exceeding new tower or monopole development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
f.  Whether, as an existing facility owner, the applicant has ever sought to impose fees, costs, or contractual provisions in order to share an existing facility or to adapt an existing facility for sharing which were deemed unreasonable. 
(b)  The procedure for issuance or denial of conditional use permit for location of antenna on existing building, structure, tower, or monopole shall be as follows: 
(1)  The building inspector shall determine whether a conditional use permit for location of an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole should be issued or denied under the standards of this article within 30 days of the receipt of a complete application. Failure to act within this time frame shall not constitute a waiver of any provision of this Code or approval of the application. 
(2)  Any decision by the building inspector to deny a conditional use permit application for the location of an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The building inspector's decision to deny an application may be appealed to the mayor and council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days of the denial. Failure to file a notice of appeal within ten days of the denial shall constitute a waiver of the applicant's appeal rights. 
(3)  The mayor and council shall hold a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the notice of appeal. In the event the mayor and council affirms the building inspector's decision to deny the application, the decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(c)  No conditional use permit for the construction of a tower or monopole shall be issued until the same shall have been submitted to the planning commission. The planning commission shall transmit its report either recommending approval or disapproval of a complete application within 30 days after referral to it. In addition to such recommendation for approval or disapproval, the planning commission may make suggestions as to conditions or limitations to be attached to any recommended approval. Upon receipt of the planning commission's report, or at the expiration of the 30-day period, the mayor and council of the city shall place the application on the next available agenda and shall proceed to approve or deny the issuance of a conditional use permit. In the event the mayor and council denies the application, the decision of the mayor and council shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(d)  In granting a conditional use permit for the construction of a tower, antenna, or monopole, additional zoning conditions may be imposed to the extent necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower, antenna, or monopole on surrounding properties. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-8; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 5, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-9. - Zoning requirements for location of telecommunication towers, antennas, and monopole towers. 
(a)  No conditional use permit to construct a monopole or to locate an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower, or monopole shall be issued unless the location has been zoned commercial with a C-2 classification or has been zoned industrial with an I-1 or I-2 classification under the zoning laws of the city. 
(b)  No conditional use permit to construct a tower shall be issued unless the location has been zoned industrial with an I-1 or I-2 classification under the zoning laws of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-9; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 6, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-10. - Location of antenna on existing building, structure, or telecommunication facility. 
    A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain an antenna on an existing building, structure, tower or monopole within the city provided: 
(1)  If an antenna is installed on an existing building or structure other than a tower, such antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the existing building or structure; 
(2)  No advertising is permitted on the antenna or telecommunication facility; 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure or building other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure or building so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible; 
(4)  If an antenna is installed on an existing tower of any height, such antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower; 
(5)  The antenna is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA, FCC, or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review available lighting alternatives and approve the design which would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views; 
(6)  The antenna meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC or such governing agency with the authority to regulate telecommunication towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the antenna shall bring such antenna into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or repermitting of the antenna at the owner's expense; 
(7)  The antenna complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents; 
(8)  The antenna is equipped with an anticlimbing device to prevent unauthorized access. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-10; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 6(A), 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-11. - Telecommunication towers. 
    A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain a telecommunication tower within the city provided: 
(1)  Any tower sought to be placed in an I-2 zone is not greater than 150 feet in height, and any tower sought to be placed in either an I-1 zone is not greater than 120 feet in height; 
(2)  The tower maintains a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, is painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness; 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the tower or telecommunication facility; 
(4)  The tower is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other authority for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views; 
(5)  The tower and telecommunication facility uses materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and base facility to the natural setting and built environment; 
(6)  The tower and telecommunication facility meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC or such governing agency with the authority to regulate telecommunication towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owner of the tower or telecommunication facility shall bring such tower or facility into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or re-permitting of the antenna at the owner's expense; 
(7)  The applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunication facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(8)  The following setbacks and separation requirements are met: 
a.  All towers, including but not limited to lattice towers and guy towers, must be set back from any property line abutting a residential district, other than a district zoned C-R, as measured from the base of the tower, a distance of 500 feet for a 150-foot tower and 300 feet for a 120-foot tower respectively. For a guyed structure, such setback shall be adequate to provide a vegetative, topographic, or other buffer sufficient to obscure view to the anchor from such adjoining properties. 
b.  All towers and telecommunication facilities must have a front yard set back equal to the height of the tower, and sufficient rear and side yard set backs to fully contain the structure in the event of tower failure. 
(9)  The tower and telecommunication facility is equipped with an anticlimbing device to prevent unauthorized access; 
(10)  The tower complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents; 
(11)  The tower and telecommunication facility is designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically practical; 
(12)  Landscape buffer/screening requirement shall be as follows: 
a.  Any tower or telecommunication facility which abuts a residentially zoned property shall have a minimum 50-foot landscaped, horizontal buffer that effectively screens the view of the tower and base facility from adjacent property. The buffer must include a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer sufficient to screen the tower and base facility completely to a height of six feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way. When topography and existing conditions allow, the required 50-foot horizontal buffer should be an undisturbed buffer; provided, however, the buffer may be crossed by an access drive of not greater than 12 feet in width; 
b.  Any tower or telecommunication facility which abuts property zoned other than residential shall have a minimum 15-foot landscaped, horizontal buffer that effectively screens the view of the tower or base facility from adjacent property. The buffer must include a solid opaque fence or solid vegetative buffer sufficient to screen the tower and base facility completely to a height of six feet from adjacent properties and rights-of-way; 
c.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where towers or facilities are sited on wooded lots in excess of five acres, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer; 
d.  In locations where the visual impact of the tower or facility would be minimal, such as developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived; 
(13)  The equipment at the tower or telecommunication facility is automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion; 
(14)  All access roads to the tower or telecommunication facility shall be constructed of dustless and durable Portland cement, concrete or other materials complying with specifications established by the building inspector and maintained in a usable condition; 
(15)  Principal, accessory and joint uses shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made; 
b.  Towers may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, setback, separation, and general requirements of this section are met, towers may occupy a leased parcel on a site meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. When joint use of a lot is permitted, the city shall require the execution of a unity of title if two or more lots are utilized for setback purposes or to prohibit the unlawful division of a lot containing a tower and another principal use; 
c.  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-11; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 7, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-12. - Monopole towers. 
    A conditional use permit may be issued to erect, repair, construct, relocate or maintain a monopole tower within the city provided: 
(1)  Any monopole tower sought to be placed in an I-2 zone is not greater than 150 feet in height, any monopole tower sought to be placed in an I-1 zone is not greater than 120 feet in height, and any monopole tower sought to be placed in a C-2 zone is not greater than 60 feet in height; 
(2)  The monopole tower is made of wood or, if made of steel, the monopole maintains a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, is painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness; 
(3)  No advertising is permitted on the monopole tower; 
(4)  The monopole tower is not artificially lighted unless required by the FAA or other governmental authority for safety purposes. Where required, the building inspector shall review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views; 
(5)  The monopole tower meets or exceeds current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other governmental agency with the authority to regulate telecommunication facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owner of the monopole shall bring such monopole into compliance with any revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling agency. Failure to comply with this provision shall be grounds for the city to require removal or re permitting of the antenna at the owner's expense; 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the city that no existing telecommunication facility can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna; 
(7)  The following setbacks and separation requirements are met: 
a.  All monopole towers to be placed in an I-2 zone must be set back from any adjoining residentially zoned district, other than a district zoned C-R, a distance of 500 feet, all monopole towers to be placed in an I-1 zone must be set back from any adjoining residentially zoned district, other than a district zoned C-R, a distance of 300 feet, and all monopole towers to be placed in a C-2 zone must be set back from any adjoining residentially zoned district, other than a district zoned C-R, a distance of 200 feet; 
b.  All monopole towers must have front yard setback equal to the height of the tower, and sufficient rear and side yard set backs to fully contain the structure in the event of monopole failure; 
c.  Monopole towers over 40 feet in height shall not be located within one-half mile from any existing telecommunication tower or monopole that is over 50 feet in height; 
(8)  The monopole tower is equipped with an anticlimbing device to prevent unauthorized access; 
(9)  The monopole tower complies with all current safety, design, structural, and wind loading standards of applicable building and technical codes adopted by the city, so as not to endanger the health and safety of residents; 
(10)  Accessory or principal uses shall be subject to the following: 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a monopole shall be allowed but not used for offices, vehicle storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a monopole shall not be stored or parked on the site of the monopole, unless repairs to the monopole are being made. 
b.  Monopoles may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, setback, separation, and general requirement of this ordinance are met, monopoles may occupy a leased parcel on a site meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. When joint use of a lot is permitted, the city shall require the execution of a unity of title if two or more lots are utilized for setback purposes or to prohibit the unlawful division of a lot containing a monopole and another principal use. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-12; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 8, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-13. - Annual inspection; inspection fee, unsafe facilities, abandoned facilities. 
(a)  Tower, antenna or monopole owners shall provide written evidence that each telecommunication tower, antenna or monopole is in compliance with all federal requirements, including, but not limited to the FCC frequency emissions standards. 
(b)  To ensure the structural integrity of towers, antennas, and monopoles, the owner shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building codes and the applicable standards for towers, antennas, and monopoles that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Tower, antenna, and monopole owners shall conduct inspections to ensure structural integrity a minimum of once every three years. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in the state. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the building inspector no later than February 1 of each inspection year. 
(c)  The building inspector shall have the right in the discharge of his official duties to enter upon and inspect any telecommunication facility located within the city. 
(d)  If, upon inspection or upon receipt of an engineer's report submitted pursuant to subsection (a) above, the building inspector determines that a telecommunication facility fails to comply with the city's building and technical codes or with the requirements of this article, then upon written notice being provided to the owner of such facility, the owner shall have 45 days to bring the facility into compliance with this article. If the owner fails to bring the telecommunication facility into compliance within said 45 days, the city may proceed with the removal of such facility pursuant to the provisions of the city's building code and place a lien upon the property for the costs of such removal. 
(e)  If, upon inspection or upon receipt of an engineer's report submitted pursuant to subsection (a) above, the building inspector determines that a telecommunication tower, antenna or monopole has not been utilized for a continuous period of 12 months, such tower, antenna or monopole shall be considered abandoned, and the owner shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of written notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If the tower, antenna or monopole is not removed within said 90 days, the city may proceed with the removal of such facility pursuant to the provisions of the city's building code and place a lien upon the property for the costs of such removal. If there are two or more users of a single facility, this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower or monopole for a period of 12 months. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-13; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 98-11, § 9, 5-5-1998) 
Sec. 38-2-14. - Preexisting antennas, towers, or telecommunication facilities. 
    Any preexisting antenna, tower, or telecommunication facility which does not meet this requirement of this article for a conditional use permit shall be considered nonconforming and subject to the nonconforming use provisions of the city's zoning ordinance; provided, however, that the installation of a new antenna on a preexisting tower or monopole shall not constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use provided that the new antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of the preexisting tower or monopole. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-14; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 38-2-15. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A single antenna under 70 feet in height owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator shall be exempted from the provisions of this article. The owner or operator of such antenna, however, shall be required to comply with all applicable city, state and federal codes. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to the installation, maintenance, or use of: 
(1)  A satellite earth station antenna that is two meters or less in diameter and is located or proposed to be located in any area where commercial or industrial uses are generally permitted; or 
(2)  A satellite earth station antenna that is one meter or less in any area. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-16; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
Sec. 38-2-16. - Penalties. 
    Any person found in violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1981, § 8-9-17; Ord. No. 96-08, § 1, 10-1-1996) 
ARTICLE 3. - CATV FRANCHISES 

Sec. 38-3-1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the respective meanings given herein: 
    Additional service. Any communications service other than basic service provided over its CATV system by a grantee directly or as a carrier for its subsidiaries, affiliates, or any other person engaged in communications services including, but not limited to, burglar alarm, data, or other electronic intelligence transmission, facsimile reproduction, meter reading and home shopping. 
    Administrative officers. The mayor, city manager or other chief administrative officer of the city, or his designate. 
    Applicant. Any person submitting an application to the city for a franchise to operate a CATV system under the terms and conditions set forth by the governing body. 
    Basic service. The simultaneous delivery by the grantee to television receivers (or any other suitable types of audio-video communication receivers) of all subscribers in the city of all signals of over-the-air television broadcasts required by the FCC to be carried by a CATV system as defined herein. "Basic service" shall also include grantee channels, city channels, except as may be designated for special purposes by the administrative officer, public channels and additional channels at the option of the grantee, or as directed by the governing body. 
    CATV or community antenna television system. Any facility which: 
(1)  In whole or in part receives directly or indirectly over the air and amplifies or otherwise modifies the signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more television and AM and FM radio stations and distributes such signals by wire or cable to subscribing members of the public who pay for such services; 
(2)  Distributes by cable or wire news, weather and other information including civil defense type information as required as an incidental part of CATV service to all subscribers without additional charge; 
(3)  Distributes any and all other lawful communications of a specialized nature provided that it shall not mean or include any facility to which is transmitted any special television program or event for which a separate and distinct charge is made to the subscriber in a manner commonly known and referred to as pay television, except as may be permitted by the federal, state, and/or local regulatory agencies. 
    Certificate of compliance. Approval required by the FCC in order for a grantee of a CATV franchise to begin operation within the city. 
    Channel. A band of frequencies, six megahertz wide in the electromagnetic spectrum which is capable of carrying either one audio-video television signal and a number of video signals or several thousand nonvideo signals. 
    City channels. Channels on the CATV system which are reserved by this article for use by the city. 
    Commercial subscriber. A purchaser of any service delivered over the system who is not a residential subscriber. 
    FCC or Federal Communications Commission. That agency as presently constituted by the United States Congress, or any successor agency. 
    Grantee. The person to whom or to which a franchise is granted by the governing body under this article or anyone who succeeds the person in accordance with the provisions of the franchise. 
    Grantee channels. The channels on the system which are reserved by this article for the carriage of program material originated by a grantee and the retransmission of broadcast signals in accordance with the FCC's cablecasting rules and regulations. 
    Gross subscriber revenue. All revenue derived from the monthly charges from all subscribers. 
    Pay television. The delivery over the CATV system of video signals in intelligible form to residential subscribers for a fee or charge (over and above the charge for basic service) on a per program, per channel or other subscription basis. 
    Public channels. Channels on the CATV system which are reserved for carriage of program material provided by persons who lease channel time and, if necessary, studio facilities, from a grantee for the presentation of programs. 
    Residential subscriber. A purchaser of any service delivered over the system to an individual dwelling unit where the service is not to be utilized in connection with a business, trade or profession. 
    Street. The surface of and the space above and below any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, path, public way, or place, alley, court, boulevard, parkway, drive or other easement now or hereafter held by the city for the purpose of public travel and shall include other easements or rights-of-way as shall be now held or hereafter held by the city which shall, within their proper use and meaning, entitle the city and its grantee to the use thereof for the purposes of installing or transmitting CATV system transmission over poles, wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be ordinarily necessary and pertinent to a CATV system. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-1; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979) 
Sec. 38-3-2. - Authority to grant franchise. 
    The governing body of the city is authorized to grant the right, privilege and franchise to construct, operate and maintain a CATV system in the streets of the city for a period of 15 years from and after the passage, acceptance and effective date of the franchise, subject to the conditions and restrictions as hereinafter provided; and said right, privilege and franchise may be granted to any qualified applicant who, upon the proper showing, shall fulfill all the requirements and conditions of this article and franchise. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-2; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979) 
Sec. 38-3-3. - Franchise term. 
    The franchise, authority or permit granted the grantee herein shall terminate 15 years from the date of the grant and may be renewed for successive 15-year terms on the same terms or conditions as contained herein, or such different or additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the governing body, and consistent with the requirements of rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-3; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979) 
Sec. 38-3-4. - Application for franchise. 
(a)  No CATV franchise or renewal thereof shall be issued except on a written application and upon a form approved by the governing body. 
(b)  The form shall set forth such facts in detail as the governing body may deem appropriate including: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, partnership or unincorporated association, its statement shall contain the names and addresses of all persons (including corporations) having a proprietary or equitable interest in and to the prospective franchisee's business operation, and in and to the prospective franchise if awarded to the proposer. The term "equitable interest" shall include all assignments for value, as well as all contingent assignments of any right or privilege under the prospective franchise, and shall also include any benefit, payment of emolument whatsoever resulting from the grant of a franchise under this article. 
(2)  If the applicant is a nonpublic corporation, the statement shall furnish, additionally, the names and addresses of the officers, directors and shareholders of said corporation, together with the number of shares held by each shareholder. 
(3)  If the applicant is a publicly held corporation, as defined by the rules and regulations of the Federal Securities and Exchange Commission, the statement shall contain the states in which incorporated and/or qualified to do business and the names and addresses of the officers and directors of the corporation. 
(4)  A full disclosure of the ownership of the facilities to be used in rendering the service. 
(5)  The source of funds for operation of the system respecting the installation and maintenance of all CATV facilities and shall demonstrate the financial ability to provide and extend service to proposed subscribers at a reasonable cost. 
(6)  A detailed schedule of the rates to be charged for the services offered, the facilities to be employed and the general routes of the cables used in redistributing signals, the service area or areas, the commencement and completion dates of construction of the CATV system and the proposed dates the service will be available to the area or areas named. 
(7)  A detailed schedule of rates to be applied to residential, apartment, commercial and other users of service. 
(c)  The governing body may request such other information as it may deem appropriate. 
(d)  All applications shall be open to public inspection, shall be kept on file a reasonable length of time at the discretion of the governing body, and intentional misrepresentation in an application shall be grounds for its rejection or for termination of the franchise. 
(e)  All applications shall be considered firm offers to the city, shall be signed and verified by the applicants and shall bind the applicant to the provisions thereof. 
(f)  Any information requested above or by the mayor and council at the time of application, which for any reason shall later change or otherwise become incorrect, shall be amended in writing at least 30 days prior to the effective date of such change. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-4; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979) 
Sec. 38-3-5. - Franchise payments. 
(a)  The grantee shall pay to the city, on or before March 31 of each year, a three percent franchise fee based on gross subscriber revenues received for cable television operations in the city for the preceding calendar year. No other fee, charge or consideration shall be imposed, except that the governing body may impose a fee in excess of three percent but no more than five percent gross subscriber revenues received from cable television operations in the city, provided that the FCC certifies, after appropriate showing made by grantee, that a franchise fee in excess of three percent but not greater than five percent will not interfere with the effectuation of federal regulatory goals in the field of cable television and after appropriate showings made by the governing body that the franchise fee in excess of three percent but no greater than five percent is appropriate in light of the city's planned regulatory program for cable television. A grantee shall file with the city within 30 days after expiration of each calendar year during the period the franchise shall be in force a financial statement showing in detail the gross annual subscriber revenues as defined herein of grantee during the preceding year. It shall be the duty of a grantee to pay to the city at the time of filing such statement the sum hereinabove prescribed. A grantee shall also file within 90 days following the conclusion of each fiscal year of a grantee an annual report prepared and audited by an independent certified public accountant acceptable to the city showing the yearly total gross subscriber revenues and payments to the city and any further relevant financial information in regard to the grantee as may be required by the administrative officer and governing body. 
(b)  In the event the franchise should be terminated or forfeited prior to the end of the basic 15-year term, a grantee shall immediately submit to the city a financial statement prepared as before required showing the gross subscriber revenues of a grantee for the time elapsed since the last period for which a grantee has paid to the city the required percentage of gross annual subscriber revenues, and a grantee shall pay to the city not later than 30 days following the termination of the franchise a like percentage of such revenues and any other such sums legally due and owing to the city. 
(c)  In the event that any payment is not made on or before the applicable date fixed in subsections (a) and (b) hereof, interest on such payments shall apply from such date at the yearly rate of eight percent. 
(d)  The city shall have the right to inspect a grantee's records showing the gross receipts from which its franchise payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under the franchise. No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a release of or an accord or satisfaction of any claim the city might have for further or additional sums payable under the terms of this article or for any other performances or obligation of grantee hereunder. 
(e)  Payments of compensation made by a grantee to the city pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be considered in the nature of a tax but shall be in addition to any and all taxes which are now or hereafter required to be paid by any law of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-5; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979) 
Sec. 38-3-6. - Insurance. 
(a)  At all times during the term of the franchise, the grantee shall obtain, pay all premiums for and file with the city executed duplicate copies and receipts evidencing the payments of premiums for the following: 
(1)  A general comprehensive public liability insurance policy indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from any and all claims by any person whatsoever on account of injury to or death of a person or persons occasioned by the operations of a grantee under franchise herein granted, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $500,000.00 per personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(2)  Property damage insurance indemnifying, defending and saving harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, from and against all claims by any person whatsoever for property damage occasioned by the operation of the grantee under the franchise herein granted, or alleged to have been so caused or occurred, with a minimum liability of $250,000.00 for property damage to any one person and $500,000.00 for property damage to two or more persons in any one occurrence. 
(3)  For all other types of liability, $1,000,000.00. 
Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect by a grantee during the existence of and until after the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of the CATV system as defined in the franchise. 
(b)  All of the foregoing insurance contracts shall be in a form satisfactory to the city and shall be issued and maintained by companies authorized to do business in the state and acceptable to the city, and they shall require 30 days' written notice of any cancellation to both the city and a grantee herein, and a copy of said policy shall be filed with the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-6; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979) 
Sec. 38-3-7. - Indemnity. 
    The grantee shall at its sole cost and expense fully indemnify, defend and save harmless the city, its officers, boards, commissions and employees against any land and all claims, suits, actions, liability and judgments for damage. 
(1)  These damages or penalties shall include but shall not be limited to damages arising out of copyright infringement and all other damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by the franchise. 
(2)  A grantee shall pay and by its acceptance of the franchise specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned above. These expenses shall include but not be limited to all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney fees and all other costs of litigation. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-7; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-8. - Books and records of grantee. 
(a)  A grantee shall file with the city engineer a copy, true and accurate, of maps and/or plats of all existing and proposed installations upon the streets. These maps and plats shall conform to the requirements of the city engineer and shall be kept continuously up to date. 
(b)  A grantee shall continually keep on file with the city a current list of its shareholders holding over three percent of the outstanding stock and officers with their current addresses. 
(c)  All books and records of a grantee concerning its operations within the city shall be made available for inspection and audit by the administrative officer or his designate within 30 days after any request for such inspection or audit shall be made. 
(d)  Copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions established by a grantee for the operation of CATV under the franchise shall be filed with the city and at the local office of a grantee. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-8; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-9. - Fees. 
    No charge shall be made to the city for its use of city channels or for the construction and operation of the coaxial between the city studio and the CATV system head end, and under no circumstances shall the city be obligated to pay to a grantee any fee for service rendered to the city under the terms of the franchise. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-9; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-10. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  All transmissions and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by a grantee within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who join any of said streets. The CATV system shall be constructed and operated in compliance with all adopted city and national construction and electrical codes and shall be kept current with new codes. 
(b)  Except when absolutely necessary to service a subscriber and not simply because it shall be more convenient, economical or profitable for a grantee to so operate, and then only when expressly permitted in writing by the city engineer, under such conditions as he shall prescribe for the public welfare, a grantee shall not erect or authorize or permit others to erect any poles or facilities within the streets of the city for the conduct of its CATV system but shall use the existing poles and other equipment of the appropriate electrical power and telephone and other utility companies under such terms and agreements as a grantee negotiates with these companies. The city shall cooperate with a grantee in negotiating and obtaining permission to use such facilities. 
(c)  No poles, cables, equipment or wires for the construction, maintenance and operation of the CATV system shall be installed or the installation thereof commenced on any existing pole within the city until the proposed location, specifications and manner of installation of such cables, equipment and wires shall have been set forth upon a plat or map showing the existing poles, streets, alleys or highways within the city where such installations are proposed and submitted in writing by a grantee to the city engineer and approved by that department in writing. 
(d)  Should a grantee be required in the conduct of its business to locate property within the streets of the city other than property which may be attached to utility poles, then in that event, before a grantee shall install or shall permit any other person to install for the grantee any of such property in the street, the nature of such property shall be disclosed to the city engineer for his approval as to the need thereof and as to the location within the street and only installed under such conditions as he shall prescribe concerning such location or installation. 
(e)  Whenever the city or state shall require the relocation or reinstallation of any property of a grantee in any of the streets of the city, it shall be the obligation of a grantee, upon notice of such requirement, to immediately remove and relocate or reinstall such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet the requirements of the city or state. Such relocation, removal or reinstallation by a grantee shall be at the sole cost of a grantee. 
(f)  Whenever in any place within the city all the electric and telephone utilities shall be located underground, it shall be the obligation of a grantee to locate or to cause its property to be located underground within such places. If the electric utilities or telephone utilities shall be located underground in any place within the city after a grantee shall have previously installed its property, nevertheless, a grantee shall at the same time or immediately thereafter remove and relocate its property also underground in such places. Facilities of a grantee placed underground at the property owner's request in an area where electric utilities or telephone utilities are aerial shall be installed with the additional expense paid by the property owner. 
(g)  A grantee shall have the authority to trim trees overhanging the streets of the city so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with a grantee's wires and cables. All trimming shall be done under the supervision and direction of the city and at the expense of a grantee. 
(h)  In case of disturbance of any street caused by a grantee, a grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city engineer, replace and restore such street in as good condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Provided, where a cut or disturbance is made in a section of sidewalk paving, rather than replacing only the area cut, a grantee shall replace the full width of the existing walk length of the section or sections cut, a section being determined as that area marked by expansion joints or scoring. 
(i)  A grantee shall maintain, repair and keep in good condition for a period of one year following such disturbance all portions of a sidewalk or street disturbed by it or its agents, provided such maintenance and repairs shall be made necessary because of defective workmanship or materials supplied by a grantee. 
(j)  A grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of such building. The expense of such temporary removing or raising or lowering of the wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and a grantee shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. A grantee shall be given not less than 48 hours' advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. In the event of a disagreement between a grantee and a holder of a permit, such disagreement will be resolved by the city engineer. 
(k)  If at any time in case of fire or disaster in the city it shall become necessary, in the judgment of the administrative officer or the chief of the fire department, to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances or other fixtures of a grantee, this may be done, and the repairs thereby rendered necessary shall be made by a grantee, at its own cost and expense and without charge against the city. 
(l)  The grantee's work, while in progress, shall be properly executed at all times with suitable barricades, flags, lights, flares or other devices as are reasonably required to protect all members of the public having occasion to use the portion of the streets involved, or adjacent property. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-10; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-11. - Initial system installation schedule. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the acceptance of the franchise, a grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of CATV systems of their associated microwave transmission facilities. 
(b)  The grantee, within six months from the date the FCC certifies a grantee's compliance with its rules and regulations governing cable television operations in and for the city, shall extend energized trunk cable to 25 percent of the city and shall extend energized trunk cable to the remaining portions of the city within 12 months thereafter unless additional time is granted by the governing body upon request by grantee for good cause shown. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-11; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-12. - System extension to new subscribers. 
(a)  A grantee, whenever it shall receive a request for service from at least five subscribers within 660 feet of its system, shall extend such system to such subscriber at no cost to the subscriber for system extension other than the usual connection fees for all subscribers. The 660 feet shall be measured in extension length of the grantee's cable required for service located within the public way or easement and shall not include length of necessary service drop to the subscriber's home or premises. 
(b)  In addition, the city engineer may, upon complaint from any potential subscriber residing in the city, order the extension of the system to such subscriber after opportunity for hearing and notice to a grantee. In such cases, the city engineer, in his discretion, may order such extension to any subscriber only upon reasonable contribution from the subscriber to the cost of said extension. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-12; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-13. - Type and capacity of equipment to be installed. 
    The applicant shall specify in its proposal the type and capacity of the equipment to be installed, and a grantee shall be required by the city engineer to update this section of its proposal in keeping with the advances in the state of the art of CATV systems design. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-13; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-14. - Operational standards. 
(a)  The CATV system shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the highest accepted standards of the industry to the end that the subscriber may receive the highest and most desirable form of service. 
(b)  In determining satisfactory compliance with the provisions of this article, the following, among other things, shall be considered: 
(1)  That the CATV system is installed and remains capable of using all band equipment and of passing the entire VHF and FM spectrum and that it shall have the further capability of converting UHF for the distribution to subscribers on the VHF band. 
(2)  That the CATV system as installed is capable of transmitting and passing the entire color television signals without the introduction of material degradation of color fidelity and intelligence. 
(3)  That the CATV system is designed and capable of 24 hours a day continuous operation. 
(4)  That the CATV system is capable of and will produce a picture upon any subscriber's television screen in black and white or color (provided the subscriber's television set is capable of producing a color picture) that is undistorted and free from ghost images and accompanied by proper sound assuming the technical, standard production television set is in good repair and that the television broadcast signal transmission is satisfactory. In any event, the picture produced shall be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(5)  That the CATV system shall transmit or distribute signals of adequate strength to produce good pictures with good sound in all television receivers of all subscribers without causing cross modulation in the cables or interference with other electrical or electronic systems. 
(6)  That the CATV system as installed has a minimum capacity of 20 channels. 
(7)  That a grantee shall provide, upon request and without charge, one outlet to each public office building, fire station, police station and public and private school that is passed by its cable. If more than one outlet is required at any of the said locations, a grantee shall install at the cost of time and material only, and in no event will there be a monthly service charge at said locations except for additional outlets. 
(8)  That a grantee shall make its studio facilities, including color cameras and other equipment, available for use by public and private schools for local organization programs and for closed circuit educational films subject to reasonable rules and regulations pertaining to such use by grantee and in such manner as to not unduly interfere with the cable television operations of a grantee. Services rendered to all users by a grantee under the terms of the franchise shall at all times be as good as the state of the art allows. 
(9)  That a grantee shall provide at least one free dedicated noncommercial public access channel to be available. 
(10)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for educational use on a developmental basis, and that upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter at least one channel will be made available free. 
(11)  That a grantee shall reserve at least one channel solely for use by state and local governments on a developmental basis and that, upon completion of the basic trunk line, for the first five years thereafter at least one channel will remain free. 
(12)  That the CATV system shall be installed with the capacity for two-way communication in accordance with the regulations of the FCC now in effect or which may be promulgated. 
(c)  A grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for such good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(d)  A grantee shall maintain an office in the county which shall be open during all usual business hours, have necessary listed telephones, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments may be received at any time. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-14; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-15. - Supervision by city. 
(a)  A grantee shall construct, operate and maintain the CATV system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances and departmental rules and regulations. 
(b)  The CATV system and all parts thereof shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
(c)  The city engineer may, from time to time, issue such reasonable rules and regulations concerning the construction, operation and maintenance of the CATV system as are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(d)  If at any time the powers of the governing body or any agency or official of the city are transferred by law to any other board, authority, agency or official, the transferee shall have the powers, rights and duties previously vested under this article or by law in the governing body or any agency or official of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-15; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-16. - Grantee's duty to remove its properties from the public streets. 
(a)  Following a grantee's commencement of service through and over its CATV system, a grantee shall promptly remove from the public streets where its properties are located all or any part of the facilities so located when one or more of the following enumerated conditions occur: 
(1)  A grantee ceases to operate the CATV system for a continuous period of six months from the date of said occurrence. 
(2)  A grantee fails to construct said system as hereinabove and hereafter provided. 
(3)  The franchise is terminated or revoked pursuant to notice as provided herein. 
(b)  A grantee shall be entitled to receive notice in writing from the city setting forth one or more of the occurrences hereinabove enumerated or such other occurrences hereinbefore or hereinafter provided and shall have 90 days from the date upon which said notice is received to remove such properties as hereinabove required. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-16; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-17. - Operational reports. 
(a)  Within six months from the acceptance date of the franchise, a grantee shall submit to the city engineer and the administrative officer an installation plan for the entire city, indicating the date on which a grantee expects the installation of the CATV system to be completed and available for service to subscribers in the various areas of the city. 
(b)  A grantee shall furnish the city engineer with progress reports indicating in detail the area of construction of the CATV system. Such periodic reports shall be furnished at three-month intervals, the first report to be made three months after the construction commencement date. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-17; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-18. - Off-the-air programming. 
(a)  A grantee shall carry the signals of all television stations licensed to communities within 35 miles of the city pursuant to the rules and regulations of the FCC. 
(b)  A grantee may also transmit or distribute the full output on FM radio stations provided that a grantee transmits or distributes all of the FM stations the broadcasting studios of which are now located within the city or within 35 miles of the limits thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-18; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-19. - Cablecasting on city and public channels. 
    For the presentation of programming on public channels, a grantee shall make available free time and, if necessary, adequate studio facilities to members of the public at rates filed with the governing body and subject to the governing body's review in accordance with the provisions of section 2-3-9. Appropriate technical assistance shall also be furnished by a grantee. Time shall be provided on a first-come, first-served basis, except that a grantee shall endeavor to grant such channel time to as many different persons as is practical, it being the intention of the governing body that such public channels serve as a significant source of diversified expression. In order that there is a maximum opportunity for freedom of expression by members of the public, such programming shall be free from any control by a grantee as to program content, except as is required to protect a grantee from liability under applicable law. The governing body may direct that a grantee discontinue, or not deliver, a program on the public channels which it finds to be essentially promotional or otherwise related primarily to the conduct of a business, trade or profession; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed as a prohibition of advertiser-supported programming on public channels. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-19; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-20. - Local event blackout. 
    If any local event within the metropolitan area is blacked out or not telecast within said area pursuant to and within the terms of any agreement by or with the owners, authorized distributors or licensees of such event, such event shall not be transmitted or delivered by a grantee notwithstanding the source of such event or its TV picture signals except under the rules and regulations adopted by the FCC The word "event" means any live entertainment or sports contest. A grantee shall be required to show proof of written permission if requested. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-20; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-21. - Emergency use of the facilities. 
(a)  In the event of any emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon request of the administrative office, make available its facilities to the city at no cost for emergency use during the period of such emergency or disaster and shall provide such personnel as necessary to properly operate under the circumstances. 
(b)  A grantee shall incorporate into its facilities the capability for an emergency override alert whereby the city, in times of crisis, may be able to introduce a bulletin on all channels simultaneously. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-21; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-22. - Compliance with state and federal laws. 
(a)  A grantee shall, at all times, comply with all laws and regulations of the state and federal governments or any administrative agency thereof, and if any state or federal law or regulation shall require a grantee to perform any service or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service or shall permit a grantee to perform any service in conflict with the terms of the franchise or of any laws or regulation of the city, then as soon as possible following knowledge thereof, a grantee shall notify the administrative officer of the point of conflict believed to exist between such regulation of law and the laws or regulations of the city or franchise, and a grantee shall be governed by the advice of the administrative officer. 
(b)  A grantee shall be subject to all city ordinances as set forth herein, and a grantee shall also be subject to all applicable rules and regulations which, from time to time, may be promulgated by the FCC for CATV systems. 
(c)  If the governing body determines that material provision of this article is affected by such subsequent action, the governing body shall have the right to modify any of the provisions herein to such reasonable extent as may be necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-22; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-23. - Filing communications with regulatory agencies. 
    Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by a grantee to the FCC, SEC or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matter affecting CATV operation shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-23; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-24. - Restrictions on transfer, assignment, etc., of franchise. 
(a)  The franchise shall not be assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, leased or sublet in any manner, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person either by the act of a grantee or by operation of law without the consent of the governing body. The granting, giving or waiving of any one or more of such consents shall not render unnecessary any subsequent consent or consents. 
(b)  The consent or approval of the governing body to any assignment, lease, transfer or sublease of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets. 
(c)  Prior approval of the governing body shall be required where ownership or control of more than ten percent of the right of control of a grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already owns or controls ten percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively, at the date the franchise is granted. By its acceptance of the franchise, a grantee specifically agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the governing body shall constitute a violation of this article by a grantee. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a mortgage or pledge of the CATV system equipment or any part thereof or a leasing by a grantee from another person to said CATV system equipment or part thereof for financing purposes or otherwise. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-24; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-25. - Preferential or discriminatory practices. 
    A grantee shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any undue preference or advantage to any person or subject any person to any undue prejudice or disadvantage; provided, however, connection and service charges may be waived or modified during promotional campaigns of grantee. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-25; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-26. - Revocation of franchise. 
(a)  In addition to all the rights and powers reserved or pertaining to the city, the city reserves as an additional and as a separate and distinct power the right to terminate the franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee hereunder in any of the following events or for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  A grantee shall by act or omission violate any term or condition of this article and within 30 days following written demand by the city shall fail to effect compliance. 
(2)  Any provision of this article shall be finally adjudged by a court of law invalid or unenforceable and the governing body further finds that such provision constitutes at that time a consideration material to the continuance of the franchise herein granted. 
(3)  A grantee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged a bankrupt or all or part of a grantee's facilities are or are to be sold under an instrument to secure a debt and are not redeemable by grantee within 30 days from said sale. 
(4)  A grantee attempts to or does practice any fraud or deceit in its conduct or relations under the franchise with the city or subscribers or potential subscribers. 
(b)  A grantee shall not be declared at fault or be subject to any sanction under any provision of this article in any case in which performance of any such provision is prevented for reasons beyond its control. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-26; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-27. - Procedures. 
(a)  Any injury, proceeding, investigation or other action to be taken or proposed to be taken by the administrative officer and the governing body in regard to the operations of a grantee's cable television system other than as provided in subsection (c) of this section, but including action in regard to a change in subscription rates, shall be taken only after 30 days' public notice of such action or proposed action is published in a local daily or weekly newspaper having general circulation in the city; a copy of such action or proposed action is served directly on grantee; and the grantee has been given an opportunity to respond in writing and/or at hearing as may be specified by the administrative officer and governing body, and general members of the public have been given an opportunity to respond or comment in writing on the action or proposed action. 
(b)  The public notice required by this section shall state clearly the action or proposed action to be taken, the time provided for response and the persons in authority to whom such response should be addressed, and such other procedures as may be specified by the administrative officer and governing body. If a hearing is to be held, the public notice shall give the date and time of such hearing, whether public participation will be allowed and the procedures by which such participation may be obtained. The grantee is a necessary party to any hearing conducted in regard to its operations. 
(c)  An informal complaint shall be submitted to the administrative officer and governing body in writing and shall contain the name and address of the complainant, the name of the cable system against which the complaint is made and a complete statement of facts upon which the complaint is based. 
(1)  Upon receipt of any informal complaint, the administrative officer and governing body will forward a copy to the system complained of or may take the question up by correspondence with the system. Within such time as may be prescribed by the administrative officer and the governing body, the system will be called upon to satisfy the complaint or advise the administrative officer and governing body of its refusal or inability to do so. If the system satisfies the complaint, it shall so notify the administrative officer and the governing body in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c)(2) hereof. The administrative officer and governing body will forward a copy of the system's notice of satisfaction to the complainant. If the system refuses or is unable to satisfy the complaint, it shall so notify the administrative officer and governing body, and the administrative officer and governing body will forward a copy of such notice to the complainant, with a statement of the procedure to be followed to further prosecute the complaint. 
(2)  If a system satisfies any complaint brought to its attention by the administrative officer and governing body, a statement must be filed with the administrative officer and governing body setting forth when and how the complainant has been satisfied. 
(3)  When a complaint has not been satisfied pursuant to subsection (c)(2) above, the complainant may file a formal complaint with the administrative officer and governing body in the form and manner to be specified thereby. The complaint to the administrative officer and governing body must be filed within six months from the date of the administrative officer's and governing body's statement accompanying a copy of the system's notice of refusal or inability to satisfy the complaint, and the complaint to the administrative officer and governing body must take reference to the date of the complaint filed with the administrative officer and governing body and that it is based on the same facts as the complaint filed with the administrative officer and governing body. If no complaint is filed with the administrative officer and governing body within six months period, the complainant will be deemed to have abandoned his complaint, and such complaint will be deemed dismissed. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-27; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-28. - Grantee to have no recourse. 
(a)  Except as expressly provided in the franchise, a grantee herein shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost or expenses or damage arising out of the provisions or requirements of the franchise or because of the enforcement thereof by the city, nor for the failure of the city to have the authority to grant all or any part of the franchise. 
(b)  A grantee expressly acknowledges that upon accepting a franchise, it does so relying upon its own investigation and understanding of the power and authority of the city to grant the franchise. 
(c)  A grantee by acceptance of the franchise acknowledges that it has not been induced to enter into the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement whether verbal or written by or on behalf of the city or by any other third person concerning any term or condition of the franchise not expressed herein. 
(d)  A grantee further acknowledges by acceptance of the franchise that it has carefully read the terms and conditions hereof and is willing to and does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and conditions and agrees that in the event of any ambiguity therein or in the event of any other dispute over the meaning thereof, the same shall be construed strictly against a grantee and in favor of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-28; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-29. - Failure of city to enforce the franchise; no waiver of the terms thereof. 
    A grantee shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the franchise by any failure of the city upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-29; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-30. - Time essence of agreement. 
    Whenever the franchise shall set forth any time for any act to be performed by or on behalf of a grantee, such time shall be deemed of the essence, and any failure of a grantee to perform within the time allotted shall always be sufficient grounds for the city to revoke the franchise. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-30; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-31. - Grantee will not contest validity of franchise. 
    A grantee agrees by the acceptance of the franchise that it will not at any time set up against the city in any claim or proceeding any condition or term of the franchise as unreasonable, arbitrary or void or that the city had no power or authority to make such term or condition, but shall be required to accept the validity of the terms and conditions of the franchise in their entirety. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-31; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-32. - Rights reserved to the city. 
    Without limitation upon the rights which the city might otherwise have, the city does hereby expressly reserve the following rights, powers and authorities: 
(1)  To exercise its governmental powers now or hereafter to the full extent that such powers may be vested in or granted to said city. 
(2)  To determine through the governing body any question of fact relating to the meaning, terms, obligations or other factors of the franchise. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-32; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-33. - Acceptance. 
    This article and its terms and provisions shall be accepted by a grantee by a written franchise agreement executed and acknowledged by a grantee and filed with the city clerk. Said agreement shall incorporate grantee's written application to the city for the CATV franchise and shall bind grantee to the provisions of said application. The governing body may require a grantee to clarify any portion of its written application prior to final acceptance. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-33; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-34. - Extension of city limits. 
    Upon the annexation of any territory to the city (other than through a governmental consolidation process, as to which the city makes no agreement), the right and franchise hereby granted shall extend to the territory so annexed to the extent the city has authority; and all facilities owned, maintained or operated by a grantee, located within, under or over streets of the territory so annexed, shall thereafter be subject to all terms hereof. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-34; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-35. - Local office. 
    During the term of the franchise, and any renewal thereof, the grantee shall maintain in the city a local business office or agent. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if the grantee maintains a local business headquarters office within ten air miles of the center of the city; provides the administrative officer and governing body with the name, address and phone number of a resident of the county who will act as the grantee's agent to receive complaints regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters; and at least once a week informs all subscribers by appropriate announcement (e.g., by a slide card) over the system's originations cablecasting channel of the name, address and phone number of the grantee's registered agent for the city. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-35; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-36. - Pay television. 
    A grantee shall not engage in pay television except under conditions affirmatively authorized by the FCC. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-36; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
Sec. 38-3-37. - Modification of FCC rules. 
    Consistent with the requirements of rule 76.31(a)(6) of the FCC, any modification of rule 76.31 resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of the franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be incorporated in such franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the governing body within one year from the effective date of the FCC's amendment or at the time of renewal of the franchise, whichever occurs first. 
(Code 1981, § 9-5-37; Ord. No. 79-7, 7-3-1979; Ord. No. 86-12, 11-18-1986) 
ARTICLE 4. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, adopted May 7, 2002, enacted provisions intended for use as title 9, chapter 7, sections 9-7-1-9-7-20. Inasmuch as this ordinance was inadvertently omitted during the recodification, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as chapter 38, article 4, sections 38-4-1-38-4-20. 

Sec. 38-4-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the granting, issuance and regulation of franchises to companies desiring to construct, operate or maintain telecommunications systems over which telecommunications services are provided, or to companies desiring to provide facility services within the territorial boundaries of the city on the terms and conditions described in each franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-2. - Definitions. 
    Affiliated person means each person who falls into one or more of the following categories: (1) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; (2) each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (3) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, or the applicant; and, (4) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
    City means the City of Hapeville. 
    City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
    Facility services means the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of conduit or related facilities in the streets by a person for sale or lease to third parties, other than affiliated persons, that use such conduit or related facilities for the transmission of telecommunication services, but such person does not itself provide telecommunications service or cable service to such third parties or any locations or other persons in the license area. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets by a telecommunications system to provide telecommunications services. 
    Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to provide facility services along licensed routes pursuant to a license, or to construct, install, operate and maintain a telecommunications system as necessary to: (1) furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; (2) provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or (3) transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
    May is permissive. 
    Ordinance means this article and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
    Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
    Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
    Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this article, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in this article. 
    Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
    Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
    Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
    Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications Service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
    Telecommunications system means the system, plant, equipment or property within the streets in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-3. - Franchise required. 
    Prior to any person, firm, corporation, or other entity using the city right-of-way by constructing, installing, altering, or repairing lines, devices, or other physical objects within the city right-of-way as part of any commercial enterprise then a franchise must be gained by the mayor and council of the city. For the purposes of this article only, the term "using the city right-of-way" shall be defined as any activity that affects: the preservation of the physical and aesthetic integrity of city streets and highways, the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians, the management and safety of gas, water, cable, electric and telecommunication oriented (except for television) and telephone facilities that are located in or occupying any street, road, alley, sidewalk or other public place in said city, for public utility purposes, such as electric light plant, electric or steam or other streetcar line or road, gas line, railroad line, telephone line, telegraph line, telecommunication facilities, express line, waterworks, or other public utility service, whether the same be surface, underground, overhead or otherwise, except as hereinafter provided, in city right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-4. - Procedure for grant of franchise. 
(a)  Application in writing, signed by the applicant, shall be made to and filed with the department of community services for such franchise, license or right, setting forth what streets or areas are to be occupied and for what purpose. The department of community services shall be responsible for ensuring the completeness of the application. Upon receipt of a complete application, the department of community services shall inform the mayor and council of its receipt. Two weeks notice of application shall be given by the clerk of council by posting said notice at the door of the council chamber, before the same is acted on by council; and before such franchise, license or right shall be granted. If granted, such franchise shall be passed upon favorably by a majority vote of the council at one regular monthly meeting of same. The application shall be considered by the mayor and council no later than 90 days after submission by the applicant as noted by the clerk receiving the application. 
(b)  Council may grant the franchise upon such terms and conditions as it may deem advisable and revoke same for a violation of such terms and conditions. 
(c)  Council may preliminarily approve an application pending a final agreement entered into under section 38-4-8. If no final agreement is reached such application approval shall be deemed void. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-5. - Standards for approval or refusal of franchise application. 
    The city shall manage the public rights-of-way by approving or denying franchise application and fees on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis while publicly disclosing the compensation (franchise fee and administrative fee) required. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-6. - Franchise fee, application fee and administrative fee. 
(a)  The franchise fee shall be the greater of: (1) five percent of the applicant's annual gross revenue generated within the city; or, (2) a minimum fee paid to the city of $1,250.00 for each quarter this agreement is in effect; or, (3) a fee of $1.00 per linear foot of fiber optic telecommunications equipment located within the city but outside the downtown development district (as defined in the city's zoning ordinances) and a fee of $2.00 per linear foot of fiber optic telecommunications equipment located within the downtown development district within the city. All such payment of franchise fees shall be made on a quarterly basis and shall be remitted simultaneously with the submission of a quarterly franchise fee report to be forwarded to the city by mail not later than 30 days after the last day of each March, June, September, and December throughout the term of the franchise setting forth the gross revenue for the quarter ending on said last day. 
(b)  An application fee of $70.00 will be paid by the applicant at the time the application is delivered to the city. If a franchise is granted, the application fee will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except as required by law. 
(c)  An administrative fee shall be paid by the applicant at the time a final contract is executed. The fee shall reflect the actual costs of administering the franchise application and any resulting agreement. These costs shall be paid at the lowest hourly rate of the lowest paid employee or worker competent in the city's opinion to perform the work required to process, draft, and negotiate the application and agreement. Such fees will include but are not necessarily limited to document preparation, document processing, document review, field review, legal review, legal work regarding contract negotiation and drafting, contract execution, and any other city cost the city incurs as a result of the franchise application and award. 
(d)  The franchise fee, application fee and administrative fee are separate and apart from any additional fees required by the city as they relate to the activities of the grantee. The grantee remains responsible for securing all necessary permits prior to the start of construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-7. - Audit and provision of audit information. 
(a)  Franchise fee payments subject to audit; remedy for underpayment. No acceptance of any franchise fee payment by the city shall be construed as an accord and satisfaction that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount or a release of any claim that the city may have for further or additional sums payable under a franchise and all amounts paid shall be subject to audit and recomputation by the city. Except as provided in subsection (b), the cost of the audit shall be borne by the city. 
(b)  Costs of audit. If, as a result of such audit or any other review, the city determines that grantee has underpaid its fees in any 12-month period by ten percent or more, then, in addition to making full payment of the relevant obligation, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all of the reasonable costs associated with the audit or review, including all reasonable out-of-pocket costs for attorneys, accountants, and other consultants. 
(c)  Payments not to be set off against taxes or vice versa. Payments made pursuant to this section and any other provision of this article are not a tax and are not in the nature of a tax and are in addition to any and all taxes of general applicability or other fees or charges (including any fees or charges which may be imposed on the grantee for the use of poles, conduits or similar facilities that may be owned or controlled by the city) which the grantee or any affiliated person shall be required to pay to the city. 
(d)  Interest on late payments. If any payment required by this article is not actually received by the city on or before the applicable date fixed in this article, the grantee shall pay interest thereon, from the due date to the date paid at a rate of one percent per month, for the period of delinquency. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-8. - Franchise agreement. 
    Each grantee shall enter into an agreement with the city which is consistent with the terms of this article. Each franchise agreement granted under this article shall be personal to the grantee and the terms of each franchise agreement may vary. The mere granting of a franchise agreement by the city in no way relieves the grantee of its responsibility to secure all permits necessary, prior to construction, for the operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the facilities. The department of community services will administer each franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-9. - Duration of franchise. 
    Franchise agreements that extend beyond a calendar year shall comply with O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-10. - Renewal of franchise. 
    Sixty days prior to the expiration of the agreement term, the grantee may apply for the renewal of this authorization. The city reserves the right to grant or deny such renewal. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-11. - Rights personal. 
(a)  The rights granted by this article to the grantee are personal to the grantee (as owned and controlled on the effective date of this article) and shall not be assigned, sold, pledged, leased, sublet, mortgaged or transferred, directly or indirectly, without the prior written consent of the city. 
(b)  It is not the intention of this article nor any subsequent agreement to grant any property right whatsoever to grantee. Further, grantee is required to contractually relinquish any claimed easement right within the city's municipal right-of-way. If any facility is placed by grantee outside of the city's right-of-way and such right-of-way is later expanded to include the grantee's facility, upon the city's request, such facility shall be removed or relocated at grantee's full and sole expense. The grantee, under contract and for the express consideration of the use of the city's right-of-way shall waive any and all claim for reimbursement for any costs for any removed or relocated facility and for any claim of any easement or other property right in the public right-of-way or expanded public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-12. - Inspections provisions of construction information. 
    The city shall inspect the activities of the grantee within the right-of-way including inspection of construction procedures and relocation of facilities and may require information necessary to perform an inspection including, but not limited to the information required under subsections 38-4-13(e) and (f). Such information shall include descriptions of how the grantee's facilities fit into the affected rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-13. - Construction practices. 
(a)  No grantee shall commence any construction, operation, maintenance, repair or upgrading of a franchise, or any part thereof, without having first secured the necessary permits from the city or other required public agencies having jurisdiction over the work to be performed. 
(b)  In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of all the public utilities providing telephone and electric power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein underground. 
(c)  In those areas of the city where a grantee's cables or facilities are located on the above-ground transmission or distribution facilities of the public utility providing telephone, electric power, or other service, and in the event that the facilities of such public utilities subsequently are placed underground, then the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at grantee's cost, provided that grantee may request a waiver, in writing, of the requirement for underground placement where such underground placement would be technologically unfeasible. Certain of grantee's equipment, such as pedestals, amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed aboveground, may continue to remain in above-ground closures. 
(d)  If the grades, lines, or right-of-way of any street within the service area are changed at any time during the term of a franchise, then the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades, lines, or rights-of-way. In the event that the grantee refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the city and the grantee shall pay to the city all costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alternation, or relocation. 
(e)  Prior to construction a final location plan shall be submitted for approval by the inspection department, and the inspection department shall be authorized to permit or to require an alternate location for the proposed facilities within the public right-of-way to avoid conflict with other permitted uses or to establish an appropriate width from curb for placement of conduit for the use proposed. The city also reserves the right to inspect the installation and maintenance of grantee's facilities in or on the city's property. 
(f)  The grantee shall provide as-built drawings, acceptable to the city detailing the number and location of facilities installed pursuant to this article. The number and location of facilities may be reasonably regulated as set forth in this chapter. 
(g)  The grantee shall give the city 30 days advance written notice requesting any additional use of right-of-way and shall abide by any permitting requirements as specified by city ordinances. 
(h)  In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade, or removal of the facilities the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the city and all designated landmarks. The grantee agrees that it shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace or repair and restore to its previous serviceable condition, in a manner as may be specified by the city, any street or any municipal structure involved in the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the facilities that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of the grantee. 
(i)  In connection with the construction, operation, maintenance, repair, upgrade, or removal of the facility, the grantee shall not obstruct the streets, railways, passenger travel, river navigation, or other traffic to, from, or within the public rights-of-way without prior consent of the city and any other appropriate authorities. All such work shall be performed so as to cause minimal interference with users of the streets and adjoining property owners. 
(j)  The grantee shall, upon prior written notice by the city or any person holding a permit to move any structure, temporarily move its wires to permit the moving of said structure. The grantee may impose a reasonable charge on any person other than the city for any such movement of its wires. However, imposition of such a charge shall not be deemed to constitute an easement benefiting grantee. 
(k)  In case of a grantee's disturbance of pavement, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the grantee shall, at its sole expense, replace and restore such surfaces, in as good a condition as before such work was commenced and in accordance with city standards. 
(l)  Erection, removal, and common uses of poles. 
(1)  No poles or other wire-holding structures shall be erected by the grantee without first having entered into a pole attachment agreement with the city. However, no location of any pole or wire-holding structure of the grantee shall be vested interest and such poles or structures shall be removed or modified by the grantee at its own expense whenever the council determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. 
(2)  Where poles or other wire-holding structures already existing for use in serving the city are available for use by the grantee on reasonable terms the council may require the grantee to use such poles and structures. If a grantee believes the terms with a private supplier to be unreasonable, it may apply, in writing, to the city for a waiver of this requirement. 
(3)  Poles in public right-of-way shall be removed or relocated at the sole expense of grantee at the request of the city when, in the city's sole discretion, removal or relocation is deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-14. - Insurance. 
(a)  Liability insurance. Throughout the term of any franchise, the grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, maintain a liability insurance policy or policies in a form acceptable to the city, and approved by the city attorney. The grantee shall furnish, at least annually, to the city certificates of insurance for all policies required by this article and the franchise. Each such liability insurance policy shall contain the following, or equivalent, endorsement: "It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the intention not to renew be stated until sixty (60) days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew." Not later than 30 days prior to cancellation of required insurance, the grantee shall obtain and furnish to the city replacement insurance policies in a form reasonably acceptable to the city. 
(b)  Increase insurance coverage. In the event of any changed circumstances following the effective date, the city may, after consulting with the grantee, alter the minimum limitation of the liability insurance policy or policies required in this section. 
(c)  Liability not limited. The legal liability of the company and any affiliated person to the city and any person for any of the matters which are the subject of the liability insurance policies required by this section, including, without limitation, the grantee indemnification obligations set forth in this article shall not be limited by such insurance policies nor by the recovery of any amounts thereunder, except to the extent necessary to avoid duplicative recovery from or payment by the grantee. 
(d)  Self insurance. In lieu of purchasing one or more commercial insurance policies, grantee may provide for the above-referenced types and amounts of insurance through self-insurance, subject to approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-15. - Letter of credit. 
(a)  Within ten days after formal award of a franchise, the grantee shall deposit with the city a letter of credit from a financial institution in the amount of $10,000.00. The form and content of such letter of credit shall be approved by the city attorney. The letter of credit shall be used to insure the faithful performance by the grantee of all provisions of a franchise; and compliance with all orders, permits and directives of any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or defaults under the franchise, and the payment by the grantee of any claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system. 
(b)  The letter of credit shall be maintained at $10,000.00 during the entire term of the franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to subsections (a) or (c) of this section. 
(c)  If the grantee fails to pay to the city any compensation within the time fixed herein; or fails to repay the city within ten days, for underpayments, any damages, costs or expenses which the city is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with this franchise; or, fails, after three days' notice of such failure by the grantee to comply with any provision of the franchise which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the letter of credit, the council may immediately request payment of the amount thereof, with interest, calculated at the rate of one percent per month, from the date of delinquency, and any penalties, from the letter of credit. Upon such request for payment, the city shall notify the grantee of the amount and date thereof. 
(d)  Enforcement of this article with respect to the letter of credit is in addition to all other rights of the city, authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such letter of credit shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(e)  The letter of credit shall contain the following, or equivalent, endorsement: 
"It is hereby understood and agreed that this letter of credit shall not be canceled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City of Hapeville, Georgia, Mayor and Council, by registered mail, of a written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew." 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-16. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the award of a franchise, the grantee shall file with the city a performance bond in the amount of $100,000.00 in favor of the city. This bond shall be approved by the city attorney and shall be maintained throughout the construction or upgrade of the entire facility or until such time as the city may require. 
(b)  In the event the grantee fails to comply with any law, ordinance or regulation governing the franchise, or fails to well and truly observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of the franchise, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally, from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the grantee, plus a reasonable allowance for attorney's fees, up to the full amount of the bond. This section shall be an additional remedy for any and all violations outlined in section 38-4-18. 
(c)  The city may, upon completion of construction or upgrade of the grantee, waive or reduce the requirement of the grantee to maintain said bond. However, the city may require that a performance bond be posted by the grantee for any construction subsequent to the completion of the work in the right-of-way, in a reasonable amount and upon such terms as determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-17. - Abandonment or removal of franchise property. 
(a)  In the event that the use of any property of grantee within the right-of-way or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous period of six months, grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned that franchise property. 
(b)  The city, upon such terms as it may impose, may give grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any grantee property or equipment under the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this article, the grantee shall remove all abandoned above-ground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice from the city and shall restore any affected city property to its former state at the time such facilities and equipment were installed, so as not to impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this article and any security fund provided in the franchise shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by grantee with the terms and conditions of this section. 
(c)  At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon abandonment as defined above or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for herein, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the city shall have the right to require grantee to remove, at its own expense, all above-ground portions of its facilities from all streets and public ways within the city within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than 180 days. 
(d)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this article, the grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so long as it does not, in the city's sole discretion, materially interfere with the use of the street or public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-18. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Penalty provisions applicable to zoning as provided by section 93-24-6 of the zoning ordinance of the city, in existence before the adoption of this article shall be and are herein readopted and made applicable to this article as if fully set out herein. Further, action taken by the city under the penalty provisions of section 93-24-6 of this Code shall not bar the city from taking any civil action against a party violating this article which may include a demand for reimbursement of attorney's fees and any other fee expended by the city in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-19. - Relationship to other ordinances and franchises. 
    This article shall not supersede nor repeal article 3 of this same chapter, CATV Franchises, nor chapter 38, article 2, of this Code. If it is determined that this article and the said chapters conflict, the more restrictive provision shall apply except in the area of CATV Franchises (governed by chapter 38, article 3) and the siting of telecommunications towers and antennas (governed by chapter 38, article 2). 
    Furthermore, this article shall not be deemed to repeal any franchise agreement duly approved and executed before the effective date of this chapter. Furthermore, this provision shall not be deemed to in any way to allow any attempt by the mayor and council to contractually or otherwise limit their police powers. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Sec. 38-4-20. - Revocation. 
    If the grantee fails to comply with any of the terms and conditions of this article, then the city may, in addition to the other penalties herein, revoke the authorization granted herein. The city shall notify the grantee of its failure to comply and give grantee 30 days to correct such default before revocation. The notice required hereunder shall not be required for issuance of a citation for a violation of this article as set out in section 38-4-17 without invoking the revocation provisions hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2002-03, § 2, 5-7-2002) 
Chapter 41 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 41-1-1. - Uniform Rules of the Road adopted by reference. 
    Pursuant O.C.G.A. title 40, chapter 6, sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, sections 40-6-1 through 40-6-397 of that chapter, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A § 40-1-1, as hereafter amended, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-1; Ord. No. 91-5, 2-5-1991) 
Sec. 41-1-2. - Temporary traffic regulations. 
    In cases where traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public assemblages where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules directing and regulating the traffic in these congested districts, and any person who, after being warned of the temporary traffic regulations, shall violate them shall be liable therefor as for other violations of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-2) 
Sec. 41-1-3. - Vehicle cover required. 
    No person shall operate or load any vehicle on the public streets and roads of this city unless the vehicle is constructed, loaded and securely covered so as to prevent any of its load from dropping, escaping or shifting in such a manner as to create a safety hazard or in such a manner so as to litter the streets and roads of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-3) 
Sec. 41-1-4. - Police committee; powers and duties generally. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the police committee, and to this end it shall have the authority within the limits of the funds at its disposal, to carry on educational activities in traffic matters, to supervise the publication of traffic reports, to receive suggestions and complaints having to do with traffic matters and to recommend to the mayor and council and to the city traffic engineer and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. 
(b)  No ordinance providing for the control of traffic on the streets of the city shall be enacted by the mayor and council until after such proposed ordinance shall have been submitted to the police chief and also to the police committee, and their several recommendations received thereon. All proposed traffic ordinances referred by the mayor and council to the police committee shall be reported back to the mayor and council within 30 days after such reference with its recommendation, otherwise the mayor and council may act on such proposed ordinance without the recommendation of the police committee. 
(Code 1959, § 20-2; Code 1981, § 10-1-4) 
Sec. 41-1-5. - Designation of noncommercial traffic streets. 
(a)  In order to improve traffic conditions and to restrict the flow of certain types of traffic in certain areas, the police committee or the mayor and council is hereby authorized and empowered to designate certain streets and areas within the city as restricted to noncommercial traffic by the posting of appropriate signs sufficiently conspicuous to be observed by motorists. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial or commercial-type motor vehicle on any streets designated "no commercial traffic." 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed, however, as preventing proper commercial vehicles having definite business in a particular restricted area of the city from entering such area for purposes of making deliveries or pickups, or otherwise servicing the property of any resident of such area; the purpose of this section being to prevent the use of certain city streets by commercial vehicles passing through en route to other destinations. 
(Code 1959, § 20-3; Code 1981, § 10-1-5) 
Sec. 41-1-6. - Designation of traffic engineer; responsibilities. 
(a)  The chief of police is designated as city traffic engineer. 
(b)  The traffic engineer shall be responsible for conducting engineering analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, conducting engineering investigation of traffic conditions and cooperating with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and carrying out the additional powers and duties imposed by this chapter and other ordinances of the city. 
(c)  The city engineer or other designated person shall install and maintain at the direction of the traffic engineer all traffic control signals, signs and markings. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-6) 
Sec. 41-1-7. - Through commercial traffic prohibited on certain streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for through commercial traffic to be operated upon the following designated streets: 
(1)  Whitney Avenue from North Avenue to South Central Avenue; 
(2)  Virginia Place from Virginia Avenue to Whitney Avenue; 
(3)  Jonesboro Road from Mount Zion Road to King Arnold Street; 
(4)  North Avenue from Dogwood Drive to Sylvan Road; 
(5)  Myrtle Street from Central Avenue to North Avenue; 
(6)  Sunset Avenue; and 
(7)  Such other streets as may from time to time be posted. 
(Code 1959, § 20-21; Code 1981, § 10-1-7) 
Sec. 41-1-8. - Large vehicle traffic prohibited on certain streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any large vehicle, in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), on the following streets: 
(1)  North Central Avenue from Sylvan Road to Dogwood Drive. 
(2)  The entirety of South Central Avenue. 
(3)  The entirety of King Arnold Street. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to the operation of: 
(1)  Large vehicles making deliveries of people or property to areas, homes, or businesses accessible only by routes including the roads described herein; or 
(2)  Large vehicles by the owner or operator of such vehicle while on his or her way to his or her residence. 
(3)  Recreational vehicles by the owner or operator of such vehicle while on his or her way to his or her residence. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  The term "large vehicle" shall mean tractors, trailers, cabs, trucks, vehicle carriers, tow trucks, towing vehicles, and truck cabs. 
(2)  The term "recreational vehicles" shall mean vehicles that are used primarily for recreational purposes, are not used primarily for transportation, and are not used for commercial purposes. 
(Ord. No. 2001-09, § 1, 5-1-2001) 
Sec. 41-1-9. - Vehicle weight limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle including tractors and trailers upon any street in any residential area whenever the total weight of the vehicle and its load exceeds ten tons. 
(Code 1959, § 20-22; Code 1981, § 10-1-8) 
Sec. 41-1-10. - Blocking crossings by railroad trains. 
    It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
(Code 1959, § 20-28; Code 1981, § 10-1-9) 
Sec. 41-1-11. - Vegetation; creation of traffic hazard, abatement procedure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for owners of property in the city to permit shrubbery or other vegetation to grow or to accumulate to a height of more than three feet within seven feet of the curb of any public street, road or alley when, in the opinion of the police chief or the police committee, or both, the same shall constitute a menace or a hazard to traffic. 
(b)  Upon notification by the police chief or the chairman of the police committee, or the designated representative of either, the owner of any property held to be in violation of the foregoing will, within three days after such notification, remedy the defective condition pointed out or cited to him in the notification according to instructions received. 
(c)  If, in the opinion of the property owner, the notice under this section by the police chief, chairman of the police committee or their designated representative seems unreasonable, unfair or would work an unnecessary hardship upon him, the property owner may, at his request, be given the right to appear before the mayor and council and state his case before any further action is taken against him, and the decision of the mayor and council shall be final and binding upon all concerned. 
(d)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section by failing within three days following notification to comply therewith shall be brought to trial in the municipal court, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1959, §§ 20-29, 20-30; Code 1981, §§ 10-1-10, 10-1-11) 
Sec. 41-1-12. - Interference with vehicular traffic by airplanes, helicopters, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any airplane, helicopter or any other flying machine, intended to be propelled through the air, to be propelled, driven, dragged, pulled or pushed across any city street within the city, it being the intent of this section that no interference with vehicular traffic shall be permitted. 
(Code 1959, § 14.1; Code 1981, § 10-1-12) 
Sec. 41-1-13. - Proof of insurance required. 
    The Georgia Motor Vehicle Accident Reparations Act, Georgia Laws 1974, p. 113, as thereafter amended and in particular Georgia Laws 1978, p. 1369, are hereby adopted by reference and made part of this Code as if set out in full, therefore it shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle within the city without liability insurance and proof thereof. 
(Ord. No. 80-7, 7-10-1980; Code 1981, § 10-1-13) 
ARTICLE 2. - VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 41-2-1. - Traffic violations bureau; creation; schedule of fines to be prepared. 
(a)  The judge of the municipal court shall establish a traffic violations bureau to assist the court with the clerical work of traffic cases. The bureau shall be in charge of those persons and shall be open at those hours as the judge may designate. 
(b)  The judge who hears traffic cases shall designate the specified offense under this chapter or traffic ordinances of the city and applicable state traffic laws in respect to which payments of fines may be accepted by the traffic violations bureau in satisfaction thereof, and shall specify by suitable schedules the amount of fines for first, second and subsequent offenses, provided those fines are within the limits declared by law or ordinance, and shall further specify what number of offenses shall require appearance before the municipal court. 
(c)  When fines are paid to the traffic violations bureau as provided herein, no court costs shall be assessed or collected. 
(Code 1959, § 20-160; Code 1981, § 10-1-111) 
Sec. 41-2-2. - Same; duties. 
    The following duties are hereby imposed upon the traffic violations bureau in reference to traffic offenses: 
(1)  It shall accept designated fines, issue receipts and represent in court those violators as are permitted and desire to plead guilty, waive court appearance and give power of attorney. 
(2)  It shall receive and issue receipts for cash bail from the persons who must or wish to be heard in court, enter the time of their appearance on the court docket and notify the arresting officer and witnesses, if any, to be present. 
(3)  It shall keep an easily accessible record of all violations of which each person has been guilty during the preceding 12 months, whether guilt was established in court or in the traffic violations bureau. 
(Code 1959, § 20-161; Code 1981, § 10-1-112) 
Sec. 41-2-3. - Same; records and reports. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall keep any records and make any reports as the mayor and council may from time to time require. 
(Code 1959, § 20-162; Code 1981, § 10-1-113) 
Sec. 41-2-4. - Same; procedure. 
    The traffic violations bureau shall follow any procedure as may be prescribed by this chapter or other traffic ordinances of the city or as may be required by any laws of the state. 
(Code 1959, § 20-163; Code 1981, § 10-1-114) 
Sec. 41-2-5. - Same; payment of fines thereto. 
(a)  Any person charged with an offense for which payment of a fine may be made to the traffic violations bureau shall have the option of paying the fine within the time specified in the notice of arrest to the officer in charge at the city police station upon entering a plea of guilty and upon waiving appearance in court; or may have the option of depositing required lawful bail and upon a plea of not guilty shall be entitled to a trial as authorized by law. 
(b)  The payment of a fine to the officer on duty shall be deemed an acknowledgement of conviction of the alleged offense, and the officer upon accepting the prescribed fine shall issue a receipt to the violator acknowledging the payment thereof. 
(Code 1959, § 20-164; Code 1981, § 10-1-115) 
Sec. 41-2-6. - Procedure upon arrest; issuance of notice to appear. 
    Except when authorized or directed under state law immediately to take a person arrested for a violation of any of the traffic laws before the municipal court, any police officer, upon making an arrest for violation of the state traffic laws, this chapter or other traffic ordinance of the city, shall take the name, address and number of the motor vehicle involved and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the city a notice to answer to the charge against him at a place and time to be specified in the notice. The officer, upon receiving the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the notice, may release that person from custody. 
(Code 1959, § 20-172; Code 1981, § 10-1-116) 
Sec. 41-2-7. - Liability of owner for parking violation; equally with operator. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any street in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city regulating the parking of vehicles. Such person shall be equally liable with the operator for any violation and in addition thereto may have his vehicle impounded, as provided in section 41-7-2. 
(Code 1959, § 20-173; Code 1981, § 10-1-117) 
Sec. 41-2-8. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of the parking the registered owner of the vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle was the person who parked or placed that vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred. 
(b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure as prescribed in sections 41-2-9 and 41-2-11 has been followed. 
(Code 1959, § 20-174; Code 1981, § 10-1-118) 
Sec. 41-2-9. - Affixing notice to illegally parked vehicle. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or other ordinance of the city or by state law, the officer finding the vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to the vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city, for the driver to answer to the charge against him at the time and place specified in the notice. 
(Code 1959, § 20-175; Code 1981, § 10-1-119) 
Sec. 41-2-10. - Failure to appear after giving written promise. 
    Any person who violates his written promise to appear given to an officer upon an arrest for any traffic violation is guilty of an offense regardless of the disposition of the charge on which he was originally arrested. 
(Code 1959, § 20-176; Code 1981, § 10-1-120) 
Sec. 41-2-11. - Failure to comply with notice affixed to vehicle. 
    If a violator of the restrictions on stopping, standing or parking under this chapter or other traffic laws or ordinances does not appear in response to a notice affixed to the vehicle, at the time and place specified, the judge shall send to the owner of the motor vehicle to which the notice was affixed a letter informing him of the violation and warning him that in the event the letter is disregarded for a period of five days from the date of the letter, a summons of arrest will be issued. 
(Code 1959, § 20-177; Code 1981, § 10-1-121) 
Sec. 41-2-12. - When summons for arrest to be issued. 
    In the event any person fails to comply with a notice given to that person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons directing an appearance in the police department, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the judge shall forthwith secure and issue a summons for his arrest. 
(Code 1959, § 20-178; Code 1981, § 10-1-122) 
Sec. 41-2-13. - When warrant for arrest to be issued. 
    When it shall be made to appear to the judge that any person has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in the municipal court for trial and shall fail to appear at the time and place set forth in the copy of charges, it shall be the duty of the judge to forthwith issue a warrant for the arrest of such person and deliver same to the police chief. 
(Code 1959, § 20-179; Code 1981, § 10-1-123) 
Sec. 41-2-14. - Penalty for failure to appear when served with copy of charges. 
    Any person who has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in the municipal court and shall fail to appear at the time and place indicated in the copy of charges shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction in the municipal court, shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of the Code. 
(Code 1959, § 20-180; Code 1981, § 10-1-124) 
Sec. 41-2-15. - Suspension or revocation of driver's license; duty of judge. 
    If, upon the trial of charges against any person charged with violating this chapter or any other ordinance of the city relating to traffic, the judge shall suspend or revoke the driver's license of the defendant, it shall be his duty immediately to take up and transmit the driver's license involved to the police chief and to notify the police chief of the length of the suspension or the revocation and to provide the police chief with such information as will enable him to identify the person whose driver's license has been suspended or revoked. 
(Code 1959, § 20-181; Code 1981, § 10-1-125) 
Sec. 41-2-16. - Signing recommendation to restore driver's license. 
    Any recommendation to restore a driver's license which has been suspended or revoked as provided in section 41-2-15 shall be signed by the judge who originally tried the case and suspended or revoked such license. 
(Code 1959, § 20-182; Code 1981, § 10-1-126) 
Sec. 41-2-17. - Modification of sentence. 
    No sentence imposed by the municipal court shall be modified in any particular except by the judge or person who originally tried the case. 
(Code 1959, § 20-183; Code 1981, § 10-1-127) 
Sec. 41-2-18. - Exceptions to sections 41-2-16 and 41-2-17. 
    The restrictions contained in sections 41-2-16 and 41-2-17 hereof, upon the authority of the judge to recommend the restoration of a driver's license which has been suspended or revoked or to modify the sentence of the court, shall not apply when the judge who originally tried the case is absent from the city for a period of more than five days or is absent from the office for such period on account of illness. 
(Code 1959, § 20-184; Code 1981, § 10-1-128) 
Sec. 41-2-19. - Disposition of fines and forfeitures. 
    All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or other traffic ordinance of the city shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1959, § 20-185; Code 1981, § 10-1-129) 
Sec. 41-2-20. - General penalty. 
    Whenever in this chapter or in any other traffic ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this chapter or other ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this chapter or any ordinance shall be punished as provided in section 1-1-8 of this Code. In case of continuing violations, each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished as such. It shall be discretionary with the judge to punish any person convicted of violation of any provision of this chapter or any other traffic ordinances by ordering him to work on the public streets or public works of the city. In passing sentence of imprisonment upon persons, the judge, in his discretion, when from the age or sex of those convicted or other circumstances surrounding them, he shall deem it wise, may require any imprisonment to be served by incarceration at the police station and by labor in and about that station. 
(Code 1959, § 20-187; Code 1981, § 10-1-130) 
ARTICLE 3. - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 41-3-1. - Authority to install. 
    Subject to the procedures set forth for the installation of speed humps set forth in section 41-3-8, the city traffic engineer shall cause to be placed and maintained traffic-control signs, signals, and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances. Subject to the procedures set forth for the installation of speed humps set forth in section 41-3-8 the city traffic engineer may cause to be placed and maintained such additional traffic control devices as he or she shall deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Code 1959, § 20-31; Code 1981, § 10-1-21; Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 41-3-2. - Manual and specifications. 
    Subject to the procedures set forth for the installation of speed humps set forth in section 41-3-8, all traffic-control devices shall conform to specifications in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this Code shall be official traffic-control devices of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-22; Ord. No. 2008-12, § 1, 9-2-2008) 
Sec. 41-3-3. - Play streets. 
    The city traffic engineer shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Code 1959, § 20-40; Code 1981, § 10-1-23) 
Sec. 41-3-4. - Crosswalks, safety zones, traffic lanes. 
    The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized after approval by the mayor and council: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where, in his opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway, and at such other places as he may deem necessary. He shall make proper studies of all existing crosswalks not at roadway intersections, and shall abolish those which he deems unnecessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-41; Code 1981, § 10-1-24) 
Sec. 41-3-5. - One-way streets and alleys; placing signs. 
    Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the city designates any one-way street or alley, the city traffic engineer shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 20-42; Code 1981, § 10-1-25) 
Sec. 41-3-6. - Obedience to signs. 
    Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated by this chapter or any ordinance of the city as provided in section 41-3-5, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Code 1959, § 20-43; Code 1981, § 10-1-26) 
Sec. 41-3-7. - Coasters, roller skates and similar devices; use restricted. 
(a)  No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so coasting such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance of the city. 
(b)  There shall be no such skating or riding on the sidewalks within the central traffic district or any business district, but any person may so skate or ride upon the sidewalks outside the central traffic district or any business district. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds, or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to take hold of or hang on to any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of automobiles or other vehicles along and in the streets of the city, or for two or more persons to join hands while skating on the sidewalks. Any person so skating or riding shall give right-of-way to, and in no way interfere with, persons walking on the sidewalks. 
(d)  Any persons violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for violation of this Code; provided, however, any such offender under the age of 16 years shall be dealt with as provided by state law creating juvenile courts as contained in the Georgia Code. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1959, § 20-50; Code 1981, § 10-1-27) 
Sec. 41-3-8. - Speed humps-Installation. 
(a)  Upon request from an owner of property on a city street or a person lawfully residing on a city street to have a speed hump installed on the city street on which they own the property and/or lawfully reside, the city traffic engineer shall administer a traffic engineering study to determine whether the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The 85th percentile speed of traffic on such street must be at least 11 miles per hour over the posted speed limit; 
(2)  The street must be functionally classified as a local, residential street; and 
(3)  All tax records and land maps allow for the installation of a speed hump. 
(b)  Upon completion of the traffic engineering study, the city traffic engineer shall publish the results of the study to the property owners and/or legal residents of the affected street. 
(c)  In the event the traffic engineering study indicates the above-stated conditions are met and 80 percent of the property owners and/or legal residents of the affected street sign a petition in a form satisfactory to the city evidencing their consent to have a speed hump installed on the affected street, the city traffic engineer will present the information to the mayor and council for approval or denial of the speed hump on the affected street. 
(d)  Prior to completion of the traffic engineering study, mayor and council may approve a temporary speed hump or other traffic calming device(s) to be installed at the location requested pursuant to subsection (a) of this Code section. Such temporary speed hump or traffic calming device shall be placed at the location requested until such time as the traffic engineering study is complete, or until such time a permanent speed hump or traffic calming device is approved and installed pursuant to subsection (c) of this Code Section. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 2, 9-2-2008; Ord. No. 2018-08 , § 1, 7-17-2018) 
Sec. 41-3-9. - Speed humps-Removal. 
    A speed hump on a city street shall be removed if: 
(1)  The Mayor and Council determine that such speed hump shall be removed, in which case the removal of said speed hump shall be at the City's expense; or 
(2)  All of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Seventy percent of the property owners and/or lawful residents on the city street, via formal petition, request its removal; 
b.  The speed hump has been in place no less than one year; 
c.  The property owners and/or lawful residents on the city street are made aware that speeds will increase; and 
d.  The property owners and/or lawful residents agree to pay all costs associated with such removal, with the costs prorated among the property owners and/or lawful residents based on the frontage per linear foot of each property adjoining the street. 
(Ord. No. 2008-12, § 2, 9-2-2008) 
Secs. 41-3-10-41-3-14. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RED LIGHT CAMERAS 

Sec. 41-3-15. - Red light camera enforcement. 
    For convenience in reference, this division shall be entitled the red light camera enforcement ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-16. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to enhance public safety through the use of technologies which reduce the violation of red traffic signals. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-17. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
    In operation means operating in good working condition. 
    Operator shall mean any individual driving and/or possession of a vehicle. 
    Owner means the registered owner of a motor vehicle, except that such term shall not include a motor-vehicle company when a motor vehicle registered by such company is being operated by another person under a rental agreement with such company. 
    Recorded images means images recorded by a traffic-control signal monitoring device: 
(1)  With: 
a.  Not less than two photographs. 
b.  Not less than two microphotographs. 
c.  Not less than two electronic images. 
d.  Videotape. 
(2)  Showing a traffic-control signal displaying a circular red or red-arrow signal along with the rear of a motor vehicle apparently operated in disregard or disobedience of such signal and, on at least one image or portion of tape, clearly depicting the number or other identifying designation of the license plate displayed on the motor vehicle. 
    Signature means any manual or facsimile of a person's signature. 
    System location is the approach to an intersection toward which a photographic, video digital or electronic camera is directed and is in operation. 
    Traffic-control signal monitoring device means a device with one or more motor-vehicle sensors working in conjunction with a traffic-control signal to produce recorded images of motor vehicles being operated in disregard or disobedience of a circular red or red arrow signal. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-18. - Monetary penalty. 
(a)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication is to proceed is shown by a steady circular green signal. 
(b)  Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication shall stop at a clearly marked stop line or, if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk of the nearside of the intersection, or if there is no crosswalk, before entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is shown by a steady green arrow signal indication. 
(c)  The driver of a motor vehicle shall be liable for a monetary penalty imposed pursuant to this division if such motor vehicle is found, as evidenced by information obtained from a traffic-control signal monitoring device, to have failed to comply with a traffic light signal as designated in subsections (a) and (b) within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-19. - Proof, certificate. 
(a)  Proof that a particular vehicle entered an intersection in violation of subsection 41-3-18(a) or (b) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia, as detected by a traffic-control signal monitoring device, together with proof that the particular vehicle is registered with the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state or local vehicle registration office) in the charged person's name, shall raise the evidentiary presumption and constitute prima facie evidence in any prosecution of a violation of that section that the charged person was the person driving the vehicle depicted in the recorded image. 
(b)  A certificate, sworn to or affirmed by a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city police department, or a copy thereof, based on inspection of recorded images produced by a traffic-control signal monitoring device shall be considered prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(c)  Recorded images made for the purpose of this section shall not be a public record. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not limit law enforcement agencies to the use of traffic-control signal monitoring devices in enforcing O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a); and, when there is evidence obtained from other source or sources which constitutes a prima facie case or a violation of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-20(a), such violation may be prosecuted as otherwise provide by law in lieu of, but not in addition to, enforcement under this article. 
(e)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner or lessee of the vehicle files a sworn notarized statement with the Hapeville Police Department or other city agency designated by the city administrator prior to the return date established on the citation identifying the name and address of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the appropriate city employee, a hearing may be set for prosecution of the alleged violation. 
(f)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the charged person can prove that they were not the operator of the vehicle through photographic evidence produced and maintained by the city when the vehicle owned by the charged person was in violation of subsection 41-3-18(a) or (b) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
(g)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the owner or lessee of the vehicle testifies under oath in open court or other appropriate administrative hearing that he or she was not the operator of the vehicle at the time of alleged violation. 
(h)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if a certified copy of a police report, showing that the vehicle had been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time of the alleged violation, is present, prior to the return date established on the citation issued pursuant to this section, to the court adjudicating the alleged violation. Upon review of the notarized statement by the prosecuting attorney for the city, a hearing may be set for prosecution of the alleged violation. 
(i)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of subsection 41-3-18(a) or (b) of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia, as part of a funeral procession. 
(j)  Such presumption shall be rebutted if the recorded image depicts the vehicle passed through the intersection in violation of subsection 41-3-18(a) or (b) of the Code of Ordinances City of Hapeville, Georgia in order to avoid impeding the efforts of an emergency vehicle to pass through the intersection. 
(k)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained here, the prosecution and conviction for a violation of this article shall not require a picture of the driver described in section 41-3-17 above. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-20. - Penalty; effect of a conviction. 
(a)  Imposition of a penalty pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a criminal conviction as an operator and shall not be made a part of the operating record of the person upon whom such liability is imposed nor shall it be used for insurance purposes in the provision of motor vehicle insurance coverage. The civil monetary penalty imposed by this section for each violation shall be no greater than $70.00. 
(b)  Upon a failure to respond to any notice of violation by the prescribed date, the notice shall be considered a judgment and shall carry interest at the legal rate. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-21. - Summons. 
(a)  A summons for a violation of this section may be executed by the city by sending by first class mail a copy thereof to the address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle shown, in the case of vehicle owners, in the records of the Georgia Department of Public Safety (or any other state vehicle registration office) or, in the case of vehicle lessees or renters, in the records of the lessor. Said summons shall be postmarked not later than ten days after the date of the alleged violation. 
(b)  No proceedings for contempt or arrest shall be instituted for failure to appear on the return date of the summons. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-22. - Private entities. 
(a)  A private entity may enter into an agreement with the city to be compensated for providing the traffic light signal violation monitoring system or equipment and all related support services, to include consulting, operations and administration. However, only a trained law enforcement officer or a technician employed by the city police department may swear to or affirm the certificate required by [subsection] 41-3-19(b). 
(b)  No portion of any fine collected through the use of a traffic-control signal monitoring devices may be paid to the manufacturer or vendor. Compensation to the manufacturer or vendor shall be based on the value of such equipment and shall not be based on the number of traffic citations issued or the revenue generated by traffic-control signal monitoring devices. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-23. - Signage. 
(a)  The city shall erect signs on every highway which comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway which intersects the jurisdictional limits to the city. A sign shall be erected also by the city on each public road on the approach to the next traffic-control signal monitoring device which is monitoring such next signal for such road. 
(b)  Such signs shall be at least 30 inches by 30 inches in measurements and shall warn motorists that traffic-control [signal] monitoring devices are being employed. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
Sec. 41-3-24. - Warning period. 
    Only warning notices and not citations shall be sent during the 30-day period commencing with each installation of a traffic-control [signal] monitoring device. 
(Ord. No. 2006-06, § 1, 4-18-2006) 
ARTICLE 4. - SPEED LIMITS 

Sec. 41-4-1. - Motor vehicles. 
(a)  Timing devices authorized. The police department of the city shall be authorized to use an approved electronic speed timing device for the detection and arrest of violators of speeding ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Business districts. The maximum speed of all vehicles in congested business districts of the city shall be that which is reasonable and safe under the general prevailing traffic and weather conditions, and in no event more than 25 miles per hour. 
_____
(c)  Specific locations. The following speed limits are established on the named streets and locations: 
ON-SYSTEM Road Name From To Distance 
(In Miles) Speed 
Limit 
(mph) State Route 3 (North Central Avenue) Sunset Street (M.L. 0.63) Dogwood Drive (M.L. 1.42) 0.79 35 State Route 3 (Dogwood Drive) North Central Avenue (M.L. 1.42) Mt. Zion Road (M.L. 2.36) 0.94 35 State Route 403 (I-85) Norman Berry Bridge overpass (M.L. 16.91) 300 feet North of Cofield Drive overpass (M.L. 18.18) 1.27 55  
    (Signs to be erected by the Georgia Department of Transportation.) 
OFF-SYSTEM Road Name From To Distance 
(In Miles) Speed 
Limit 
(mph) Airport Loop Road Clayton County Line Rainey Avenue 1.05 45 Central Avenue 300 feet east of Martel Road Colville Avenue 0.30 35 Cofield Drive Dogwood Drive Springdale Road 0.45 25 Custer Street South Central Avenue Lang Avenue 0.30 25 Doug Davis Drive Virginia Avenue Atlanta Avenue 0.30 40 Forrest Hill Drive Mt. Zion Road North Avenue 0.50 30 Henry Ford II Avenue Perkins Street 600 feet west of I-75 0.50 35 Interloop Road Airport Loop Road Rainey Avenue 0.65 35 King Arnold Street Dogwood Drive Sunset Street 0.70 35 Mt. Zion Road Dogwood Drive Forrest Hill Drive 0.50 30 Myrtle Street North Central Avenue North Avenue 0.25 30 North Avenue Springhaven Avenue Forrest Hill Drive 1.00 25 North Central Avenue Sylvan Road Dogwood Drive 0.50 35 Oakdale Road Cofield Drive North Avenue 0.45 35 Old Jonesboro Road Mt. Zion Road Northside Drive 1.25 25 Old Jonesboro Road Northside Drive Northwoods Place 0.40 25 South Central Avenue Colville Avenue Perkins Street 0.80 35 Sylvan Road 350 feet south of Poplar Street North Central Avenue 0.65 35 Virginia Avenue Norman Berry Drive South Central Avenue 0.90 35 Willingham Drive 350 feet west of I-85 South Central Avenue 0.45 35  
    (Signs to be erected by the City of Hapeville.) 
_____
(d)  School, church zones. The maximum speed of all vehicles in school and church zones during those periods of the day or night when such school or church is in session, or when school zone or church zone removable warning signs are located in the street designating such areas, shall be that which is reasonable and safe under the general prevailing traffic and weather conditions, and in no event more than 15 miles per hour. 
(e)  Other areas. The maximum speed of all vehicles in all other areas, districts and on all other streets and alleys in the city, not otherwise specified herein, shall be that which is reasonable and safe under the general prevailing traffic and weather conditions, and in no event more than 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1959, § 20-53; Code 1981, § 10-1-41; Ord. No. 83-8, 10-18-1983; Ord. No. 90-6, 11-6-1990; Ord. No. 98-10, § 1, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 2008-14, § 1, 10-7-2008; Ord. No. 2012-07, § 1, 9-18-2012) 
Sec. 41-4-2. - Railroads. 
(a)  No railroad train shall proceed across any grade crossing in the city at a greater rate of speed than 25 miles per hour, nor shall any railroad train be run anywhere within the city at a greater rate of speed than 25 miles per hour. 
(b)  Responsibility for failure to comply with the requirements of this section relating to the operation of trains shall be upon the persons operating railroad trains and the persons having control of the tracks, together with all the officers, employees and agents of persons operating railroad trains who have it within their power or authority to comply, or to enforce compliance, with such requirements; and any of such persons may be convicted and punished for violation of any of such requirements. 
(Code 1959, § 20-54; Code 1981, § 10-1-42) 
State Law reference- Blowing of whistles by railroad trains, O.C.G.A. §§ 46-8-170, 46-8-190 and 46-8-191. 
ARTICLE 5. - PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 41-5-1. - Parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer, after approval of the mayor and council, is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-51) 
Sec. 41-5-2. - Parking on one-way streets. 
    The city traffic engineer, after approval of the mayor and council, is authorized to erect signs upon the lefthand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such lefthand side in violation of such sign. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-52) 
Sec. 41-5-3. - Parking on one-way roadway. 
    In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the lefthand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city traffic engineer, after approval by the mayor and council, is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the lefthand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-53) 
Sec. 41-5-4. - Hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer, after the approval of the mayor and council, is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-54) 
Sec. 41-5-5. - Limited parking times-Hours designated. 
(a)  Parking shall not be permitted in any business district, including the central traffic district, longer than two hours between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Parking shall not be permitted longer than one hour in any other area designated by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall park or stand any truck or other freight-carrying vehicle in excess of one-half ton capacity for a period longer than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(c)  No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet wide or ten feet high, for more than one hour, on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(d)  No person shall park or stand any vehicle, except for expeditious loading or unloading of passengers, between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., and also between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. on any day, on streets or parts of streets designated by ordinance or marked in any way as no parking. 
(e)  No person shall park in the city hall parking lots, except those having official business with the city and only in such places therein and for the time as designated by markings therein authorized by the city traffic engineer. 
(f)  No vehicle shall be parked or permitted to stand on streets or public places within the city for any period of time unless the same is capable of being moved under its own power and any vehicle so parked or standing may be impounded by the police department in accordance with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 20-96; Code 1981, § 10-1-55) 
Sec. 41-5-6. - Same-Obedience to signs. 
    When prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance or by order of the city traffic engineer, no person shall park a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by traffic signs. 
(Code 1959, § 20-97; Code 1981, § 10-1-56) 
Sec. 41-5-7. - Stopping prohibited at certain places. 
    When prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance, no person shall stop a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by official sign. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-57) 
Sec. 41-5-8. - Maximum time for heavy trucks or trailers. 
    No truck or trailer over one ton capacity shall be allowed to park for more than one hour on the streets of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 20-100; Code 1981, § 10-1-58) 
Sec. 41-5-9. - Parking on Central Park Drive. 
(a)  In the street known as Central Park Drive as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, there shall be no stopping, standing or parking of vehicles from 1:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. seven days a week. 
(b)  Traffic control devices shall be erected at the entrance of Central Park Drive and/or on such other part or parts of the right-of-way as may be appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 2001-11, § 1(10-1-59), 6-5-2001) 
Secs. 41-5-10-41-5-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE AND TRAILER PARKING 

Sec. 41-5-21. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known as the "comprehensive vehicle and trailer parking management ordinance." 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-1; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 41-5-22. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to prevent the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles and trailers on residential parcels of land in order to prevent fire; improve ingress and egress of emergency vehicles and emergency personnel including fire, medical, and law enforcement officials; to prevent theft and vandalism; to prevent the accumulation of grass, weeds, debris, trash or junk under or near the vehicles; and to avoid the creation of conditions which would lessen the value of residential property and which would create an aesthetically unsightly condition in the eyes of a reasonable person. 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-2; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 41-5-23. - Authority. 
    This division is enacted pursuant to the grant of police powers to the city as provided under article 9, section 2, paragraphs 1 and 3 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia as well as 1980 Ga. Laws., page 3769. 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-3; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 41-5-24. - Definitions. 
    When used in this division only, the following words shall have the meanings below: 
    Commercial motor vehicle. A motorized device designed or used to transport passengers or property: 
(1)  If the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight of 8,500 or more pounds or such lesser rating as determined by federal regulations; 
(2)  If the device requires a commercial driver's license to legally be operated; 
(3)  If the device is designed to transport 16 or more passengers; or 
(4)  If the device is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be placarded under the Motor Carrier Safety Rules prepared by the United States Department of Transportation. 
    Residential zone. A geographic area designated on the official zoning map of the city, including the areas designated at the time of the effective date of this chapter as: R-O zone, one-family detached; R-1 zone, one-family detached; R-2 zone, two-family residential; R-3 zone, single-family attached; R-4 zone, multifamily residential; R-5 zone, one-family attached/detached; R-SF zone, single-family; R-I zone, residential infill overlay; R-AD zone, residential architectural design (as these zones now exist and may hereafter be amended); and residential zones created after the effective date of this chapter. The term "residential land" shall be synonymous with this definition for the purposes of this chapter. Public streets shall not be included in this definition. 
    Trailer: 
(1)  Every device with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a vehicle or animal and so constructed that no part of the weight of the device being drawn rests upon the towing vehicle or animal; 
(2)  Every device, designed for the task of transporting and storing boats, motorcycles, campers, and all-terrain vehicles; 
(3)  Every device without motive power designed to be drawn by a vehicle or animal, and attached to the towing vehicle or animal by means of a reach or pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections; and 
(4)  Every device, with or without motive power, designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a vehicle or animal and so constructed that some part of the weight of the device being drawn rests upon, or is carried by, a towing vehicle or towing animal. 
    Vehicle. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be drawn upon a highway, airway, or waterway, excepting devices: used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; that constitute articles of clothing; which are children's toys, or are manually propelled by pedals or otherwise by human limbs (excluding mopeds). 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-4; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 41-5-25. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall only apply to areas of the city which are zoned residential. This chapter does not apply to commercially zoned areas nor residential areas designated N-C zone (neighborhood commercial) nor C-R zone (commercial residential). 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-5; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 41-5-26. - Parking management. 
    The following regulations govern the parking, stopping and standing of vehicles and trailers within the city limits: 
(1)  In each residentially zoned area, no more than five vehicles, including trailers, shall be parked, stopped, or standing per one acre or less parcel of land. 
(2)  The following regulations shall also be applicable to subsection (1) above: 
a.  All vehicles of any kind that require licenses, emission stickers, tags, titles, tax payment receipts, or registration with state or federal agencies, found in residential areas must properly display all required certifications for operation in the state or they shall be cited as abatable nuisances under local ordinance and state law and, if applicable, shall otherwise be cited for other registration or display compliance failures. 
b.  Parking, stopping, or standing of a vehicle or trailer shall be permitted in a residential area only on a hard surfaced pavement, drained, lighted and maintained by the owner in accordance with specifications of the city. 
c.  A residential parcel of land greater than one acre is permitted to have more than five vehicles, including trailers, parked, stopped, or standing on the land only if: 
1.  No more than five vehicles are visible from any neighboring lot or public right-of-way; 
2.  All vehicles over the five-vehicle limit are located under a carport or another safely erected and maintained shelter; or 
3.  No vehicle over the five-vehicle limit is parked, stopped, or standing on the residential parcel of land for more than seven days in any one month period. 
d.  Airplanes, helicopters, air balloons, gliders, ultra light air vehicles, hang gliders, and other devices designed for air travel are prohibited from parking, standing, and stopping in any residentially zoned area. 
e.  Ships, boats, canoes, kayaks, paddle boats and other devices designed for water travel may only be located in residentially zoned areas where: 
1.  There are no more than five watercraft parked, stopped, or standing on each one acre or less parcel of land; and the watercraft is completely and opaquely covered and located at the rear of any domicile; or 
2.  The watercraft is not visible from any neighboring property or public right-of-way except that such watercraft may be located in a completely enclosed and safely erected and maintained shelter which meets the standards as set forth in subsection (2)c.2. above. The five watercraft do not count against the five vehicles and trailers allowed per one acre lot. However, these vehicles must comply with subsection 1. and 2. herein above. Standing, parking, or stopping of watercraft not in accordance with a. and b. herein shall be subject to the rules regarding the maximum number of vehicles and trailers per one-acre lot. 
f.  Trailers and commercial motor vehicles may park, stand or stop in residentially zoned areas only as designated below: 
1.  Trailers which are designed and used for the task of transporting and storing watercraft, aircraft, motorcycles, campers, all terrain vehicles and the like, the use of said trailer being for the purpose for which it was originally intended are allowed in residentially zoned areas subject to the regulations below: 
(i)  The device located on the trailer is allowed to be parked, stopped, or to stand in a residentially zoned area; 
(ii)  The trailer without cargo constitutes one item which is counted toward the five vehicle including trailer limit per acre; 
(iii)  The trailer with cargo constitutes one item which is counted toward the five vehicle including trailer limit per acre; 
(iv)  More than five vehicles and trailers are allowed per the one-acre limit where the regulations of subsections (2)e.1. and (2)e.2. above are followed as made applicable to trailers; 
2.  Commercial motor vehicles may park, stand, or stop in residentially zoned areas only where: 
(i)  The commercial motor vehicle does not require a commercial driver's license to be operated in the state; and 
(ii)  The commercial motor vehicle has a gross vehicle weight below 8,500 pounds. 
g.  The preceding subsections are not to be construed to allow trailers in residential areas that can accommodate for legal transport six or more vehicles as defined herein, nor six or more animals or livestock of any kind not including domestic house pets but including horses. 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-6; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 2008-11, § 1, 10-7-2008) 
Sec. 41-5-27. - Exceptions. 
    Nothing contained herein shall be construed as to: 
(1)  Restrict the transportation and flow of goods and services in the ordinary flow of commerce or persons through the city; or 
(2)  Prevent the pickup and delivery of goods, services and persons in the ordinary course of business. 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-7; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 41-5-28. - Penalties. 
    Any person, persons, entity or entities found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or upon which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. 
(Code 1981, § 8-10-8; Ord. No. 99-19, § 1, 12-7-1999) 
Secs. 41-5-29-41-5-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ABANDONED, WRECKED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES; WASTE MATERIALS AND ITEMS OF JUNK 

Sec. 41-5-41. - Outside storage. 
(a)  The outdoor storage of machinery, equipment, used building materials, trash; solid waste, appliances; any used, wrecked, dismantled, inoperative or junk automobiles, locations for vermin harborage and other such debris, shall be limited to junkyards. However, in those cases where a commercial enterprise requires the temporary storage of these materials, or other supplies, goods and equipment (not included for sales display) storage shall be permitted within a completely enclosed building or within a completely buffered yard which protects adjoining properties from the emission of dust, glare, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibration and other types of air and noise pollution. In no case shall any outdoor storage which creates unhealthy or unsanitary conditions be permitted. Noise pollution shall be measured as based on a violation of the city's noise pollution ordinance. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, temporary storage shall be deemed to be a term of no more than 90 days. 
(c)  A junk automobile or a junk vehicle, as used in this section, shall be any automobile that: 
(1)  Is unusable due to disrepair because of one or more of the major parts needed for its operation have been removed or destroyed or have been made not safe for operation of the vehicle through disrepair or damage. 
(2)  Constitutes a nuisance or health or safety hazard in that it provides a place for insects, rodents, and other animals to exist, attracts children, vagrants, or other individuals and may cause injury to them; and 
(3)  Does not have a current license plate with an appropriate ad valorem tax decal affixed in accordance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20 if the vehicle is required to have such under the provisions thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2005-02, § 1(8-11-1), 1-4-2005) 
ARTICLE 6. - LOADING AND UNLOADING 

Sec. 41-6-1. - Designation of curb loading zones. 
    The city traffic engineer, after approval of the mayor and council, is hereby authorized to determine the exact location of passenger and freight curb loading zones, and he shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. 
(Code 1959, § 20-102; Code 1981, § 10-1-71) 
Sec. 41-6-2. - Parking for designated purposes and time only; in passenger zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective. 
(Code 1959, § 20-103; Code 1981, § 10-1-72) 
Sec. 41-6-3. - Parking in freight zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a truck for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zone are in effect; nor stop, stand or park any other vehicle for such unloading of materials. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any motor vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1959, § 20-104; Code 1981, § 10-1-73) 
Sec. 41-6-4. - Permit to load or unload at angle to curb. 
    The city traffic engineer is authorized to issue special permits not to exceed three days' duration to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permits. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1959, § 20-105; Code 1981, § 10-1-74) 
Sec. 41-6-5. - Restricted use. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1959, § 20-108; Code 1981, § 10-1-75) 
Sec. 41-6-6. - Bus stops. 
(a)  A nonparking zone of 80 feet shall be created at all bus stops for the purpose of loading and unloading passengers. 
(b)  Such nonparking zones shall be marked by signs and, in addition, such zones in all congested areas shall have the curbs painted yellow. This proper marking of zones shall be maintained by the companies operating buses in and out of such zones. 
(c)  Buses or any vehicles parked in such zones for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers shall pull as close to the curb as possible. 
(d)  This section does not prohibit buses from loading and unloading at platforms or loading zones where they are provided for that purpose in the street. 
(Code 1959, § 20-109; Code 1981, § 10-1-76) 
ARTICLE 7. - IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Towing illegally parked vehicles, Ga. Code Ann., § 68-1669. 

Sec. 41-7-1. - Pounds may be created; person in charge. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to designate and establish vehicle pounds to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by or on instructions from city officers in the manner herein provided. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-91) 
Sec. 41-7-2. - When vehicle may be impounded. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic; or when any vehicle is found to be parked for a period of at least ten days on any city street or elsewhere in the city under circumstances which would authorize investigating police officers to determine that the vehicle has been temporarily or permanently abandoned by its owner or driver; or when any vehicle, whether or not involved in an accident or collision, is left in such condition or position as to constitute an obstruction or traffic hazard to public and or private property or where the driver of the vehicle is arrested and incarcerated under a proper charge of intoxication or operating a vehicle on the public streets in an intoxicated condition, or where a vehicle is found to be transporting nontax paid alcohol or alcoholic beverages, or where there exists any other circumstances or conditions which in the judgment of the investigation police officers make it necessary or expedient that a vehicle be impounded for public protection, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police department or by the qualified employees of any wrecker service company licensed to do business in the city, by means of towing the vehicle, or otherwise, to one of the designated vehicle pounds. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-92) 
Sec. 41-7-3. - Impounding fee. 
    A fee for the impounding, removal and storage of any impounded vehicle, as set by resolution of the mayor and council from time to time, shall be assessed against the owner or other person having the right to possession of the impounded vehicle. 
(Code 1959, § 20-113; Code 1981, § 10-1-93) 
Sec. 41-7-4. - Recovery of costs. 
    The recovery of all costs, fees and liens and the disposition of all such vehicles shall be as provided for by Ga. Laws 1980, p. 995 et. seq. as now or hereafter in the future amended. 
(Code 1981, § 10-1-94) 
ARTICLE 8. - VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION DEVICES 

Sec. 41-8-1. - Definitions. 
    Vehicle immobilization device shall mean any mechanical device, including those commonly referred to as "boots," that is designed or adopted to be attached to a wheel, tire, or other part of a parked vehicle so as to prohibit the vehicle's usual manner of movement or operation. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 3-1-2009) 
Sec. 41-8-2. - Use of vehicle immobilization devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to affix a vehicle immobilization device to any vehicle parked in any off-street parking facility, lot or area located on private property within the city, regardless of whether a charge for parking is assessed, unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Signs shall be located at each designated entrance to the parking facility, lot or area where such a device is to be used indicating that parking prohibitions are in effect, such signs being erected so that the front of the signs are visible from each and every parking space. 
(2)  The wording on such signs shall contain the following information: 
a.  A statement that any vehicle parked thereon which is not authorized to be parked in such area may be subject to use of a vehicle immobilization device. 
b.  Set forth the maximum fee for removal of the device, as provided in subsection 41-8-2(b). 
c.  The name, address, and phone number of the person or entity responsible for affixing the device. 
d.  A statement that cash, credit cards, and debit cards are accepted for payment. 
e.  A statement that no additional fee will be charged for use of cash, credit cards, or debit cards. 
f.  The name, address, and phone number of the entity that hired the vehicle immobilization service or company. 
(3)  The phone number referenced in subsection (a)(3) above must be operable and answered in person during the hours a vehicle immobilization device is affixed to a vehicle within the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity affixing a vehicle immobilization device to a vehicle within the city to charge a fee for removal of the device in excess of $75.00. The $75.00 fee may be paid by cash, credit card, or debit card at no additional charge. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to immobilize any vehicle located on public property within the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity affixing a vehicle immobilization device to a vehicle to fail to arrive on the site where the vehicle was immobilized within one hour of being contacted by the owner, driver or person in charge of the vehicle that has been immobilized. It shall also be unlawful for any person or entity affixing a vehicle immobilization device to a vehicle to fail to release the vehicle from immobilization within thirty minutes after receipt of payment from the owner, driver or person in charge of a vehicle that has been immobilized. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle immobilization service, or the vehicle immobilization service's agent, representative, employee or operator to go to any place and immobilize a vehicle unless called by the owner, owner's agent, representative or employee of a commercial parking lot, or where a vehicle immobilization service has a contract to immobilize illegally parked cars at a specific commercial parking lot. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity affixing a vehicle immobilization device to fail to provide a receipt of payment of the booting fee to the owner, driver, or person in charge of a vehicle. The receipt shall have the following information: The name, address, and phone number of the vehicle immobilization service or company; and the name and signature of the person who affixed/removed the vehicle immobilization device. 
(g)  A vehicle immobilization device cannot be affixed to a vehicle and a fee cannot be charged if the driver of the vehicle returns to the vehicle before the installation of the vehicle immobilization device is complete. 
(h)  (1)  Any person affixing or removing a vehicle immobilization device shall register with and obtain a written permit from the police department by paying a $50.00 fee and filing an application, on a form to be supplied by the police department, including the following: 
a.  Name of applicant; 
b.  Permanent address and telephone number of the applicant; 
c.  Applicant's drivers license number or state issued identification number; and 
d.  Name and address of applicant's employer. 
The application shall be sworn by the applicant, and it shall be unlawful for an applicant to make a false statement of fact in his or her application. In addition, as part of the registration process, the applicant shall submit to a criminal background check and fingerprinting by the police department. No permit shall be issued to a person who has been convicted of a violation of the provisions of this article or to any person whose permit issued hereunder has previously been revoked as provided herein. 
(2)  Upon proper registration in accordance with this section, a written permit shall issue, to be valid for one calendar year from the date of issuance. Each person affixing or removing a vehicle immobilization device shall at all times while conducting business carry upon his or her person the permit so issued and shall display such permit upon request. 
(3)  A permit issued hereunder shall be revoked by the police department if the holder of the permit is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this article. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given to the holder of the permit in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her permanent address set forth in the application. 
    Immediately upon the giving of such notice the permit shall become null and void and must be turned into the police department. 
(i)  Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2009-01, § 1, 3-1-2009; Ord. No. 2011-04, §§ 1-8, 5-3-2011) 
ARTICLE 9. - FEE SCHEDULE 

Sec. 41-9-1. - Vehicle identification number inspections. 
    A $15.00 fee shall be required of all non residents of the city for each vehicle identification number inspection conducted by the city police department. for residents of the city, a $15.00 fee shall be required for the second and each subsequent vehicle identification number inspection conducted by the city police department in each fiscal year. This fee schedule shall be maintained at the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 2010-12, § 1, 9-7-2010) 
ARTICLE 10. - PERSONAL TRANSPORTATION VEHICLES 

Sec. 41-10-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
(1)  Authorized street means a public roadway of the city by whatever name (e.g., road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that: 
a.  Has a posted speed limit of 25 miles per hour or less; 
b.  Is not designated as part of either the state or federal highway system; 
c.  Provides for no more than one lane of vehicular traffic per direction; and 
d.  Is not an unauthorized street. 
(2)  Driver means the person driving and having physical control over a personal transportation vehicle. 
(3)  Owner means the person holding title to a personal transportation vehicle who has a majority ownership interest in such personal transportation vehicle. 
(4)  Parking area means any area accessible to the public by motor vehicular traffic and is designated for the temporary parking of motor vehicles, usually in places referred to as parking lots. 
(5)  Personal transportation vehicle (PTV) means any motor vehicle: 
a.  With a minimum of four wheels; 
b.  Capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour; 
c.  With a maximum gross vehicle weight, unladed or empty, of 1,375 pounds; and 
d.  Capable of transporting not more than eight persons. 
(6)  Unauthorized street means any of the following public roadways (or portions thereof) within the municipal limits of the city: Interstate 85; Interstate 75; Loop Road; North Central Avenue; Porsche Avenue; Dogwood Drive; Sylvan Road; Mount Zion Road; Willingham Drive; the portion of Atlanta Avenue that is south of Doug Davis Drive; and the portion of Virginia Avenue that is west of Doug Davis Drive. In addition to said roadways, unauthorized street shall also mean any other public roadway of the city by whatever name (e.g. road, alley, avenue, highway, route, boulevard, etc.) that has been designated by the mayor and council of the city by ordinance or resolution as an unauthorized street. 
(Ord. No. 2016-35 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 41-10-2. - Operating regulations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to operate a PTV on any street within the municipal limits of the city that is not an authorized street. 
(b)  Any person who drives or operates a PTV on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city must hold a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(c)  All drivers of PTVs shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicle traffic when using the authorized streets and parking areas of the city. 
(d)  A PTV shall not be operated to transport more than eight persons. 
(e)  A PTV shall not be operated on a sidewalk at any time. 
(f)  Every driver of a PTV shall be granted all the rights of, and shall be subject to all of the rules of the road and duties applicable to, the driver of any other vehicle. 
(g)  All PTVs are entitled to a full use of a lane on the authorized streets and parking areas of the city and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any PTV of the full use of a lane. 
(h)  The driver of a PTV shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(i)  No driver shall operate a PTV between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
(j)  The driver of a PTV operating on an authorized street may cross a multi-lane road only at a signalized intersection designed for such purpose. 
(k)  Notwithstanding subsection (j), the driver of a PTV may (a) cross Dogwood Avenue only at the intersection of Dogwood Avenue and North Avenue; and (b) cross North Central Avenue only at the intersection of North Central Avenue and Virginia Avenue. 
(l)  The driver of a PTV operating on an authorized street may cross a state or federal route only at an intersection that has been designated for such purpose by the state department of transportation. 
(m)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city shall also apply to drivers and occupants of PTVs. 
(n)  All drivers and occupants of a PTV must remain seated at all times during the operation of the PTV. No person may sit on the driver's lap during the operation of the PTV. 
(Ord. No. 2016-35 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 41-10-3. - Equipment. 
    Each PTV shall meet the following design standards and shall be equipped with the following operational equipment: 
(1)  A minimum of four wheels; 
(2)  Each PTV must be capable of a maximum level ground speed of no more than 20 miles per hour; 
(3)  A maximum gross vehicle weight, empty and unladen, of 1,375 pounds; 
(4)  A braking system sufficient for the weight and passenger capacity of the vehicle and a parking brake; 
(5)  A reverse warning device functional at all times when the directional control of the PTV is in the reverse position; 
(6)  A main power switch. When such switch is in the "off" position or the key or other device that activates the switch is removed, the motive power circuit shall be inoperative. If the switch uses a key, it shall be removable only in the "off" position; 
(7)  Head lamps; 
(8)  Reflex reflectors; 
(9)  Tail lamps; 
(10)  Front and rear turn signals; 
(11)  A horn; 
(12)  A rearview mirror; 
(13)  Safety warning labels; and 
(14)  Hip restraints and hand holds or a combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2016-35 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 41-10-4. - Liability. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as an assumption of liability by the city for any injury to any person or property (real or personal) which may result from the operation of a PTV within the municipal limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-35 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 41-10-5. - Map. 
    The operation of PTVs within the city shall be allowed as designated on the map entitled "Golf Cart Restricted Access Map," said map further illustrating the regulations of this article. The "Golf Cart Restricted Access Map" shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. Any person may review said map upon request to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2016-35 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 41-10-6. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates the terms of this article shall be punishable as follows: In addition to whatever violations of state law or any other provision of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia that a driver of a PTV may be subject to, the owner of a PTV shall be subject to the following civil penalties: 
(1)  For the conviction of a first offense, a fine of not less than $50.00. 
(2)  For the conviction of a second offense, a fine of not less than $100.00. 
(3)  For the conviction of a third offense, it is shall be unlawful for the PTV to be operated or to be driven on any street within the municipal limits of the city for a period of two years following such conviction. 
(Ord. No. 2016-35 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Chapter 44 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
ARTICLE 2. - AMBULANCES 

Sec. 44-2-1. - Zone in which ambulance service permitted to locate; fee. 
    Private ambulance services shall be permitted to operate within the city limits of the city in a zone classified as C-2 of the zoning ordinance of the city and shall pay for such privilege a regulatory fee of $100.00. 
(Code 1959, § 2A-1; Code 1981, § 9-4-1) 
Sec. 44-2-2. - State license required; compliance with state rules and regulations governing operation. 
    Such ambulance service must exhibit to the city clerk such licenses as required to the ambulance service from the state and shall comply in full with all state rules and regulations governing the operation of such business. 
(Code 1959, § 2A-2; Code 1981, § 9-4-2) 
Sec. 44-2-3. - Identification form required of drivers. 
    All drivers operating ambulances for such ambulance service shall furnish to the chief of police such information as he might require on a form prescribed by him concerning the personal life of such ambulance driver including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Any offenses except traffic violations with which such person has been charged; 
(2)  Places of residence for the past six years; 
(3)  Fingerprints; 
(4)  Places of employment for the past six years; and 
(5)  Birth certificate or other legal proof of age approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1959, § 2A-3; Code 1981, § 9-4-3) 
Sec. 44-2-4. - Driver's permit required. 
    No person shall be employed as a driver of an ambulance unless he shall have first secured a permit from the chief of police of the city within 48 hours after commencing such employment for which permit a charge of $5.00 shall be paid and all permits shall bear the photograph of the person holding the permit. 
(Code 1959, § 2A-4; Code 1981, § 9-4-4) 
Sec. 44-2-5. - Revocation of driver's permit. 
    The chief of police or anyone designated by the chief of police to have authority under this section shall have the right to revoke such driving permit of an ambulance employee for violations of any of the rules and regulations covered hereby. 
(Code 1959, § 2A-5; Code 1981, § 9-4-5) 
Sec. 44-2-6. - Safety inspection of vehicles. 
    The fire chief of the city or any agent designated by him shall have the right to inspect the vehicle used in the ambulance service for safety compliance and that equipment required by the state is properly installed and maintained in the ambulance. 
(Code 1959, § 2A-6; Code 1981, § 9-4-6) 
Sec. 44-2-7. - Liability insurance required; amounts. 
    No permit shall be granted to any person to operate an ambulance within the city limits until the applicant for such permit shall have filed with the mayor and council satisfactory proof that the applicant carries public liability and property damage insurance. This insurance must be in amounts of not less than $50,000.00 for bodily injury liability for each person, $100,000.00 for bodily injury liability for each accident, $25,000.00 for property damage liability and $50,000.00 for personal injury protection. The insurance must provide for indemnification of any person negligently or willfully injured or damages on account of the operation of an ambulance by an applicant hereunder, or any person under the authority of or as agent for such applicant. In addition, such insurance must be with a company qualified to do business in the state. Such insurance shall be kept in force, and it shall be the duty of the chief of police to check on this feature of the business and report to the mayor and council annually as of December 31 of each year. Such insurance shall be subject to approval by the mayor and council. Termination of insurance protection, without having been replaced prior to termination, shall automatically operate as a revocation of the permit to operate ambulances within the city. Before an insurance policy will be approved by the mayor and council as provided herein, it must be demonstrated that such policy has a provision whereby the mayor and council shall be notified prior to 15 days before any termination thereunder. 
(Code 1959, § 2A-7; Code 1981, § 9-4-7; Ord. No. 82-4, 4-6-1982) 
ARTICLE 3. - TAXICABS (RESERVED) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-02, § 1, adopted March 4, 2008, deleted Art. 3, which pertained to taxicabs and derived from Code 1959, §§ 21-1-21-21; Code 1981, §§ 9-3-1-9-3-22; Ord. No. 79-3, adopted April 10, 1979; Ord. No. 82-3, adopted April 6, 1982; Ord. No. 89-2, adopted Feb. 7, 1989; and Ord. No. 91-2, adopted Feb. 5, 1991. 
Subpart B - ENVIRONMENT, HEALTH AND SANITATION 
Chapter 51 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 21, 2015, repealed and reenacted chapter 51 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 51, articles 1-3, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1981, §§ 8-7-1-8-7-13, 8-7-21-8-7-24, 8-7-31-8-7-34, and Ord. No. 2003-06, § 1, adopted March 4, 2003. 

ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 51-1-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the city's "flood damage prevention ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-2. - Statutory authorization. 
    Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city does ordain this chapter and establishes this set of floodplain management and flood hazard reduction provisions for the purpose of regulating the use of flood hazard areas. It is determined that the regulation of flood hazard areas and the prevention of flood damage are in the public interest and will minimize threats to public health and safety, as well as to private and public property. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-3. - Findings of fact. 
    It is hereby determined that: 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Flood hazard areas can serve important stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation and ecological purposes when permanently protected as undisturbed or minimally disturbed areas. 
(3)  Effective floodplain management and flood hazard protection activities can: 
a.  Protect human life and health; 
b.  Minimize damage to private property; 
c.  Minimize damage to public facilities and infrastructure such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; and 
d.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-4. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in flood hazard areas, as well as to protect the beneficial uses of floodplain areas for water quality protection, streambank and stream corridor protection, wetlands preservation, and ecological and environmental protection by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to flooding or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Limit the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood waters; and 
(6)  Protect the stormwater management, water quality, streambank protection, stream corridor protection, wetland preservation, and ecological functions of natural floodplain areas. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-5. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall be applicable to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. For lands subsequently annexed into the city, the special flood hazard areas identified on Fulton County maps and studies shall be subject to regulation under this chapter. For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current effective flood insurance study, supporting maps, and other data for the county are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-6. - Designation of chapter administrator. 
    The director of community affairs for the city or his or her authorized agent is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-7. - Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, areas of future-conditions flood hazard and associated floodplain characteristics-Flood area maps and studies. 
    For the purposes of defining and determining "areas of special flood hazard," "areas of future-conditions flood hazard," "areas of shallow flooding," "base flood elevations," "floodplains," "floodways," "future-conditions flood elevations," "future-conditions floodplains," potential flood hazard or risk categories as shown on FIRM maps, and other terms used in this chapter, the following documents and sources may be used for such purposes and are adopted by reference thereto: 
(1)  The flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 18, 2013 and the September 18, 2013 FIRM panels, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto. 
(2)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the base flood elevation or delineation of the base or one-percent (100-year) floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; and 
b.  Any base flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology and approved by the city. 
(3)  Other studies, which may be relied upon for the establishment of the future-conditions flood elevation or delineation of the future-conditions floodplain and flood-prone areas, including: 
a.  Any flood or flood-related study conducted by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, the United States Geological Survey, or any other local, state or federal agency applicable to the city; and 
b.  Any future-conditions flood study conducted by a licensed professional engineer which has been prepared utilizing FEMA approved methodology approved by the city. 
(4)  The repository for public inspection of the FIS, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Community Services Office, 3474 North Fulton Avenue, Hapeville, Georgia 30354. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-8. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
    This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, easement, covenant, deed restriction or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-9. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-1-10. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 51-2-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Addition means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
    Adjacent means those areas located within the defined horizontal distance from the future-conditions floodplain boundary that are at or lower in elevation than either three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, unless the area is hydraulically independent (meaning absolutely no connection to the flooding source such as through pipes, sewer laterals, down drains, foundation drains, ground seepage, overland flow, gated or valved pipes, excavated and backfilled trenches, etc. with no fill or other manmade barrier creating the separation). 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the chapter administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of future-conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one-percent-annual-chance flood based on future-conditions hydrology (100-year future-conditions flood). 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one percent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land area subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. This includes all floodplain and flood prone areas at or below the base flood elevation designated as Zones A, A1-30, A-99, AE, AO, AH, and AR on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM). 
    Accessory structure or facility means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the primary structure. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year, also known as the 100-year flood. 
    Base flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the base flood. 
    Basement means any area of a building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides. 
    Building has the same meaning as "Structure." 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above the ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 1, 1994. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 1, 1994. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    FEMA means the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map or FIRM means an official map of a community, issued by FEMA, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study or FIS means the official report by FEMA providing an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and corresponding flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway or regulatory floodway means the channel of a stream, river, or other watercourse and the adjacent areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Future-conditions flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year based on future-conditions hydrology. Also known as the "100-year future-conditions flood." 
    Future-conditions flood elevation means the highest water surface elevation anticipated at any given location during the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding by the future-conditions flood. 
    Future-conditions hydrology means the flood discharges associated with projected land-use conditions based on a community's zoning maps, comprehensive land-use plans, and/or watershed study projections, and without consideration of projected future construction of stormwater management (flood detention) structures or projected future hydraulic modifications within a stream or other waterway, such as bridge and culvert construction, fill, and excavation. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term includes any structure commonly referred to as a "mobile home" regardless of the date of manufacture. The term also includes parked trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. The term does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
    Mean sea level means the datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) are referenced. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after March 1, 1994 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or March 1, 1994. 
    Ordinance [chapter] administrator means the director of community services for the city or his or her authorized agent. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required prior to undertaking any development activity. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Repetitive loss means flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the development project is located. 
    Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date the permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of the structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building (including a gas or liquid storage tank), that is principally above ground, or a manufactured home. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. This term also includes "repetitive loss." 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement to a structure, taking place during a ten-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building means (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, which have been identified by the code enforcement official. The term does also not include any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the requirements of this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
ARTICLE 3. - PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 51-3-1. - Permit application requirements. 
    No owner or developer shall perform any development activities on a site where an area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard is located without first meeting the requirements of this chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
    Unless specifically excluded by this chapter, any landowner or developer desiring a permit for a development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
    No permit will be approved for any development activities that do not meet the requirements, restrictions and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-3-2. - Floodplain management plan requirements. 
    An application for a development project with any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard located on the site shall include a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan. This plan shall include the following items: 
(1)  Site plan drawn to scale, which includes but is not limited to: 
a.  Existing and proposed elevations of the area in question and the nature, location and dimensions of existing and/or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, amount and location of excavation material, and storage of materials or equipment; 
b.  For all proposed structures, spot ground elevations at building corners and 20-foot or smaller intervals along the foundation footprint, or one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; 
c.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and utilities; 
d.  Proposed locations of drainage and stormwater management facilities; 
e.  Proposed grading plan; 
f.  Base flood elevations and future-conditions flood elevations; 
g.  Boundaries of the base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain; 
h.  If applicable, the location of the floodway; and 
i.  Certification of the above by a licensed professional engineer or surveyor. 
(2)  Building and foundation design detail, including but not limited to: 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Certification that any proposed non-residential floodproofed structure meets the criteria in subsection 51-5-2(b); 
d.  For enclosures below the base flood elevation, location and total net area of flood openings as required in subsection 51-5-1(5); and 
e.  Design plans certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect for all proposed structure(s). 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(4)  Hard copies and digital files of computer models, if any, copies of work maps, comparison of pre- and post-development conditions base flood elevations, future-conditions flood elevations, flood protection elevations, special flood hazard areas and regulatory floodways, flood profiles and all other computations and other information similar to that presented in the FIS; 
(5)  Copies of all applicable state and federal permits necessary for proposed development, including but not limited to permits required by Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; and 
(6)  All appropriate certifications required under this chapter. 
    The approved floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan shall contain certification by the applicant that all development activities will be done according to the plan or previously approved revisions. Any and all development permits and/or use and occupancy certificates or permits may be revoked at any time if the construction and development activities are not in strict accordance with approved plans. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-3-3. - Construction stage submittal requirements. 
    For all new construction and substantial improvements on sites with a floodplain management/flood damage prevention plan, the permit holder shall provide to the chapter Administrator a certified as-built elevation certificate or floodproofing certificate for non-residential construction including the lowest floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. A final elevation certificate shall be provided after completion of construction including final grading of the site. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a licensed professional engineer or architect and certified by same using the FEMA floodproofing certificate. This certification shall also include the design and operation/maintenance plan to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
    Any work undertaken prior to approval of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The chapter administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make the corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-3-4. - Duties and responsibilities of the chapter administrator. 
    Duties of the chapter administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development applications and permits to assure that the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied and to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including but not limited to Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334; 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided, then the chapter administrator shall require the applicant to obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, state or other sources in order to meet the provisions of articles 4 and 5 of this chapter; 
(4)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any substantially improved structures have been floodproofed; 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a non-residential structure, the chapter administrator shall review the design and operation/maintenance plan and obtain certification from a licensed professional engineer or architect; 
(7)  Notify affected adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources (GA DNR) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); 
(8)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (e.g. where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the chapter administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. Where floodplain elevations have been defined, the floodplain shall be determined based on flood elevations rather than the area graphically delineated on the floodplain maps; 
(9)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the chapter Administrator and shall be open for public inspection; 
(10)  Coordinate all FIRM revisions with the GA DNR and FEMA; and 
(11)  Review variance applications and make recommendations to the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
ARTICLE 4. - STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 51-4-1. - Definition of floodplain boundaries. 
(a)  Studied "A" zones, as identified in the FIS, shall be used to establish base flood elevations whenever available. 
(b)  For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the future-conditions flood elevations shall be provided by the city. If future-conditions elevation data is not available from the city, then it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-4-2. - Definition of floodway boundaries. 
    The width of a floodway shall be determined from the FIS or FEMA approved flood study. For all streams with a drainage area of 100 acres or greater, the regulatory floodway shall be provided by the city. If floodway data is not available from the city, it shall be determined by a licensed professional engineer using a method approved by FEMA and the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-4-3. - General standards. 
(a)  No development shall be allowed within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard that could result in any of the following: 
(1)  Raising the base flood elevation or future-conditions flood elevation equal to or more than one one-hundredths foot; 
(2)  Reducing the base flood or future-conditions flood storage capacity; 
(3)  Changing the flow characteristics as to the depth and velocity of the waters of the base flood or future-conditions flood as they pass both the upstream and the downstream boundaries of the development area; or 
(4)  Creating hazardous or erosion-producing velocities, or resulting in excessive sedimentation. 
(b)  Any development within any area of special flood hazard or area of future-conditions flood hazard allowed under subsection (a) shall also meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Compensation for storage capacity shall occur between the average ground water table elevation and the base flood elevation for the base flood, and between the average ground water table elevation and the future-condition flood elevation for the future-conditions flood, and lie either within the boundaries of ownership of the property being developed and shall be within the immediate vicinity of the location of the encroachment. Acceptable means of providing required compensation include lowering of natural ground elevations within the floodplain, or lowering of adjoining land areas to create additional floodplain storage. In no case shall any required compensation be provided via bottom storage or by excavating below the elevation of the natural (pre-development) stream channel unless such excavation results from the widening or relocation of the stream channel; 
(2)  Cut areas shall be stabilized and graded to a slope of no less than two percent; 
(3)  Effective transitions shall be provided such that flow velocities occurring on both upstream and downstream properties are not increased or decreased; 
(4)  Verification of no-rise conditions (less than one one-hundredths foot), flood storage volumes, and flow characteristics shall be provided via a step-backwater analysis meeting the requirements of section 51-4-4; 
(5)  Public utilities and facilities, such as water, sanitary sewer, gas, and electrical systems, shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration or contamination from flood waters; and 
(6)  Any significant physical changes to the base flood floodplain shall be submitted as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. The CLOMR submittal shall be subject to approval by the city using the FEMA community concurrence forms before forwarding the submittal package to FEMA for final approval. The responsibility for forwarding the CLOMR to FEMA and for obtaining the CLOMR approval shall be the responsibility of the applicant. Within six months of the completion of development, the applicant shall submit as-built surveys and plans for a final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-4-4. - Engineering study requirements for floodplain encroachments. 
    An engineering study is required, as appropriate to the proposed development activities on the site, whenever a development proposes to disturb any land within the future-conditions floodplain, except for a residential single-lot development on streams without established base flood elevations and floodways. This study shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer and made a part of the application for a permit. This information shall be submitted to and approved by the city prior to the approval of any permit which would authorize the disturbance of land located within the future-conditions floodplain. Such study shall include: 
(1)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or floodplain will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development; 
(2)  Step-backwater analysis, using a FEMA-approved methodology approved by the city. Cross-sections (which may be supplemented by the applicant) and flow information will be obtained whenever available. Computations will be shown duplicating FIS results and will then be rerun with the proposed modifications to determine the new base flood profiles, and future-conditions flood profiles; 
(3)  Floodplain storage calculations based on cross-sections (at least one every 100 feet) showing existing and proposed floodplain conditions to show that base flood floodplain and future-conditions floodplain storage capacity would not be diminished by the development; 
(4)  The study shall include a preliminary plat, grading plan, or site plan, as appropriate, which shall clearly define all future-conditions floodplain encroachments. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-4-5. - Floodway encroachments. 
    Located within areas of special flood hazard are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity flood waters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, floodways must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway, except for activities specifically allowed in subsection (2) below. 
(2)  Encroachments for bridges, culverts, roadways and utilities within the regulatory floodway may be permitted provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment will not result in any increase to the pre-project base flood elevations, floodway elevations, or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A licensed professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof; and 
(3)  If the applicant proposes to revise the floodway boundaries, no permit authorizing the encroachment into or an alteration of the floodway shall be issued by the city until an affirmative conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) is issued by FEMA or a no-rise certification is approved by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-4-6. - Maintenance requirements. 
    The property owner shall be responsible for continuing maintenance as may be needed within an altered or relocated portion of a floodplain on the property so that the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity is maintained. The city may direct the property owner (at no cost to the city) to restore the flood-carrying or flood storage capacity of the floodplain if the owner has not performed maintenance as required by the approved floodplain management plan on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
ARTICLE 5. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION 

Sec. 51-5-1. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of structures (residential or non-residential), including manufactured homes, shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain, unless all requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 have been met; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(5)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a licensed professional engineer or architect to meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished and flood resistant enclosure shall solely be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(6)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(7)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(8)  All proposed development shall include adequate drainage and stormwater management facilities per the requirements of the city to reduce exposure to flood hazards; 
(9)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(10)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(11)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to, or contamination from, such systems during flooding; 
(12)  Other public utilities such as gas and electric systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them, or public safety hazards from them, during flooding; 
(13)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced; 
(14)  If the proposed development is located in multiple flood zones, or multiple base flood elevations cross the proposed site, the higher or more restrictive base flood elevation or future condition elevation and development standards shall take precedence; 
(15)  When only a portion of a proposed structure is located within a flood zone or the future conditions floodplain, the entire structure shall meet the requirements of this chapter; and 
(16)  Subdivision proposals and other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, shall be reasonably safe from flooding: 
a.  All such proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
b.  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
c.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-5-2. - Building standards for structures and buildings within the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a. 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a. 
(b)  Non-residential buildings. 
(1)  New construction. New construction of principal non-residential structures shall not be allowed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 have been met, all new construction shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a. New construction that has met all of the requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the chapter administrator using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(2)  Substantial improvements. Substantial improvement of any principal non-residential structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be authorized by the chapter administrator to be elevated or floodproofed. Substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a. Substantial improvements may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the chapter administrator using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan. 
(c)  Accessory structures and facilities. Accessory structures and facilities (i.e., barns, sheds, gazebos, detached garages, recreational facilities and other similar non-habitable structures and facilities) which meet the requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 and are permitted to be located within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain shall be constructed of flood-resistant materials and designed to provide adequate flood openings in accordance with subsection 51-5-1(5)a. and be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure. 
(d)  Standards for recreational vehicles. All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(1)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(2)  Meet all the requirements for residential buildings-substantial improvements (subsection (a)) including the anchoring and elevation requirements. 
(e)  Standards for manufactured homes. 
(1)  New manufactured homes shall not be allowed to be placed within the limits of the future-conditions floodplain unless all requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 have been met. If all of the requirements of sections 51-4-3, 51-4-4, and 51-4-5 have been met, all new construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a.; 
(2)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision shall be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than three feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher; or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
(3)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(7). 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-5-3. - Building standards for structures and buildings authorized adjacent to the future-conditions floodplain. 
(a)  Residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal residential building or manufactured home, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least three feet above the base flood elevation or one foot above the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a. 
(b)  Non-residential buildings. For new construction and substantial improvement of any principal non-residential building, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement and access to the building, shall be at least one foot above the level of the base flood elevation or at least as high as the future-conditions flood elevation, whichever is higher. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate the structure, openings sufficient to automatically equalize the hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a. Non-residential buildings may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-5-4. - Building standards for residential single-lot developments on streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-Zones). 
    For a residential single-lot development not part of a subdivision that has areas of special flood hazard, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), the chapter administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any available scientific or historic flood elevation data, base flood elevation and floodway data, or future-conditions flood elevation data available from a federal, state, local or other source, in order to administer the provisions and standards of this chapter. 
    If data are not available from any of these sources, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to twice the width of the stream or 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream, whichever is greater. 
(2)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood or future-conditions flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided for flood prone enclosures in accordance with subsection 51-5-1(5)a. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-5-5. - Building standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-Zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. In these areas the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to no lower than one foot above the flood depth number in feet specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Flood openings sufficient to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 51-5-1(5)a.; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above the highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A licensed professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice, and shall provide such certification to the chapter administrator using the FEMA floodproofing certificate along with the design and operation/maintenance plan; and 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-5-6. - Standards for subdivisions of land. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall identify the areas of special flood hazard and areas of future-conditions flood hazard therein and provide base flood elevation data and future-conditions flood elevation data; 
(b)  All residential lots in a subdivision proposal shall have sufficient buildable area outside of the future-conditions floodplain such that encroachments into the future-conditions floodplain for residential structures will not be required; and 
(c)  All subdivision plans will provide the elevations of proposed structures in accordance with subsection 51-3-2(2). 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
ARTICLE 6. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 51-6-1. - Variance procedures. 
    The following variance and appeals procedures shall apply to an applicant who has been denied a permit for a development activity, or to an owner or developer who has not applied for a permit because it is clear that the proposed development activity would be inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
(1)  Requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter shall be submitted to the city. All such requests shall be heard and decided in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the city. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(2)  Any person adversely affected by any decision of the city shall have the right to appeal such decision to the mayor and council as established by the city in accordance with procedures to be published in writing by the mayor and council. At a minimum, such procedures shall include notice to all affected parties and the opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision to the superior court of Fulton County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(4)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure, and the variance issued shall be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(5)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this section are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(6)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(7)  In reviewing such requests, the city and the mayor and council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(8)  Conditions for variances. 
a.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, or the creation of a nuisance. 
b.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
c.  Any person to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance resulting from the lowest floor elevation being placed below the base flood elevation will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property, and that such costs may be as high as $25.00 for each $100.00 of insurance coverage provided. 
d.  The chapter administrator shall maintain the records of all variance actions, both granted and denied, and report them to the state department of natural resources and the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(9)  Any person requesting a variance shall, from the time of the request until the time the request is acted upon, submit such information and documentation as, the city and the mayor and council shall deem necessary for the consideration of the request. 
(10)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the city and the mayor and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as they deem necessary or appropriate, consistent with the purposes of this chapter. 
(11)  Variances shall not be issued "after the fact." 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
ARTICLE 7. - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 51-7-1. - Violations. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this chapter or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-7-2. - Notice of violation. 
    If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this chapter, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this chapter without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
    The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this chapter and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Sec. 51-7-3. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this chapter, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the municipal court of the city to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment for 60 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2015-06 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-21-2015) 
Chapter 54 - NUISANCES 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1-1. - Declaration of nuisances. 
    The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter; weeds; vegetation; or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewerage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees, and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent such activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery, grass or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; 
(12)  Abandoned, deteriorating, or dilapidated buildings, construction thereof, or improvements thereto; abandoned or unfinished landscaping or improvements thereto for a period of three months or more which would create a place of vermin harborage hazardous to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city or become odorous or unsightly, obnoxious and objectionable to the general area and to the citizens of the city; and 
(13)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2-1; Ord. No. 86-8, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 98-12, § 1, 6-2-1998) 
Sec. 54-1-2. - Findings of the existence of nuisances. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city finds and declares that within the city limits there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and not in compliance with applicable state minimum standard codes as adopted by ordinance or operation of law or any optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes relative to the safe use of real property and real property improvements adopted by ordinance in the city; or general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and the state; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. 
(b)  It is further found and declared that in the city where there is in existence a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people of the city and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use which renders the adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation. The governing authority of the city finds that there exists in the city dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and which are not in compliance with applicable codes; which have defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; which lack adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings or structure unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city, or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and private property exists constituting an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity of the property. 
(c)  It is the intention of the governing authority that this chapter shall comply with and does comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a) as a finding that conditions as set out in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist within the city. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2-2; Ord. No. 2003-01, § 1, 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 54-1-3. - Continued use of other laws and ordinances. 
    It is the intent of the mayor and council that nothing in this chapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of any local enabling act, charter, or ordinance or regulation nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law or ordinance, legislation, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1(11-2-3), 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 54-1-4. - Appointment of public officers; powers of public officers regarding nuisances. 
(a)  The mayor and council of the City of Hapeville, Georgia appoint, until repealed by ordinance, the police chief, the fire chief and the public service director, or their designees, as public officer(s) acting either individually or in concert with one another to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. 
(b)  The public officer(s) may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure, of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures, or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
(c)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(d)  The public officer is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this chapter and the O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in those sections of the Official Code of Georgia: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinance; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2-3; Ord. No. 94-33, § 2, 12-6-1994; Ord. No. 98-12, § 3, 6-2-1998; Ord. No. 99-16, § 1, 10-5-1999) 
Sec. 54-1-5. - Offense; penalty. 
    It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 11-2-4) 
ARTICLE 2. - UNFIT DWELLINGS OR STRUCTURES 

Sec. 54-2-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicable codes means: 
(1)  Any optional housing or abatement standard provided in chapter 2 of title 8 of the O.C.G.A. as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; 
(2)  Any fire or life safety code as provided for in chapter 2 of title 25 of the O.C.G.A.; and 
(3)  Any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 8 after October 1 provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
    Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2 of chapter 13 of title 16 (O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq.), known as the Georgia Controlled Substances Act. 
    Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
    Governing authority means the mayor and council of the city. 
    Municipality means any incorporated city within this state. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means: 
(1)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)  Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)  Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
    Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the county or municipality. 
    Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this chapter adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter or any agent of such officer or officers. 
    Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
    Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1(11-2-4), 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 54-2-2. - Duties of owners; appointment of public officer; procedures for determining premises to be unsafe or unhealthful. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(b)  The mayor and council of the city appoint or designate the city code enforcement officer, city fire marshal, city fire chief, city police chief, and his/her designees as public officer(s) to exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter. 
(c)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and the parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction as determined by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, at a date and time certain and at a place within the city where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days or more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(d)  If after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. For purposes of this chapter, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in chapter 39A of title 41, of the O.C.G.A. qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure, to be repaired, altered, improved, to be vacated and closed, or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with at least the following words: 
    "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes and endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and the city are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(1)  The lien provided for in this subsection shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12(g). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collection real property ad valorem tax, including specifically chapter 4 of title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; provided, however that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(2)  The tax commissioner shall collect and retain an amount equal to the cost of administering a lien authorized by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. unless such costs are waived by resolution of the county. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(3)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property of the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(4)  Where the abatement action does not commence in the superior court, review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(5)  The public officers designated herein may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety, and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions creating a public health hazard or general nuisance, and may seek to enforce such citation in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this chapter. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1(11-2-5), 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 54-2-3. - Determination by public officer that under existing ordinances dwellings, buildings, or structures are vacant and sample conditions of nuisances. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he/she finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; and 
(7)  Other additional standards which may from time to time by adopted and referenced herein by ordinance amendment. 
(b)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes based upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1(11-2-6), 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 54-2-4. - Powers of public officers. 
    The public officers designated in this chapter shall have the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to such officers and agents as he or she may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1(11-2-7), 1-7-2003) 
Sec. 54-2-5. - Service of complaints. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this chapter shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)  Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the city; and a return of service, filed with the clerk of the appropriate court, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)  Pursuant to the provisions of article 5 chapter 4 of title 48 of the O.C.G.A.; or 
(3)  Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)  If any owner or party in interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in the county tax filings and mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)  In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection (f) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place to protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
(f)  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this chapter, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(h)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this chapter on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 2003-02, § 1(11-2-8), 1-7-2003) 
Chapter 57 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, adopted January 10, 2017, repealed the former ch. 57, §§ 57-1-1-57-1-9, and enacted a new ch. 57 as set out herein. The former ch. 57 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 2010-11, § 1, adopted September 7, 2010 

Sec. 57-1-1. - Title. 
    This chapter will be known as the "Hapeville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Best management practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
    Board. The board of natural resources. 
    Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Certified personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    Coastal marshlands. Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
    Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
    CPESC. Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface, also known as excavation. 
    Department: The state department of natural resources (DNR). 
    Design professional. A professional licensed by the state in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable state law governing professional licensure. 
    Director. The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
    District. The Region 3 Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Division. The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1, et seq., that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 57-1-4(c) of this chapter. 
    Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land-disturbing activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 57-1-3(5). 
    Larger common plan of development or sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Local issuing authority (LIA). The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    Metropolitan river protection act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
    NOI. A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
    NOT. A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    Operator. The party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Phase or Phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Properly designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Roadway drainage structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and Water Conservation District approved plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Region 3 Soil and Water Conservation District office or city as appropriate. 
    Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State general permit. The national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
    State waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the wildlife resources division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for water quality control, chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-3. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968;" 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the city; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections (15) and (16) of section 57-1-4(c), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the natural resources conservation service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the city from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the city or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The city may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections 15, 16 and 17 of section 57-1-4(c) in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  Additional protections. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the state soil and water conservation commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsections (16) and (17) of this subsection (c), there is established a 25 foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream that, under normal circumstances, has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of article 5, chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50 foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to article 2 of chapter 5 of title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25 foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(17)  There is established a 25 foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-280, et seq., the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970.", and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however, that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilization structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade storm-water detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. 
c.  The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015 if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25 foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
d.  Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in EPD Rule 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land disturbing activities. 
(d)  Minimum requirements. Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent the city from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Permits. The fact that land-disturbing activity for a project for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The city shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(2)  Wetlands as defined in 33 CFR Part 328.3(b) are an important resource, which are protected through the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended. This act regulates all dredge and fill activities in "water of the U.S." and is administered by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Land disturbing activities may require a Section 404 permit administered by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. The United States Department of Interior has prepared a national wetlands inventory map covering the city. The map is known as the Hapeville National Wetlands Inventory Map and is incorporated in this article by reference. To assist applicants for land disturbance permits, the city has available for public inspection a copy of the Hapeville National Wetlands Inventory Map. It is encouraged that permit applicants for land disturbance use this map as a resource to identify wetlands. Permit applicants are cautioned, however, that all wetlands may not be identified by this map and the responsibility for defining wetlands and securing any necessary state or federal permits rests solely with the applicant. Applicants for land disturbance permits are advised that only the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers is responsible for certifying whether or not wetlands are present on the site, the city is not involved with Section 404 permitting. As a part of the process of obtaining a land disturbance permit, all applicants must complete and submit an "acknowledgement and certification" form provided by the city which acknowledges the applicant has investigated Section 404 permitting criteria and has determined whether or not the permit is required for the project for which a land disturbance permit has been requested. Should the applicant certify a Section 404 permit is not required, the city must make a determination from the map as to whether or not the presence of wetlands is likely within the area in which the permit is requested. Should the city determine that the presence of wetlands is not likely in the area the city may issue the land disturbance permit. However, should the city determine that the presence of wetlands is likely in the area the city may not issue the land disturbance permit. A determination by the city that the presence of wetlands is likely in the area requires that the applicant obtain a determination to be made by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If wetlands are present, the applicant must obtain a Section 404 permit prior to being issued a land disturbance permit. Should the applicant certify a Section 404 permit is required, the city may not issue a land disturbance permit until the applicant provides a copy of the Section 404 permit to the city. Any action by the city under this article does not relieve the property owner, developer, or petitioner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD, if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 57-1-4 will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of $500.00, shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or 12-7-17(10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections (15), (16) and (17) of section 57-1-4(c) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (7) of this subsection (b) have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the city and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the city to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The city, with plan review authority, shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the city, with plan review authority, to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the city may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The city may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the city with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections (b) and (c) of section 57-1-4, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the city unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the city has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections (15), (16) and 17 of section 57-1-4(c) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the city. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the city, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The city may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The community services department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the city shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The community services department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to Code section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the city shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, thact, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the city shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection (7) of section 57-1-5(b). The city may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-8. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-9. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the city upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 60 days after receipt by the city of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the city, after exhausting its administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal such decision by writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Fulton County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Sec. 57-1-10. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the date of its adoption. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2016-34 , § 1, 1-10-2017) 
Chapter 58 - SURFACING AND MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAYS AND OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES 

Sec. 58-1-1. - Purpose, intent, and nonconforming use, and grace period for compliance with regulations. 
(a)  In adopting this chapter, it is the intent of mayor and council to clarify amendments made on July 16, 2013 to former section 93-23-5 of the Code wherein the surfacing and maintenance of residential driveways and commercial off-street parking and loading facilities were regulated. 
(b)  Residential driveways that were constructed of a material other than hard-surfaced pavement prior to July 16, 2013 shall have until June 31, 2021 to come into full compliance with the regulations set forth within section 58-1-3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-29 , § 1, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 1, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 58-1-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Asphalt, porous. Asphalt concrete from which small aggregates are omitted from the asphalt mixture. The remaining large, single-sized aggregate particles leave open voids that give the material its porosity and permeability. To ensure pavement strength, fiber may be added to the mix or a polymer-modified asphalt binder may be used. Generally, porous asphalt pavements are designed with a subsurface reservoir that holds water that passes through the pavement, allowing it to evaporate and/or percolate slowly into the surrounding soils. An example of a porous asphalt surface is an open-graded fixture course. 
(b)  Concrete, porous. A type of concrete with a high porosity used for concrete flatwork applications that allows water from precipitation and other sources to pass directly through, thereby reducing the runoff from a site and allowing groundwater recharge. 
(c)  Gravel. Rock, including but not limited to granite, limestone, dolomite, crushed and graded by screens and then mixed to a blend of stones and fines. Gravel is also known as "crusher run," DGA (dense grade aggregate), QP (quarry process), and shoulder stone. Gravel is generally between five to 15 millimeters in size. 
(d)  Materials, pervious. Materials, such as concrete paving blocks, concrete grid pavers, perforated brick pavers, or other similar materials approved by the city engineer or his or her designee, that permit water to enter the ground by virtue of their porous nature or by large spaces in the material. 
(e)  Hard-surfaced Pavement. Pavement made hard or firm by compacting or paving it with an asphalt (or bituminous) surface, hot mix asphalt (HMA) surface, Portland cement concrete (PCC) surface, pervious pavement, or similar materials approved by the city engineer or his or her designee. 
(f)  Pavement, permeable. Pavement utilizing a range of sustainable materials and techniques with a base and subbase that allow the movement of storm water through the surface. Pervious materials allow storm water to percolate and infiltrate the surface areas, traditionally impervious to the soil below. Examples of permeable pavement include open cell pavers, porous asphalt, porous concrete, and other material approved by the city engineer or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 2016-29 , § 1, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 2, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 58-1-3. - Surfacing requirements for single-family residential driveways and hardship exemptions. 
(a)  The construction materials of single-family residential driveways shall consist of porous concrete, asphalt, plain concrete, brick and concrete pavers, or other permeable pavements. Loose gravel shall, in no event, be allowed as a finished surface for such driveways. 
(b)  Residential driveways that were constructed of a material other than hard-surfaced pavement prior to July 16, 2013 shall have until June 31, 2021 to come into full compliance with the regulations set forth within section 58-1-3(a) of this chapter. 
(c)  Hardship exemption: Owner(s) of a single-family residential driveway who allege that they will suffer an extreme and substantial financial hardship in complying with the regulations set forth under sections 58-1-3(a) and 58-1-3(b) of this chapter, may apply to the city council for a hardship exemption from the requirements of this chapter. Such application shall be filed the city clerk. Eligibility for a hardship exemption shall be determined based upon evidence provided by the applicant showing that the property owners will suffer an extreme and adverse financial hardship if forced to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Such evidence may include proof of the financial circumstances of all owners of the property, as well as the status of the property, including the property's involvement in recent and/or pending transfers of ownership and foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2016-29 , § 1, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 3, 5-2-2017) 
Sec. 58-1-4. - Surfacing and maintenance requirements for commercial driveways and off-street parking and loading facilities. 
(a)  All commercial driveways and off-street parking and loading facilities regulated under article 23 of chapter 93 of this Code shall be hard-surfaced pavement. Loose gravel shall, in no event, be allowed as a finished surface for such driveways and off-street parking and loading facilities. Such driveways and off-street parking and loading facilities shall also be drained, lighted and maintained by the property owner in accordance with specifications of the city. 
(b)  Parking areas that are in excess of the parking requirements of chapter 93 of this Code may consist of pervious materials, provided the total number of parking spaces, including excess spaces, does not exceed 110 percent of the requirement. 
(Ord. No. 2016-29 , § 1, 1-10-2017; Ord. No. 2017-09 , § 4, 5-2-2017) 
Chapter 60 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE 2. - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 60-2-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the word "garbage" is hereby defined to mean every refuse accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter attending the preparation, use, cooking and dealing in, or storage of means, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or grains. The word "trash" is hereby defined to mean all small discarded materials from around the premises which can be deposited in the approved containers for collection without hindrance to the normal collection service provided. The word "rubbish" is hereby defined to mean all grass cuttings, leaves, flowers, shrubbery, pruning of fruit or shade trees thereof from improved property, but not to include any waste where a tree over five inches in diameter has been taken down. 
(Code 1959, § 11-1; Code 1981, § 5-2-1) 
Sec. 60-2-2. - Carts; curbside service. 
(a)  Each household, apartment, store, shop, restaurant, hotel, boardinghouse or other commercial establishment shall have sufficient carts approved by the city to receive all garbage and trash that is to be removed by the city. Carts shall mean a receptacle of not less than 90 gallons, or more than 95 gallons, made of reinforced plastic, and shall have a suitable handle on the outside for pushing and pulling. The cart shall have an attached lid and wheels that are suitable for rolling. Carts shall be purchased through the city. Collection service may be refused and suspended until sufficient approved carts are obtained. 
(b)  All carts shall be placed curbside no earlier than 5:00 pm the day prior to the date of pickup, no later than 8:00 am on the day of scheduled collection. The location of the cart shall be in an area adjacent to the curb and at the front of the property. The cart shall be easily accessible to collection trucks. After collection, carts should be removed from the curbside within 24 hours and placed in the rear of the structure. Failure to comply may result in collection service being suspended or a citation being issued. 
(Code 1959, § 11-2; Code 1981, § 5-2-2; Ord. No. 92-6, 9-9-1992; Ord. No. 2004-09, § 1(5-2-2), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 60-2-3. - Storing of refuse. 
    All garbage must be thoroughly drained of all liquid matter and well-wrapped in paper or placed in a plastic garbage bag tied at the top before being deposited in the covered metal or reinforced plastic containers. 
(Code 1959, § 11-3; Code 1981, § 5-2-3; Ord. No. 92-6, 9-9-1992) 
Sec. 60-2-4. - Disposal of rubbish. 
(a)  All rubbish such as hedge clippings, shrubbery clippings, tree branches and other large rubbish shall be placed inside and adjacent to front property line of the sidewalk, where no sidewalk exists, shall be placed adjacent to the curb, but in no case in such position to obstruct the sidewalk or gutter to free traffic. It shall be placed immediately in front of the property from which such rubbish originates in a location easily accessible to the rubbish collection trucks of the city. All branches, limbs and shrubbery shall be cut into lengths of five feet or less and not over five inches in diameter. 
(b)  All other rubbish, as defined in section 60-2-1, shall be properly bagged and secured in commercial or yard-type plastic bags and placed on the property in a location adjacent to the front property line sidewalk. In cases where no sidewalks exist, rubbish shall be placed on the property adjacent to the curb. Such placement shall in no way obstruct the free flow of traffic, either foot or vehicular, along the sidewalk or roadway, or obstruct stormwater runoff in the gutter line or from the roadway. All rubbish shall be placed immediately in front of the property from which such originated and in a location easily accessible to the city collection vehicles. All rubbish not properly bagged and secured as stated above will not be collected, and the originator may be subject to a nuisance fine, as provided for in section 54-1-1(2), (6), (11) or (13). 
(Code 1959, § 11-4; Code 1981, § 5-2-4; Ord. No. 93-8, 4-6-1993) 
Sec. 60-2-5. - Collection of rubbish; disposal of building material. 
    The city shall not be responsible for the collecting and hauling of rubbish, trash, discarded building material, dirt, rock, plaster, metal or other like material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction, reconstruction, renovation, repair or other modification of buildings of whatsoever type. The material shall be removed by the owner of the property or the contractor. No certificate of occupancy or other inspection approving said improvements shall be issued or completed until the aforesaid material is removed by the owner or contractor. Before dirt, rock, plaster or other discarded building materials may be deposited on private property, permission of the owner thereof must be obtained. The city shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of discarded building material originating from private property in any fashion. The sole burden and responsibility for such removal shall remain with the owner, lessee, tenant or other occupant of such property. 
(Code 1959, § 11-5; Code 1981, § 5-2-5; Ord. No. 96-07, § 1, 8-6-1996; Ord. No. 98-03, § 1, 1-6-1998) 
Sec. 60-2-6. - Personnel not to enter buildings; tipping prohibited. 
    Garbage and refuse collection personnel are not permitted to enter houses and buildings for the collection of refuse, nor shall they accept any money for their services from persons served. 
(Code 1959, § 11-6; Code 1981, § 5-2-6) 
Sec. 60-2-7. - Multifamily dwellings. 
    In cases where the owner of a building having two or more tenants furnishes janitorial service for such dwelling units including the placing of containers at a central collection point, it shall be the duty of the janitor or other person charged by the owner with this responsibility to perform such service in compliance with this chapter; however, this shall not relieve the occupants of such dwelling units from their responsibility under sections 60-2-2 and 60-2-3. Where two or more dwelling units in any building or other premises are occupied and where the aforesaid janitorial services are not furnished, or in any case where the placing of containers for collection does not clearly indicate the premises from which they came, the occupants of such dwelling units shall plainly mark their containers for identification of ownership. This may be accomplished by marking the container with the name, or the house or dwelling unit number in which the owner resides. 
(Code 1959, § 11-7; Code 1981, § 5-2-7) 
Sec. 60-2-8. - Littering and offensive accumulations. 
(a)  Littering prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit, or cause to be thrown or deposited, upon the streets, sidewalks, lanes or alleys, or into any storm sewer, catchbasin, gutter or drainage ditch, any paper, garbage or other waste matter. No person shall deposit on, bury in, or cause to be deposited on, or buried in any land, public square, street, alley, lane, vacant or occupied lot, or into any lake or watercourse, any noxious filth, odorous or offensive liquid, solid material or garbage, or to place or keep such material within the limits of this city except in standard approved garbage receptacles from which regular collections are to be made. 
(b)  Violation deemed offense. Any person who throws or places or causes to be thrown or placed, or leaves in such a way that is likely to fall, be blown or tracked onto rights-of-way of any public street, highway, or other public property of the city any trash, paper, garbage can, bottles, debris, litter, nails, tacks, glass, crockery, scrap iron, wire or other like materials of an offensive nature, shall be guilty of an offense under this section. 
(c)  Rolling a yard. Any person who shall commit the act on private property of what is commonly called "rolling a yard" shall be deemed prima facie to have violated this section and shall be punishable as provided in subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Penalty for violation. Any person who shall be convicted under this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2-8) 
Sec. 60-2-9. - Use of city receptacles. 
    No person, other than employees of the city charged with such duty, shall move, molest, burn or interfere with any refuse receptacles or their contents or any other waste material set out for collection by the city personnel, unless authorized by the director of public service. 
(Code 1959, § 11-9; Code 1981, § 5-2-9) 
Sec. 60-2-10. - Transporting of garbage, etc. 
    No person, corporation or agent shall convey or cause to be conveyed upon the public streets, alleys or lanes any garbage, trash, rubbish or other materials of a like nature except when such material is secured in such manner to prevent the material from falling or being blown from such vehicle while in transit. 
(Code 1959, § 11-10; Code 1981, § 5-2-10) 
Sec. 60-2-11. - Types of garbage prohibited. 
    No person, corporation or agent shall place or cause to be placed with material to be collected by the city any acid, corrosive or explosive material, inflammable liquids or any other dangerous material of any kind. The city will not be responsible for the collection of such material or its disposal. 
(Code 1959, § 11-11; Code 1981, § 5-2-11) 
Sec. 60-2-12. - Sanitary fees. 
(a)  There is hereby established and assessed a residential sanitary fee of $7.50 per month to include all housekeeping units not otherwise included in this section. 
(b)  There is hereby established and assessed a commercial sanitary fee of $2.50 per cubic yard. 
(c)  There is hereby established and assessed a commercial noncontainerized minimum sanitary fee of $12.50 per month for two containers, no more than 35 gallons. The fee for each additional container shall be $10.00 per month. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2-12; Ord. No. 87-6, 2-3-1987; Ord. No. 94-1, 2-1-1994; Ord. No. 96-07, § 2, 8-6-1996) 
Sec. 60-2-13. - Commercial containers. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Commercial container. A manufactured container no greater than a capacity of eight yards suitable for emptying by mechanical equipment and approved by the community service director. 
    Commercial establishment. Any hotel, motel, business, industrial, public, or semipublic establishment of any nature or kind whatsoever other than a residential unit. 
    Recylclable materials. Plastic beverage bottles and jugs, glass bottles and jars, corrugated cardboard, newspaper, bimetal and aluminum cans, magazines, telephone books, used motor oil, metal, tires, and large appliances. 
(b)  Collection of commercial refuse generally. 
(1)  All commercial refuse accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by a contractor designated by the city, except as otherwise expressly authorized in this section. Each refuse contract held by an individual business establishment in the city on the date of the adoption of this section shall be reported to the city. The contract termination date and other pertinent information shall be sent to the community services department, who will add the business name, location, phone number, and the owner and manager's name to the city's list of commercial sanitation customers. The community service director shall be authorized to adopt and promulgate reasonable rules and regulations concerning commercial refuse collection, conveyance and disposal. However, such rules and regulations shall not be contrary to anything in this article but shall be supplementary thereto. 
(2)  The contractor designated by the city will collect commercial refuse in accordance with a schedule as established from time to time by the city and kept on file in the community service department and the office of the city clerk. 
(3)  Commercial collection service may, at the option of the city, be discontinued where commercial containers are inadequate. Before discontinuing service, the owner or occupant of the premises served shall be given written notice by the community services or other city official of the unacceptable condition. The owner or occupant shall have ten days from the mailing or delivery by hand of the notice within which to correct such defect. 
(4)  Commercial collection service may, at the option of the city, be discontinued for the nonpayment of sanitation charges and fees as provided for in this section. 
(5)  The contractor designated by the city shall be responsible for collecting or hauling. The contractor designated by the city shall not be responsible for collecting or hauling trees, discarded building material, dirt, broken concrete, bricks, rocks or debris resulting from repairs, remodeling or construction, bushes or other vegetation from commercial tree trimmers, landscapers, grading contractors or building contractors, except on a special fee basis by agreement with the city and the designated contractor. 
(6)  Commercial refuse shall be stored in garbage containers as approved by the community service director. Each commercial customer is responsible for maintaining the receptacle in good condition. 
(7)  The contractor designated by the city shall have clearly identifiable markings on each garbage container. The telephone contact number on the container shall be the same number found on the customer's invoice. At a minimum, the contractor name, contractor telephone contact number and the city's logo will be painted or otherwise affixed on the container for the collection service. 
(8)  The contractor shall invoice all customers directly and report the results of invoicing receipts at least one a month throughout the agreement. All of the contractor's record shall be subject to audit by the city at the city's convenience to ensure accurate accounting and disbursement of franchise fees. Franchise fees shall be disbursed to city at least once per month. 
(9)  The contractor shall provide a recycling collection and disposal program for recyclable materials. These materials will be corrugated cardboard and tires. 
(10)  The contractor shall pay to the city a franchise fee of ten percent total gross income of all commercial collections made within the city limits. Any contractor who is selected as the city's exclusive provider who has executed contracts for commercial collection within the city limits in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall pay the franchise fee based on the preadopting existing contracts, new contracts and contracts from other providers when the other provider's contracts terminate naturally under the provisions of this section. 
(11)  The contractor shall provide all city containers at no cost, not to exceed eight yard containers, excluding corrugated card board collection containers. 
(c)  Charges for the collection of commercial refuse. 
(1)  Charges for the collection of commercial refuse shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. Each business establishment in the city is required to use the collection contractor designated by the city, in accordance with subsection (b)(1) above, provided if the solid waste created by any commercial entity is in such form, size or bulk that it cannot be physically handled by the equipment employed by the designated city contractor for the removal of such waste, then, upon application to the city for a plan of private removal, and upon the approval of such a plan, such commercial establishment may be allowed to remove such oversized solid waste material, along with any other waste normally generated by such establishment. The application for permission to make private disposition of such solid waste shall be made through the community services director, who shall approve any plan designed to make orderly and timely disposition of such outsized solid waste. Such permit must be renewed annually. 
(2)  Failure to pay any charges will be a violation of this Code. Citations for violations of this section will be issued by the city, and said citations will be returnable to and tried before the municipal court of the city. 
(d)  Certain matter not to be placed in containers. Dead animals, feces, explosives, dangerous and corrosive materials, clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases, heavy metals, or any substance deemed to be a hazardous or toxic waste by any agency of the state or federal government shall not be placed in any trash or garbage receptacle. Produce, meats, poultry, and food preparation oils shall be placed in sealed bags prior to being placed in any trash or garbage receptacle in such a manner as to minimize noxious or offensive odors emanating therefrom. 
(e)  Doors and lids to be kept closed. Except when trash or garbage is being loaded into containers, or pickup of the same is being effected, all doors for screening, doors, or lids of containers shall be kept closed. 
(f)  Inspection. The code enforcement unit, officer of the police, and/or fire department of the city, after identifying himself, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(g)  Penalties for violations. The penalties for any violation of this section will be as stated in section 1-1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2005-06, § 1(5-2-13-5-2-19), 7-5-2005) 
ARTICLE 3. - COLLECTION OF RECYCLABLE PAPER 

Sec. 60-3-1. - Title. 
    This article will be known as the "Hapeville Collection of Recyclable Paper Ordinance." 
(Code 1981, § 5-2A-1; Ord. No. 83-1, 1-4-1983) 
Sec. 60-3-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, "recyclable paper" is defined as a common and inexpensive machine-finished paper made chiefly from wood pulp and used mostly for newspapers. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2A-2; Ord. No. 83-1, 1-4-1983) 
Sec. 60-3-3. - Separation, bundling, bagging and pick-up of newspapers for recycling. 
(a)  There is hereby created a program operated and run by the city for the collection of recyclable paper. All persons, firms or corporations may separate from normal garbage and trash their newspaper and other recyclable paper material. 
(b)  Recyclable paper material shall be placed in paper bags or tied securely with rope or cord in packages not exceeding 50 pounds, and said packages shall be placed separately at the curb or near the garbage can for collection on days specified by the sanitation department for collection and pursuant to such other rules and regulations as may be prescribed. 
(c)  After said bundles are placed at the curb for collection, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation other than the owner, lessee or occupant of the premises to pick up said bundles. Any person violating the provisions hereof shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to the provisions of section 66-1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1981, § 5-2A-3; Ord. No. 83-1, 1-4-1983) 
Chapter 63 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE 1. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 63-1-1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the stormwater management ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-1; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-2. - Authority. 
    This article is enacted pursuant to the grant of police powers to the city by Ga. L. 1980, p. 3769 (sections 1-102 and 1-103 of the codified city Charter). 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-2; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-3. - Findings of fact. 
    The mayor and council make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  Uncontrolled stormwater drainage/discharge may have a significant, adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of the city, and the quality of life of its citizens. More specifically, surface water runoff can carry pollutants and nutrients into receiving waters. 
(2)  Uncontrolled stormwater drainage can increase the incidence of flooding and the level of floods which occur, endangering roads, other public and private property and human life. 
(3)  Altered land surfaces can change the rate and volume of runoff. 
(4)  Adverse water quality and quantity consequences described above could result in substantial economic losses. Potential losses include, but are not limited to, increased water treatment costs, as well as state and federal fines associated with water quality violations. 
(5)  Many future problems can be avoided through proper stormwater management. 
(6)  Every parcel of real property, both public and private, either uses or benefits from the maintenance of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(7)  Current and anticipated growth will contribute to and increase the need for improvement and maintenance of the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-3; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-4. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article include the following: 
(1)  To protect, maintain, and enhance the shortterm and longterm public health, safety, and general welfare. This objective will be achieved by providing for regulation and management of the municipal separate storm sewer system, including public and private facilities in the city's service area. 
(2)  To comply with state (DNR) and federal (EPA) stormwater regulations developed pursuant to the Clean Water Act. These requirements include: 
a.  Control of the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system by stormwater discharges associated with commercial and industrial activity and the quality of stormwater discharged from sites of commercial and industrial activity. 
b.  Prohibition of illicit connections to municipal separate storm sewers. 
c.  Control of discharge to municipal separate storms sewers of spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater. 
d.  Control, through intergovernmental agreements, the contribution of pollutants from one municipal or county system to another. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-4; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-5. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words, and their derivatives, shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Accidental discharge shall be defined as a discharge prohibited by this article into the municipal separate storm sewer system which occurs by change and without planning or consideration prior to occurrence. 
    Best management practices (BMPs) shall mean a wide range of management procedures, activities, and prohibitions on practices which control the quantity and/or quality of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. 
    Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (33 USC 1251 et seq.) 
    Conveyance shall mean stormwater features designed for the movement of stormwater through the drainage system, such as concrete or metal pipes, ditches, depressions, swales, etc. 
    Cooling water shall mean water used exclusively as a cooling medium in an appliance, device or apparatus. 
    Development activity shall mean: 
(1)  The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, plots, sites, tracts, parcels or other divisions by plat or deed; 
(2)  The construction, installation, or alteration of a structure, impervious surface, or drainage facility; 
(3)  Clearing, scraping, grubbing, or otherwise significantly disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site; or 
(4)  Adding, removing, exposing, excavating, leveling, grading, digging, burrowing, dumping, piping, dredging, or otherwise disturbing the soil, vegetation, mud, sand or rock of a site. 
    Discharge shall mean the release of treated or untreated water to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Illicit connection shall mean a connection to a municipal separate storm sewer system which results in discharge that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer). 
    Maintenance shall mean any action necessary to preserve stormwater management facilities in proper working condition, in order to serve their intended purposes and to prevent structural failure of such facilities. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, highways, rights-of-way, municipal streets, catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, storm drains, detention ponds, other stormwater facilities) which is: 
(1)  Owned or maintained by the city; 
(2)  Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater; 
(3)  Not a combined sewer; and 
(4)  Not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW). 
    Pollution shall mean the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Private shall mean property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations, and other organizations and not by the city, county, state, or federal government. 
    Procedure shall mean a procedure adopted by the director of public services and approved by the city administrator, to implement a regulation or regulations adopted under this article, or to carry out other responsibilities as may be required by this article or other codes, ordinances or resolutions of the cit or other agencies. 
    Regulation shall mean any regulation, rule or requirement prepared by the director of public services and approved by the city administrator, pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
    Sanitary sewer system shall mean the complete sanitary sewer system of the city or county which discharges sewage directly or indirectly into any sewage treatment plan, including sanitary sewer pipelines, manholes and flushing inlets and appurtenances to the foregoing, but shall exclude any portion or facilities of the sewage treatment plant. 
    Site shall mean any lot, plot, parcel or tract of land. 
    Stormwater shall mean stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage. 
    Stormwater management shall mean the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to meet the objectives of this article and which shall include a system of vegetative or structural measures, or both, that control the increased volume and rate of stormwater runoff and water quality impacts caused by manmade changes to the land. 
    Stormwater management facilities shall mean constructed or natural components of a stormwater drainage system, designed to perform a particular function, or multiple functions, including, but not limited to, pipes, sales, ditches, culverts, street gutters, detention basins, retention basins, constructed wetlands, infiltration devices, catch basins, oil/water separators, sediment basins, natural systems and modular pavement. 
    Stormwater runoff shall mean the direct response of a land surface to precipitation and includes the surface and subsurface runoff that enters a ditch, stream, storm drain or other concentrated flow during and following the precipitation. 
    Variance shall mean the modification of the minimum stormwater management requirements for specific circumstances where strict adherence of the requirements would result in unnecessary hardship and not fulfill the intent of this article. 
    Water quality shall mean those characteristics of stormwater runoff that related to the physical, chemical, biological, or radiological integrity of water. 
    Water quantity shall mean those characteristics of stormwater runoff that relate to the rate and volume of the stormwater runoff. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-5; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-6. - Applicability. 
(a)  The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The application of this article and the provisions expressed herein shall be the minimum stormwater management requirements and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any other powers granted by state statute or local ordinance. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-6; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-7. - Administrative responsibility. 
    The director of public services shall have the power to administer and enforce all regulations and procedures adopted to implement this article including the right to maintain an action or procedure in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with or restrain any violation of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-7; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-8. - Duties of director of public services. 
    The director of public services or his designee shall: 
(1)  Administer, coordinate and oversee acquisition, design and construction of the municipal stormwater management facilities and conveyances. 
(2)  Establish or oversee establishment of development standards and guidelines for controlling stormwater runoff. 
(3)  Determine the manner in which stormwater management facilities should be operated. 
(4)  Advise the mayor and council on issues related to stormwater. 
(5)  Develop programs or procedures to control the discharge of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Administer, coordinate and oversee operations and maintenance of the municipal stormwater facilities and conveyances. 
(7)  Inspect private systems which discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(8)  Conduct followup inspections of private systems as required by the city's NPDES permit. 
(9)  Protect facilities and properties controlled by the city and prescribe how they are used by others. 
(10)  Require new, increased, or significantly changed stormwater contributions to comply with the terms of this article. 
(11)  Coordinate and monitor educational programs required under the city's NPDES permit. 
(12)  Implement the stormwater management program for the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-8; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-9. - Stormwater runoff quantity controls. 
(a)  Water quantity controls will be provided as a part of all development pursuant to the provisions of the city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance and flood damage prevention ordinance. 
(b)  The city may allow stormwater runoff that otherwise is of unacceptable quantity or which would be discharged in volumes or at rates in excess of those otherwise allowed by the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance or flood damage prevention ordinance, to be discharged into drainage facilities off site of the development, provided the following conditions are met: 
(1)  It is not practicable to completely manage runoff on site in a manner that meets the design and performance standards found in the soil erosion and sedimentation control and flood damage prevention ordinances and any accompanying design manuals; 
(2)  Off-site drainage facilities and channels leading to them are designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with requirements of those ordinances; and 
(3)  Adequate provision is made for sharing of construction, maintenance and operating costs of facilities. 
(c)  The Standards and Guidelines for Roadway Enhancement and Vegetation Control Policies as promulgated by the state department of transportation are hereby adopted as standards of the city and incorporated into this article as fully as though set out at length herein. Copies of such standards shall be maintained on file in the office of the director of public services where they shall be available for public inspection. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-9) 
Sec. 63-1-10. - Prohibition; accidental spills. 
(a)  No person shall throw, drain, run, or otherwise discharge to any component of the municipal separate storm sewer system or cause, permit or suffer to be thrown, drained, run, or allow to seep or otherwise discharge into such system any matter of any nature excepting only such storm or surface water as herein expressly authorized. 
(b)  The following are exempt from the prohibition above: 
(1)  Water line flushing performed by a government agency, diverted stream flows, rising ground waters, and unpolluted ground water infiltration. 
(2)  Unpolluted pumped groundwater. 
(3)  Discharges from potable water sources, foundation drains, air conditioning condensation, irrigation water, springs, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains, lawn watering, individual residential car washing, flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, and street wash water. 
(4)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting. 
(5)  Other unpolluted water. 
(c)  In the event of an accidental discharge or an unavoidable loss to the municipal separate storm sewer system of any material or substance other than stormwater runoff, the person concerned shall inform the director of public services within 24 hours of the nature, quantity and time of occurrence of the discharge. The person concerned shall take immediate steps to contain, treat, or take other actions to minimize effects of the discharge on the municipal separate storm sewer system and receiving streams. The person shall also take immediate steps to ensure no recurrence of the discharge. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-10; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-11. - Illicit connections. 
(a)  No person shall connect any pipe, open channel, or any other conveyance system that discharges anything except stormwater or unpolluted water which is approved by the director of public services, based on the exemptions listed in section 63-1-10(b) above, to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(b)  Improper connections in violation of this article must be disconnected and redirected, if necessary, to the city or county sanitary sewer system. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-11; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-12. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  Any stormwater management facility or BMP which services a single lot or commercial or industrial development shall be privately owned and maintained. The owner shall create and maintain a perpetual, nonexclusive easement which allows for access for inspection and maintenance from a public street. All private systems shall be maintained in such a manner that there is no interference with the intended and designed purpose of the system. 
(b)  Only those stormwater management control facilities and BMPs constructed as public works projects of the city and/or accepted for maintenance by the city through formal adoption by the mayor and council shall be considered to be publicly owned. 
(c)  The city may require dedication to the city of privately owned stormwater facilities which discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(d)  The director of public services shall determine inspection schedules necessary to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The director of public services or his designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, at reasonable hours, without hindrance, all properties for regular inspections, periodic investigations, observation, measurement, enforcement, sampling and testing, in accordance with provisions of this article. The director of public services or his designee shall duly notify the owner of the property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(f)  The director of public services or his designee, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter, at reasonable hours, without hindrance, all private properties for which the city holds a negotiated easement for repairs, maintenance and other purposes related to any portion of the publicly owned stormwater management facilities lying within said easement. The director of public services or his designee shall duly notify the owner of the property or the representative on site, except in the case of an emergency. 
(g)  Measurements, tests and analyses performed by the director of public services or his designee or required of any discharger to the municipal separate storm sewer system shall be in accordance with 40 CFR 136, unless another method is approved by the director of public services. 
(h)  If, after inspection, the condition of a privately owned facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall notify appropriate officials of the state environmental protection division or the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. In addition, the city shall have the right, but not the duty, to bring an action in an appropriate court, as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe, including the seeking of action to compel the owner of the facility to bring the facility into compliance. 
(i)  For those privately owned facilities which connect to the municipal separate storm sewer system, upon determination through inspection that such facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety and welfare through either improper maintenance or the release into the public system of prohibited discharges, the city may terminate the connection to the public system and/or take any additional enforcement actions authorized by this article. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-12; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-13. - Notice of violations; penalties; appeals. 
(a)  The owner and/or lessee of real property or improvements on which a violation occurs shall each be responsible for correction of any violation occurring on their premises. 
(b)  Upon determination that a violation of this article has occurred, the director of public services shall give written notice to the accused violator, owner and/or lessee. This notice shall specify the nature and evidence of violation, the potential penalty involved, the corrective action to be taken, if any, the amount of time in which to correct deficiencies, and the right and procedure for filing an appeal. Such notice may be made by hand delivery to the person noticed or their authorized agent or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(c)  Any person served with notice of violation or aggrieved by any other decision of the director of public services may appeal such notice in writing to the board of appeals. Such notice of appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk within seven days of receipt of the notice of violation. 
(d)  A notice of appeal shall state the specific reasons why the notice or decision of the director of public services is alleged to be in error, and the director of public services shall prepare and send to the board of appeals and appellant a written response to said notice of appeal within ten days of receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(e)  A hearing on such appeal shall be scheduled before the board of appeals within 30 days of the filing of notice of appeal. 
(f)  All appeals shall be heard by the board of appeals in open meeting. The board of appeals shall render its decision within 15 days of the appeal hearing. 
(g)  Upon failure to correct the alleged violation within the time prescribed, or upon final determination of appeal denying the relief sought, the director of public services shall issue citation for violation of this article, summoning the person so cited to appear in the city court to answer said charge. 
(h)  Violations of the provisions of this article constitute an infraction subject to a penalty not to exceed $500.00 and/or 90 days in the city jail. The city may institute appropriate action or proceedings at law or equity for the enforcement of this article or to correct violations of this article. Any court of competent jurisdiction may issue restraining orders, temporary or permanent injunctions, and other appropriate forms of remedy or relief. Each day of noncompliance is considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, including application or injunctive relief. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-13; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-14. - Variances from requirements. 
(a)  The board of appeals may grant a variance from requirements of this article if exceptional circumstances applicable to a site exist such that strict adherence to the provisions of the chapter will result in unnecessary hardship and will not fulfill the intent of the chapter. 
(b)  A written request for a variance shall be required and shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons, with supporting data, a variance should be granted. The request shall include all information necessary to evaluate the proposed variance. The variance request shall be submitted to the director of public services for evaluation and recommendation prior to being scheduled for hearing. The director of public services shall transmit his recommendation to the board of appeals within 30 days of the request for hearing. Hearing shall be held by the board of appeals no later than 45 days of receipt of the variance request. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-14; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-15. - Cooperation with other governments. 
    The city may enter into agreements with other local governments to carry out the purposes this article. These agreements may include, but are not limited to, enforcement of provisions, resolution of disputes, cooperative monitoring, and cooperative management of stormwater system and management programs. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-15; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
Sec. 63-1-16. - Liability for supplemental charges. 
    Any person in violation of any portion of this article shall pay for all city costs associated with the violation, including but not limited to containment, cleanup, injury, death, legal, fines, other. 
(Code 1981, § 8-8-16; Ord. No. 94-24, § 1, 9-6-1994) 
ARTICLE 2. - POSTDEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 63-2-1. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased postdevelopment stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of postdevelopment stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. 
(b)  This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the predevelopment hydrologic response in their postdevelopment state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum postdevelopment stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum postdevelopment stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace, with the county's greenspace protection plan; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the longterm responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and, 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and longterm followup. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-13), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-2. - Applicability 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
(2)  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
(3)  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the director of community services to be a hotspot land use; or 
(4)  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(b)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
(1)  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
(3)  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
(4)  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the director of community services. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-14), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-3. - Designation of administrator. 
    The director of community services or his or her designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-15), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-4. - Compatibility with other regulations. 
    This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-16), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-5. - Stormwater design manual. 
    The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. All references to the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) are presumed to be the "latest edition" as defined on the GSMM website at www.georgiastormwater.com. Updates, errata and revisions will be provided on the website. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. The GSMM is hereby made a public record and adopted by the city. Public access to this document shall be provided by the website cited herein. This section serves as public notice of the accessibility of the GSMM. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-17), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means a person submitting a postdevelopment stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Conservation easement means an agreement between a landowner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Development means a land development or land development project. 
    Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
    Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
    Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or more. 
    Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
    Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
    Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the longterm inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
    New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a byproduct of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
    On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
    Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the community services department of the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Postdevelopment refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
    Predevelopment refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish predevelopment conditions. 
    Project means a land development project. 
    Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
    Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
    Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
    Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-18), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-7. - Permit application requirements. 
(a)  No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(b)  Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. 
(c)  Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 63-2-8; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 63-2-9; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with section 63-2-10, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with section 63-2-11, if applicable; and 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 63-2-12. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-19), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-8. - Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. 
(a)  Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the landowner or developer shall meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the postdevelopment stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the postdevelopment stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
(b)  To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography, perennial and intermittent streams, mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available), boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading, and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed postdevelopment stormwater management system including preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls, location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains, flow paths, location of floodplain/floodway limits, relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages, and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
Local watershed plans, the city's greenspace projection plan (if applicable), and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-20), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-9. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan shall detail how postdevelopment stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 63-2-15 below. 
(b)  This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a professional engineer (PE) licensed in the state, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklists found in the stormwater design manual. 
(c)  The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse postdevelopment stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
(1)  Common address and legal description of site; 
(2)  Vicinity map; 
(3)  The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated, acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project, all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features, all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities, direction of flow and exits from the site, analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site, and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
(4)  The postdevelopment hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include a topographic map of developed site conditions with the postdevelopment drainage basin boundaries indicated, total area of postdevelopment impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project, calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each subbasin for the development project to meet the postdevelopment stormwater management performance criteria in section 63-2-15, location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas, documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized, methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 63-2-15 must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
(5)  The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed postdevelopment stormwater management system, which shall include a map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes, a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective, cross section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria, a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs), documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the postdevelopment stormwater management performance criteria, drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catchbasins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow, and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
(6)  A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of postdevelopment design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
(7)  An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act and section 57-1-1 et seq., or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)  A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan, information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings, descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction, density of plantings, descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation, and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)  Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)  The applicant must ensure access from public rights-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. The local government will establish which stormwater facilities and practices will require regular maintenance. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
(11)  Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city as provided in section 63-2-10 below, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance section 63-2-10. 
(12)  The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-21), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-10. - Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. The city will establish which stormwater facilities and practices will require formal inspection and maintenance agreements. 
(b)  The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records upon final plat approval. 
(c)  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
(d)  As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
(e)  In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 63-2-25. 
(f)  The city, in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-22), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-11. - Performance and maintenance bonds. 
    Performance and maintenance bonds or other security may be required by the city to guarantee performance of construction and/or maintenance obligations hereunder shall be posted by the applicant. The same bonding requirements as found in O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1 et seq., shall be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-23), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-12. - Application procedure. 
(a)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the city. 
(b)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in section 63-2-7(c) above (two copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(c)  The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(d)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (c) above and this subsection shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(e)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
(f)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
(2)  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
(3)  The city shall be allowed to conduct periodic inspections of the project; 
(4)  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city; and 
(5)  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by section 63-2-24. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-24), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-13. - Application review fees. 
    The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-25), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-14. - Modifications for off-site facilities. 
(a)  The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices, and there must be a legally obligated entity responsible for longterm operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the off-site facility. 
(b)  A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 
(c)  To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-26), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-15. - Water quality. 
    All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-27), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-16. - Stream channel protection. 
    Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-28), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-17. - Overbank flooding protection. 
    Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the postdevelopment peak discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-29), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-18. - Extreme flooding protection. 
    Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-30), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-19. - Structural stormwater controls. 
(a)  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
(b)  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-31), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-20. - Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. 
    The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 63-2-15(1). The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-32), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-21. - Drainage system guidelines. 
    Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include, but are not limited to, culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catchbasins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-33), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-22. - Dam design guidelines. 
    Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and rules for dam safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-34), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-23. - Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. 
(a)  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
(b)  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
(c)  If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-35), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-24. - Final inspection and as-built plans. 
    Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-36), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-25. - Longterm maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
(b)  A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may correct the violation as provided in section 63-2-28. 
(c)  Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including, but not limited to, routine inspections, random inspections, inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations, and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records, sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities, and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-37), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-26. - Right-of-entry for inspection. 
    The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-38), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-27. - Records of maintenance activities. 
    Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-39), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-28. - Failure to maintain. 
    If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after 30 days written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), and pursuant to an order of the municipal court, shall correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. The city may assess the owners of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-40), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-29. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-41), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-30. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
(b)  The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-42), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-2-31. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such reasonable within applicable industry standards conditions as the city may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient), after the city has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(5)  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for 30 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-10, § 1(8-2A-43), 8-3-2004) 
ARTICLE 3. - STREAM BUFFER PROTECTION 

Sec. 63-3-1. - Purposes. 
    It is the purpose of this article to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare; to minimize public and private losses due to erosion, siltation and water pollution; and to maintain stream water quality by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Create buffer zones along the streams in the city for the protection of water resources; and 
(2)  Minimize land development within such buffers by establishing buffer zone requirements and by requiring authorization for any such activities. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-44), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buffer means, with respect to a stream, a natural or enhanced vegetated area (established by subsection 63-3-6(1) below), lying adjacent to the stream. 
    Impervious cover means any manmade paved, hardened or structural surface regardless of material. Impervious cover includes but is not limited to rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, decks, swimming pools and any concrete or asphalt. 
    Land development means any land change, including but not limited to clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land disturbance means any land or vegetation change, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land disturbance activity or land disturbing activity means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan (i.e., the regulatory flood). 
    Parcel means any plot, lot or acreage shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the city required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Protection area or stream protection area means, with respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
    Riparian means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
    Setback means, with respect to a stream, the area established by subsection 63-3-6(2) extending beyond any buffer applicable to the stream. 
    Stream means any stream, beginning at: 
(1)  The location of a spring, seep, or groundwater outflow that sustains streamflow; 
(2)  A point in the stream channel with a drainage area of 25 acres or more; or 
(3)  Where evidence indicates the presence of a stream in a drainage area of other than 25 acres, the city may require field studies to verify the existence of a stream. 
    Streambank means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
    Stream channel means the portion of a watercourse that contains the base flow of the stream. 
    Watershed means the land area that drains into a particular stream. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-45), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-3. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all land development activity on property containing a stream protection area as defined in section 63-3-2. These requirements are in addition to, and do not replace or supersede, any other applicable buffer requirements established under state law and approval or exemption from these requirements do not constitute approval or exemption from buffer requirements established under state law or from other applicable local, state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-46), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-4. - Grandfather provisions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Work consisting of the repair or maintenance of any lawful use of land that is zoned and approved for such use on or before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(2)  Existing development and ongoing land disturbance activities, including, but not limited to, existing agriculture, silviculture, landscaping, gardening and lawn maintenance, except that new development or land disturbance activities on such properties will be subject to all applicable buffer requirements. 
(3)  Any land development activity that is under construction, fully approved for development, scheduled for permit approval or has been submitted for approval as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(4)  Land development activity that has not been submitted for approval, but that is part of a larger master development plan, such as for an office park or other phased development that has been previously approved within two years of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-47), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-5. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The following specific activities are exempt from this article. Exemption of these activities does not constitute an exemption for any other activity proposed on a property: 
(1)  Activities for the purpose of building one of the following: 
a.  A stream crossing by a driveway, transportation route or utility line; public water supply intake or public wastewater outfall structures; 
b.  Intrusions necessary to provide access to a property; 
c.  Public access facilities that must be on the water including boat ramps, docks, foot trails leading directly to the water, fishing platforms and overlooks; 
d.  Unpaved foot trails and paths; 
e.  Activities to restore and enhance stream bank stability, vegetation, water quality and/or aquatic habitat, so long as native vegetation and bioengineering techniques are used. 
(2)  Public sewer line easements paralleling the stream channel, except that all easements (permanent and construction) and land disturbance should be at least 25 feet from the top of the bank. This includes such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. This exemption shall not be construed as allowing the construction of roads, bike paths or other transportation routes in such easements, regardless of paving material, except for access for the uses specifically cited in subsection (a)(1) above. 
(3)  Land development activities within a right-of-way existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article. 
(4)  Within an easement of any utility existing at the time this article takes effect or approved under the terms of this article, land disturbance activities and such impervious cover as is necessary for the operation and maintenance of the utility, including but not limited to manholes, vents and valve structures. 
(5)  Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property. However, when emergency work is performed under this section, the person performing it shall report such work to the city on the next business day after commencement of the work. Within ten days thereafter, the person shall apply for a permit and perform such work within such time period as may be determined by the city to be reasonably necessary to correct any impairment such emergency work may have caused to the water conveyance capacity, stability or water quality of the protection area. 
(6)  Forestry and silviculture activities on land that is zoned for forestry, silvicultural or agricultural uses and are not incidental to other land development activity. If such activity results in land disturbance in the buffer that would otherwise be prohibited, then no other land disturbing activity other than normal forest management practices will be allowed on the entire property for three years after the end of the activities that intruded on the buffer. 
(b)  After the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, it shall apply to new subdividing and platting activities. 
(c)  Any land development activity within a buffer established hereunder or any impervious cover within a setback established hereunder is prohibited unless a variance is granted pursuant to section 63-3-7 below. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-48), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-6. - Buffer and setback requirements. 
    All land development activity subject to this article shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  An undisturbed natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained for 50 feet, measured horizontally, on both banks (as applicable) of the stream as measured from the top of the stream bank. 
(2)  An additional setback shall be maintained for 25 feet, measured horizontally, beyond the undisturbed natural vegetative buffer, in which all impervious cover shall be prohibited. Grading, filling and earthmoving shall be minimized within the setback. 
(3)  No septic tanks or septic tank drain fields shall be permitted within the buffer or the setback. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-49), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-7. - Variance procedures. 
    This article does not involve zoning applications or zoning decisions. However, for convenience, variances described hereunder must be submitted to the planning commission. Variances from the above buffer and setback requirements may be granted in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Where a parcel was platted prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, and its shape, topography or other existing physical condition prevents land development consistent with this article, and the city finds and determines that the requirements of this article prohibit the otherwise lawful use of the property by the owner, the appeals board of the city may grant a variance from the buffer and setback requirements hereunder, provided such variance requires mitigation measures to offset the effects of any proposed land development on the parcel. 
(2)  Except as provided above, the planning commission of the city shall grant no variance from any provision of this article without first conducting a public hearing on the application for variance and authorizing the granting of the variance by an affirmative vote of the planning commission. The city shall give public notice of each such public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within city. The city shall require that the applicant post a sign giving notice of the proposed variance and the public hearing. The sign shall be of a size and posted in such a location on the property as to be clearly visible from the primary adjacent road right-of-way. Variances will be considered only in the following cases: 
a.  When a property's shape, topography or other physical conditions existing at the time of the adoption of this article prevents land development unless a buffer variance is granted. 
b.  Unusual circumstances when strict adherence to the minimal buffer requirements in the article would create an extreme hardship. 
Variances will not be considered when, following adoption of this article, actions of any property owner of a given property have created conditions of a hardship on that property. 
(3)  At a minimum, a variance request shall include the following information: 
a.  A site map that includes locations of all streams, wetlands, floodplain boundaries and other natural features, as determined by field survey; 
b.  A description of the shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
c.  A detailed site plan that shows the locations of all existing and proposed structures and other impervious cover, the limits of all existing and proposed land disturbance, both inside and outside the buffer and setback. The exact area of the buffer to be affected shall be accurately and clearly indicated; 
d.  Documentation of unusual hardship should the buffer be maintained; 
e.  At least one alternative plan, which does not include a buffer or setback intrusion, or an explanation of why such a site plan is not possible; 
f.  A calculation of the total area and length of the proposed intrusion; 
g.  A stormwater management site plan, if applicable; and 
h.  Proposed mitigation, if any, for the intrusion. If no mitigation is proposed, the request must include an explanation of why none is being proposed. 
(4)  The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue a variance: 
a.  The shape, size, topography, slope, soils, vegetation and other physical characteristics of the property; 
b.  The locations of all streams on the property, including along property boundaries; 
c.  The location and extent of the proposed buffer or setback intrusion; 
d.  Whether alternative designs are possible which require less intrusion or no intrusion; 
e.  The longterm and construction water quality impacts of the proposed variance; and 
f.  Whether issuance of the variance is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-50), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-8. - Compatibility with other buffer regulations and requirements. 
    This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other ordinances, rule or regulation, statute or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-51), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-9. - Additional information requirements for development on buffer zone properties. 
    Any permit applications for property requiring buffers and setbacks hereunder must include the following: 
(1)  A site plan showing: 
a.  The location of all streams on the property; 
b.  Limits of required stream buffers and setbacks on the property; 
c.  Buffer zone topography with contour lines at no greater than five-foot contour intervals; 
d.  Delineation of forested and open areas in the buffer zone; and 
e.  Detailed plans of all proposed land development in the buffer and of all proposed impervious cover within the setback; 
(2)  A description of all proposed land development within the buffer and setback; and 
(3)  Any other documentation that the review and permitting authority may reasonably deem necessary for review of the application and to ensure that the buffer zone article is addressed in the approval process. 
All buffer and setback areas must be recorded on the final plat of the property following plan approval. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-52), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-10. - Responsibility. 
    Neither the issuance of a development permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this article shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon the city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-53), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-11. - Inspection. 
(a)  The city may cause inspections of the work in the buffer or setback to be made periodically during the course thereof and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city in making such inspections. The city shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. 
(b)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative or agent while in the process of carrying out official duties. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-54), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-12. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-55), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-13. - Notice of violation. 
    If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured the appropriate permit therefor, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; and 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-56), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-14. - Penalties. 
    In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties: 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order, which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Criminal penalties. For violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for 30 days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-57), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 63-3-15. - Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order under section 63-3-14(1), (2) or (3) may appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the municipal court of city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the municipal court of city within 30 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the municipal court, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the county superior court. 
(Ord. No. 2004-11, § 1(8-2A-58), 8-3-2004) 
ARTICLE 4. - STORMWATER UTILITY 

Sec. 63-4-1. - Short title. 
    This article will be known as the city stormwater utility ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-2. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect the public health, safety, environment and general welfare through the establishment of a stormwater utility in the city. The objectives of this article are stated as follows: 
(1)  The professional engineering and financial analyses conducted on behalf of and submitted to the mayor and council properly assess and define the stormwater management problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities of the city. 
(2)  Given the problems, needs, goals, program priorities and funding opportunities identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses submitted to the city, it is appropriate to authorize the establishment of a separate accounting unit which shall be dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems in the city. 
(3)  Stormwater management is necessary throughout the city. Intense urban development in the city has radically altered the natural hydrology of the area and the hydrologics of stormwater systems, with many natural elements having been replaced or augmented by man-made facilities. As a result, the specific service, system demands in the city now exceed the service capability of many of the systems. An advanced level of service is needed in the city due to its urbanization, therefore a stormwater utility service area subject to stormwater service fees should encompass the entirety of the city to enable the city to successfully manage, operate and improve stormwater systems at an advanced level. 
(4)  It is most equitable that a portion of the needed stormwater service level continue to be funded from the city's water and sewer revenue and water and sewer fund revenues, and therefore that the mayor and council may allocate such revenue(s) and funds to support stormwater management in the future in the form of a combination of service fee payments for city-owned properties and a supplemental allocation of general fund funding. 
(5)  The stormwater needs in the city include but are not limited to protecting the public health, safety and welfare. Funding of stormwater services and facilities is therefore incidental to the fundamental regulatory function of the city in protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
(6)  Provision of stormwater management programs and systems renders and/or results in both service and benefit to individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city and to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city concurrently in a variety of ways as identified in the professional engineering and financial analyses, and the service and benefits differ among the individual properties, property owners, citizens and residents in relation to the demands they impose individually and collectively on the stormwater systems. 
(7)  The service and benefit rendered or resulting from the provision of stormwater management programs and systems may differ over time depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management programs and systems and risk exposure. It is not practical to allocate the cost of the city's stormwater management programs, systems in direct relationship to the services or benefits rendered to or received by individual properties or persons over a brief span of time, but it is both practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among properties and persons in proportion to the long-term demands they impose on the city's stormwater management programs, systems which render or result in services and benefits. 
(8)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems which have been developed, installed and acquired through various mechanisms over many years. The future usefulness and value of the existing stormwater systems owned and operated by the city, and of future additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use and enhance the stormwater systems in the city. In order to do so, the city must have adequate and stable funding for its stormwater management program operating and capital investment needs. 
(9)  The mayor and council find, conclude and determine that a stormwater utility provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services and benefits throughout the city, and the most equitable means to fund an advanced level of stormwater services in the city is through stormwater service fees and other mechanisms as described in the professional engineering and financial analyses prepared for the city. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article shall apply throughout the corporate area of Hapeville. 
(c)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(d)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(e)  Responsibility for administration. The city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-3. - Definitions. 
    Credit means a conditional reduction in the amount of a stormwater service fee or other fees, rates, rentals, charges, fines and penalties to an individual property based on the provision and continuing presence of an effectively maintained and operational on-site stormwater system or facility, or continuing provision of a service or activity that reduces the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities. 
    Customer means all persons, properties and entities served by and/or benefitting from the utility's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, regulation and improvement of the stormwater management programs, systems and regulation of public and private stormwater systems and activities related thereto, and persons, properties and entities which will ultimately be served or benefitted as a result of the stormwater management program. 
    Developed land shall mean property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 200 square feet of Impervious Surfaces as defined in this chapter. 
    Duplexes and triplexes shall mean developed land containing two (duplex) or three (triplex) residential dwelling units located within the same building on one or more parcels of land. 
    Equivalent residential unit, for the purposes of this article, shall mean 2,400 square feet of impervious surfaces. The equivalent residential unit shall be used as the basis for determining stormwater service fees to single-family dwelling unit properties or classes of single-family dwelling unit properties and to other developed lands. 
    Hydrologic response means the manner whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including but not limited to the presence of impervious area, the size, shape, topographic, vegetative and geologic conditions of a property, antecedent moisture conditions and groundwater conditions on a property. 
    Impervious surfaces means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious areas include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, paved areas and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development or other imposition of impervious surfaces. 
    Multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties shall mean developed land whereon more than one residential dwelling unit is located, and shall include, but not be limited to, apartment houses, structures containing multiple residential condominiums located on a single parcel of property, boarding houses, group homes, hotels and motels, personal care homes, homes for the elderly, retirement and nursing homes, and other structures in which more than one family group commonly and normally reside or could reside. For the application of stormwater service fees, multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties shall be treated in the same manner as are other developed lands as defined in this article. 
    Other developed lands shall mean, but not be limited to, multiple-family dwelling unit residential unit properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, railroad stations and other transportation facilities covered by impervious surfaces, parking lots and decks, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units. 
    Single-family dwelling unit shall mean developed land upon which is located one principal structure that contains one dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one family, with a bathroom and kitchen facilities. Single-family dwelling units may include houses, duplexes, triplexes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located on one or more individual lots or parcels of land, and fee-simple ownership or condominium townhomes and attached single-family residential structures located on individual lots or parcels of land and such single units located on more than one individual lot or parcel of land. For the purposes of this article, developed land may be classified as a single-family dwelling unit despite the presence of incidental and/or accessory structures associated with residential uses such as garages, carports or small storage buildings, accessory dwellings or the presence of a commercial use within the dwelling unit so long as such use does not result in additional areas of impervious surfaces such as parking spaces, playgrounds or structures or additions to the building which are used as offices, storage facilities, meeting rooms, classrooms, houses of worship or similar nonresidential uses. Single-family dwelling units shall not include developed land containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes, manufactured homes and mobile homes located within manufactured home or mobile home parks where the land is owned by others than the owners of the manufactured homes or mobile homes, or multiple-family residential units that are individually owned but are located on a single parcel of developed land, such as condominiums and cooperatively-owned apartments. 
    Stormwater management systems or stormwater systems or systems means those natural and man-made channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, area drains, drop inlets, junction boxes, pipes, head walls, flared end sections, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater service fees or stormwater service charge shall mean the periodic service fee imposed pursuant to this article by the city for the purpose of recovering and/or funding costs related to stormwater management systems and facilities. The use of the area of impervious surface on each property as a measure to determine the stormwater service fee rate shall not preclude the use of other measures, or of grouping of properties having similar characteristics into classes or categories, grouping of properties having similar characteristics through the use of ranges or rounding up or down to a consistent numerical interval, or the use of flat-rate fees for one or more classes of similarly-situated properties whose impact on the city's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities is relatively consistent. Stormwater service fees may also include certain special charges to individual properties or persons for stormwater management systems and facilities or services related to stormwater management, including but not limited to charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects and on-site stormwater control systems, and enhanced levels of stormwater service above and beyond the service levels normally provided by city. 
    Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural state or which has been modified to such minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural state shall be deemed undeveloped. Undeveloped land shall have no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-4. - Establishment of a utility and an enterprise fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility which shall be responsible for stormwater management programs throughout the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of stormwater systems. The stormwater utility management unit shall be composed of such personnel, employees and agents of the city as the mayor and council may from time to time determine and their compensation shall be fixed and determined by the city manager as approved by the mayor and council. 
(b)  A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established in the city budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the stormwater utility, including but not limited to rentals, rates, charges, fees and licenses as may be established by the mayor and council and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the stormwater utility. All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of the utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that other revenues receipts, and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management programs, systems, operations and capital investments as deemed appropriate by the mayor and council, upon recommendation by the city manager. 
(c)  The mayor and council hereby confer upon the stormwater utility operational control over the existing stormwater management programs, systems performed, provided or owned and heretofore operated by the city and other related assets, including but not limited to properties other than roadways upon which such systems are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access, and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-5. - Scope of responsibility for the stormwater management systems. 
(a)  The city owns or has legal access, for purposes of operation, maintenance and improvement, to those stormwater management systems which: 
(1)  Are located within public streets, rights-of-way and easements; 
(2)  Are subject to easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems; or 
(3)  Are located on public lands to which the city has adequate access for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of systems. 
(b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems which are located on private property or public property not owned by the city and for which there has been no public dedication of such systems for operation, maintenance and/or improvement of such systems shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner, except as that responsibility may be otherwise affected by state and federal law. 
(c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of all properties and persons in general by regulation of the stormwater management systems, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specific property within or outside the boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. 
(d)  To the extent any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city, pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation, or rule of the city or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit or negligent issuance of a permit, seeking the imposition of money damages against the city, its officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-6. - Requirements for on-site stormwater management systems: enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  Every owner of real property located in the city, and every person which serves as a contractor for the purpose of developing real property located in the city shall, as to the real property owned or being developed, provide, manage, maintain and operate on-site stormwater management systems and facilities sufficient to collect, convey, detain, control and discharge stormwater in a manner which is in compliance with all of the city ordinances and resolutions, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations, and which, in any event, will not discharge stormwater in a manner which will flood, damage or otherwise harm property which is located downstream from the real property owned or being developed. A failure by an owner and/or contractor to meet the obligations and requirements imposed by this article shall constitute a private nuisance and the parties damaged thereby or the city may bring an action to abate such nuisance. Any parties so damaged may include in such action a claim for the damages that such party has sustained. 
(b)  If any court of competent jurisdiction shall find that the failure of the owner and/or contractor to meet the obligations and requirements imposed by this article constitutes a public nuisance, and the owner and/or developer fails to abate such nuisance within any time limit which the court might impose, the city may enter upon the property at issue and cause such work to be performed as is reasonably necessary to abate the nuisance, with the cost of such work to be charged to the owner and the developer, if any, on a joint and several basis. 
(c)  If the city incurs costs to abate a public nuisance, the city shall file suit to recover such costs and establish its judgment lien rights in relation thereto, which lien rights shall be perfected, after judgment, by the city filing a notice of lien on the general execution docket of the superior court of Fulton County. 
(d)  The city's designated officers, representatives, agents and employees shall have the right, pursuant to its authority in chapter 54, to enter upon private and public property owned other than by the city, upon reasonable notice to the owner of such property, to inspect the property and conduct surveys and engineering tests on such property in order to assure compliance with any order or judgment entered pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-7. - Stormwater management fees authorized. 
(a)  The city is authorized to impose a service fee on each customer of the stormwater system, provided that such fee is closely associated with the amount of impervious surface associated with a particular property for which the service fee is imposed. 
(b)  Single-family dwelling units, as defined by this article, shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit, as defined in this article. 
(c)  The stormwater service fee rate per equivalent residential unit, as defined in this article, shall be $3.50 per month for the calendar year of the effective date of this article and for subsequent years, unless modified by the city. 
(d)  All developed lands not classified as single-family dwelling units, as defined by this article, shall be billed for one equivalent residential unit, as defined by this article, for each 2,400 square feet of impervious surfaces or partial increment thereof located on the property. 
(e)  Stormwater service fee rates may be determined and modified from time to time by the mayor and council of the city so that the total revenue generated by said fees and any other sources of revenues or other resources allocated to stormwater management by the mayor and council shall be sufficient to meet the cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities, including but not limited to the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, operating expense, capital outlays, non-operating expense, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the mayor and council of the city. 
(f)  Stormwater service fee revenues in any given year may exceed or be less than the cost of service in that year, provided, however, that the stormwater service fee rate shall be based on meeting the long-term projected cost of stormwater management programs, systems and facilities. 
(g)  All unencumbered stormwater management funds derived from service fees and other sources of revenue not expended at the end of a fiscal year shall remain in the stormwater management utility enterprise fund account and balances shall be forwarded to the next fiscal year. 
(h)  Stormwater service fee rates shall be structured so as to be fair and reasonable, and the resultant service fees shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services and systems. 
(i)  The cost of stormwater management services and systems may include operating expenses, capital investments, and reserve accounts. 
(j)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater service fees and/or other methods of funding stormwater management shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by private property owners which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater systems or to private stormwater systems which impact the proper function of the public stormwater systems. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-8. - Billing, delinquencies, and collection of stormwater service fees. 
(a)  The city is authorized to establish and/or utilize its own policies with respect to the billing and collection of the stormwater utility service fees and the treatment of delinquent accounts. The stormwater utility service fee may be billed separately, or on a customer statement and collected along with other utility services provided by the city, at the city's sole discretion. The city is authorized to apply partial payments proportionately among the water, sewer, and stormwater fees charged by the city. The city is authorized to use existing city procedures for disconnection of water service with respect to non-payment. 
(b)  A stormwater service fee bill may be sent though the United States mail or by alternative means, notifying the customer of the amount of the bill, the date the payment is due, and the date when past due. 
(c)  The stormwater service fee bill may be billed and collected along with other fees and charges, including but not limited to, other utility bills, assessments or property taxes, as deemed most effective and efficient by the city manager. Failure to receive a bill is not justification for non-payment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each parcel of developed land shall be ultimately obligated to pay such fees and other charges and any associated fines or penalties, including but not limited to, interest on delinquent service fees. If a property owner is under billed, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of developed land, the city stormwater utility may back bill for a period of up to one year, but shall not be entitled to any interest for any delinquency during the back billed period. A late fee of five percent of the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility service fee bill shall be charged when a bill becomes delinquent. Thereafter, an additional fee of one percent based on the unpaid bill and any applicable delinquency fee shall be charged for each month the bill remains delinquent. 
(d)  Stormwater service fees shall begin to accrue August 3, 2016, and shall be billed in arrears. 
(e)  Frequency of the billing of stormwater service fees shall be monthly unless otherwise specified by mayor and council. 
(f)  Additionally, if unpaid, stormwater service fees shall be collected as provided in section 5-112 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-9. - Exemptions and credits. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be exempt from stormwater utility service fees or receive a credit or offset against such service fees. No exemption, credit, offset or other reduction in stormwater service fees shall be granted based on the age, tax, or economic status, race or religion of the customer, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(b)  The following properties are hereby exempt from stormwater service fees: 
(1)  Properties that are not defined in this article as being developed land shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. 
(2)  Railroad tracks, gravel and stone areas underneath and immediately adjacent to the tracks, and undeveloped portions of the railroad right-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater service fees. However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, paved or unpaved service roads and drives, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater service fees. 
(c)  A stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions shall be prepared by the city engineer and approved by the mayor and council specifying the design and performance standards of on-site stormwater systems, facilities and activities that qualify for application of a service fee credit, and how such credits shall be calculated. 
(d)  The following properties are hereby eligible for credit(s) based on stormwater control systems or other mitigation: 
(1)  Developed land than other single-family dwelling units, which use stormwater control systems or facilities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces on the subject property. 
a.  Developed land meeting eligibility for credit under this subsection includes but is not limited to: multiple-family dwelling unit residential properties, manufactured home and mobile home parks, commercial, retail and office buildings, public buildings and structures, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks and other recreational properties, public and private schools and universities, research facilities and stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces, and water and wastewater treatment plants and all other types of developed land except single-family dwelling units may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the property. 
b.  The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities under subsection (d)(1) shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meets or exceeds the city's development and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. 
c.  The amount of the stormwater utility service fee credit under subsection (d)(1) shall not be related to the cost incurred by the property owner for performing, constructing, providing and/or maintaining such programs, systems, facilities, services and activities. 
(2)  Groups of single-family dwelling units represented by an incorporated homeowner's association that owns, operates and maintains on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or that provides services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the properties represented by the homeowner's association. 
a.  Such service fee credit shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. 
b.  The stormwater utility service fee credit for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by groups of single-family dwelling units under subsection (d)(2) shall be proportional to the extent that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated and maintained by the homeowner's association meets or exceeds the city's development and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. 
c.  Such credits under subsection (d)(2) shall be proportionately allocated among all properties presented by the incorporated homeowner's association. The stormwater utility service fee credit for services and activities that reduce or mitigate the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management systems and facilities shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowner's association or any person or entity providing same. 
(3)  Individual single-family dwelling units required by the city to install on-site detention or that provide services or activities that reduce or mitigate the impact of impervious surfaces located on the subject properties may receive a credit against the stormwater service fee applicable to the subject property. 
a.  Such service fee credit under subsection (d)(3) shall be based on attaining and continuing compliance with the technical requirements and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. 
b.  The stormwater utility service fee credit under subsection (d)(3) for on-site stormwater control systems or facilities, or for services or activities provided by individual single-family dwelling units shall be a fixed amount and shall be subject to the requirement that the on-site stormwater control systems or facilities provided, operated, and maintained by the property owner meet the city's development standards and performance standards contained in the stormwater utility service fee credit application and instructions and other requirements and conditions. 
c.  The stormwater utility service fee credit for services, facilities and activities under subsection (d)(3) shall not be related to the cost of such services and activities to the homeowner or any person or entity providing same. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-10. - Appeals. 
    Any customer who believes the provisions of this article have been applied in error may appeal in the following manner and sequence: 
(1)  An appeal must be filed in writing with the city manager or her/his designated representative. In the case of stormwater service fee appeals, the appeal shall include a survey prepared by a registered land surveyor or professional engineer containing information on the total property area, the impervious surface area, and any other features or conditions that influence the Hydrologic Response of the property to rainfall events. 
(2)  Using information provided by the appellant, the city manager shall conduct a review of the conditions on the property and respond to the appeal in writing within 60 days. In response to an appeal, the city manager may adjust the stormwater service fee applicable to any property in conformance with the general purposes and intent of this article. 
(3)  All decisions by the city manager shall be served on the appellant personally or by registered or certified mail, sent to the billing address of the appellant. All decisions of the city manager shall be final. 
(4)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city shall have a right to appeal by writ of certiorari to the superior court of Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 63-4-11. - Effective date of stormwater service fees. 
    The city may begin collecting the stormwater service fee on or after August 3, 2016. 
(Ord. No. 2016-20 , § 1, 8-2-2016) 
Chapter 66 - VACANT LOTS 

Sec. 66-1-1. - Maintenance of property in unsanitary, hazardous condition unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning any vacant real property within the corporate limits of the city to permit such property to become so saturated or covered or filled with bushes, wild weeds, grass above six inches in height, trash, rubbish, tin cans, debris or other hazardous matter and materials as to constitute a menace or hazard to public health or fire. 
(Code 1959, § 12-13; Code 1981, § 5-3-1) 
Sec. 66-1-2. - Owner's duty to keep property sanitary, free from fire or other hazard. 
    It shall be the duty of each person, firm or corporation owning any vacant real property within the corporate limits of the city to clear, clean off, make and keep sanitary and/or free from fire or other hazard such vacant real property as such person, firm or corporation may own or that is maintained in violation of section 66-1-1 or is in such condition that a violation of section 66-1-1 is apparent. 
(Code 1959, § 12-14; Code 1981, § 5-3-2) 
Sec. 66-1-3. - Department of public service to locate property maintained in violation of provisions; notify owner. 
    It shall be the duty of the department of public service to determine the locations of all properties which are maintained in violation of section 66-1-1. The department of public service shall mail notice of violation to the owner at his last known address according to the city tax return records. The property owner will have ten days to eliminate all violations as listed in section 66-1-1. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3-3) 
Sec. 66-1-4. - Noncompliance of property owner. 
(a)  Any property owner violating section 66-1-1 or section 66-1-2 shall be given notice in writing by the department of public service of such violation. If after ten days from the date of receipt of such notice the property remains in violation of the Code, then the department of public service shall be authorized to issue the property owner a citation indicating the Code violation and the date on which the property owner shall be required to answer the charge in the municipal court of the city. Use of such written notice prior to the issuance of a citation/summons shall be limited by subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  A property owner shall be given written notice prior to the issuance of a citation only once in any 365-day period for any particular Code violation. If subsequent violations occur within any 365-day period from the last written notice, then the department of public service shall be authorized to issue a citation immediately upon its discovery of the Code violation. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3-4; Ord. No. 97-08, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 66-1-5. - Nonresident owners. 
    Should the department of public service be unable to locate nonresident property owners after written notice to his last known address according to the tax records of the city, the department of public service shall enter onto the property and accomplish the objectives of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3-5) 
Sec. 66-1-6. - City to bill owner of costs of clearing lot; costs constitute assessment against owner and property. 
    The department of public service shall, after any such work as described above has been performed by the city, certify to the owner of such property, or mail to the owner at his present address or at his last known address according to the tax records of the city, the cost of any work and shall allow the owner ten days after such notification to remit the cost to the city. The cost shall operate as an assessment against the owner and against the property upon which the work was performed and shall be recorded in a book titled "Special Assessments under Charter Powers." 
(Code 1981, § 5-3-6) 
Sec. 66-1-7. - Issuance of execution for amount of assessment and execution; assessment constitutes lien against property. 
    Should the owner fail to pay the cost after notification as provided in section 66-1-6, then it shall be the duty of the city clerk to issue an execution against the owner and against the property of the owner upon which any work was performed for the amount of the assessment and the amount of the execution shall be a lien on the property and the lien shall be superior to all other liens except liens for taxes. 
(Code 1959, § 12-19; Code 1981, § 5-3-7) 
Sec. 66-1-8. - Collection of execution by police chief. 
    The city clerk shall hand the execution to the police chief for collection by levy and sale and the police chief shall carry out this function according to the method and procedure as is provided for the collection of tax executions against real property. 
(Code 1959, § 12-20; Code 1981, § 5-3-8) 
Sec. 66-1-9. - Maintenance of inoperative automobiles, machinery, etc., in vacant and occupied lots unlawful; penalty for offenses. 
    Unlawful conditions; penalty. Whenever conditions are found to exist in which premises of any dwelling, dwelling unit or other structure, place or vacant lot contains dilapidated furniture and/or appliances, machinery and equipment, including automobiles, which are either in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition and which are not completely enclosed within a building or whenever any unsanitary or unhealthy conditions exist, in violation of the health and sanitation ordinances of the city, the same shall constitute an offense against the city and shall be punishable by the following fines: $25.00 for the first offense resulting in either a plea or a finding of guilty, $50.00 for the second offense resulting in either a plea or a finding of guilty, $75.00 for the third offense resulting in either a plea or a finding of guilty, and $100.00 for the fourth offense resulting in either a plea or a finding of guilty, provided, however, that all offenses occur upon the same property and are allowed by the same defendant within a two-year period. This section may be enforced by an authorized officer of the city issuing a summons, and the trial of such offense shall be held in municipal court of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3-9; Ord. No. 82-1, 4-6-1982) 
Sec. 66-1-10. - Keeping of animals; proximity to residences; cleanliness. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep one or more cows, mules, horses, goats or hogs, within 300 feet of any residence or place of business nor dog kennels except in I-1 and I-2 zones. Chicken cotes and dog runs or dog pens where more than two dogs of at least four months of age are kept shall be at least 150 feet from any residence or place of business except the dwelling unit of the owner, and shall be kept free from litter and filth and must be free from objectionable odors and must not be unsightly or objectionable to the surrounding area and further must comply with all rules and regulations of the county health department. Each dog so kept shall be provided with a minimum of 100 square feet of floor or ground area in the enclosure or housing in which said dog is retained. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3-10; Ord. No. 82-12, 9-7-1982; Ord. of 11-2-1982; Ord. No. 86-7, 10-21-1986) 
Sec. 66-1-11. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for such offense according to the city Charter. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 5-3-11) 
Chapter 69 - WATER AND SEWERS 
ARTICLE 2. - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 

Sec. 69-2-1. - Permission to climb upon city water tanks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to climb upon or touch in any manner any water tank in and owned by the city unless written permission is granted to such person by the director of public service. 
(Code 1959, § 22-2; Code 1981, § 6-1-1) 
Sec. 69-2-2. - Supplying water to other persons prohibited; charges payable in case of violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner or tenant, receiving water supplied from the city water system, to supply any other person, family or premises. If any person, either as owner or tenant, shall violate or permit other persons to violate any provision of this section, the supply of water to the premises shall be shut off and service discontinued forthwith. The water shall not again be turned on until such unauthorized use of water is stopped and there shall have been paid to the city such charges as the director of public service may determine due for water used in violation of this section and the expense of cutting off and restoring water service, which charge for shutting off and restoring service shall be $35.00. 
(Code 1959, § 22-3; Code 1981, § 6-1-2; Ord. No. 95-02, § 1, 2-7-1995) 
Sec. 69-2-3. - Permit required to supply water through pipes, meters, etc., 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner or tenant, to supply water to any other property, person or user, from the pipes or meters serving water from the system, or to use water from any such water pipe, hydrant or other device or fixture through which water may be drawn or used, without a permit from the director of public service. No person shall turn water off or on from any city water service, unless such person has permission of the director of public service. 
(Code 1959, § 22-4; Code 1981, § 6-1-3) 
Sec. 69-2-4. - Supplying water to neighboring premises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether owner or tenant, to supply water in any manner or through any fixture or device to the occupant of neighboring premises, or to any other person, except by permit from the director of public service, and if found doing so, such person shall be charged, and shall at once pay, an extra rate for each premises or family so supplied. Upon refusal of any person to comply with this provision, the water shall be shut off from his premises. 
(Code 1959, § 22-5; Code 1981, § 6-1-4) 
Sec. 69-2-5. - Supply of more than one premises through one meter; discontinuance for failure of one to pay bill. 
    When two or more persons are supplied by the same service pipe, the failure of either to pay the water bill when due shall authorize the director of public service to turn the water off from such pipe until all the rates, terms and conditions of water service are complied with. 
(Code 1959, § 22-6; Code 1981, § 6-1-5) 
Sec. 69-2-6. - Same-Separate meter when premises sold. 
    In cases where two or more premises are supplied through one meter and one service, if, at any time one or more of such premises are sold or otherwise transferred, the new owner shall be required to discontinue service to the premises so acquired and have installed a separate meter. 
(Code 1959, § 22-7; Code 1981, § 6-1-6) 
Sec. 69-2-7. - Fees for water taps. 
    Fees for water taps shall be set by the city council each year and made available at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1-7; Ord. No. 95-02, § 2, 2-7-1995) 
Sec. 69-2-8. - Unauthorized use of water; charges. 
    Should any person use water through any unauthorized pipe or connection, or without the permission of the director of public service, a bill shall be made against the premises for the time the water has been used or for the quantity shown to have been used, and if such bill is not paid the water shall be cut off and not turned on again until the bill is paid and permission given for continuance of the supply. 
(Code 1959, § 22-9; Code 1981, § 6-1-8) 
Sec. 69-2-9. - Deposit required for service. 
(a)  All residents of single-family dwelling units seeking to use water from the water mains of the city shall, before using the same, be required to deposit with the city the sum of $100.00. Deposits shall be refunded to depositors in the event service is discontinued, less any sums due the city for water rents or services. 
(b)  For multiple residential units where water and sewer service is supplied by the owner, the deposit shall be equal to three months' minimum water and sewer bill. 
(c)  Deposits on commercial and industrial accounts shall be $300.00. 
(d)  On all accounts wherein the customer has been a habitual violator, the city manager, in coordination with the public service director, is hereby authorized and empowered to increase the deposit required for new service to an amount not exceeding six months' estimated service. 
(Code 1981, § 6-1-9; Ord. No. 90-2, 2-6-1990; Ord. No. 2011-02, § 1, 2-1-2011; Ord. No. 2011-11, § 1, 10-4-2011) 
Sec. 69-2-10. - Additional penalty for service after discontinuance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have delivered into any house, factory, store, warehouse, or structure, or any other place, or into any faucet, conduit, or fixture, water from a city water main after service has been discontinued by the officers of the city for nonpayment, or before the service has been authorized by such officers without full compliance with the provisions of section 69-2-9, and without full knowledge and consent of the officers of the city in charge of water service. 
(Code 1959, § 22-11; Code 1981, § 6-1-10; Ord. No. 90-2, 2-6-1990; Ord. No. 92-5, 6-15-1992; Ord. No. 93-10, 7-6-1993) 
Sec. 69-2-11. - Service charge for testing meter. 
    A service charge of $25.00 shall be made for any meter tested for accuracy upon the request or insistence of any property owner or tenant. If the meter so tested is found to be incorrect, in keeping with the U.S. standard of measures, such service charge shall not be made. 
(Code 1959, § 22-12; Code 1981, § 6-1-11; Ord. No. 95-02, § 3, 2-7-1995) 
Sec. 69-2-12. - Restricting water use by may-or-Authorized. 
    The mayor shall have the power to restrict the uses for which water may be put, in order to maintain a sufficient reserve supply of water. 
(Code 1959, § 22-13; Code 1981, § 6-1-12) 
Sec. 69-2-13. - Same-Exercise of discretion. 
    The mayor may exercise the power referred to in section 69-2-12 whenever, in his discretion, he feels that the reserve water supply is not sufficient so as to ensure adequate fire protection, or is not sufficient to meet the fundamental needs of the users. 
(Code 1959, § 22-14; Code 1981, § 6-1-13) 
Sec. 69-2-14. - Same-Enforcement of orders. 
    The code enforcement unit shall enforce the order of the mayor issued in pursuance of section 69-2-12. 
(Code 1959, § 22-15; Code 1981, § 6-1-14) 
Sec. 69-2-15. - Rate-When established, posting. 
    The rate at which water is sold by the city to its users shall be established each year by enactment of a resolution by the mayor and council at a meeting held each year. Such rate shall be posted conspicuously in the city hall and published in the official organ of the city provided there is any substantial change from the rate of the previous year. A substantial change will constitute a rate change of more than 15 percent. 
(Code 1959, § 22-16; Code 1981, § 6-1-15; Ord. No. 92-8, 12-1-1992; Ord. No. 2008-10, § 1, 6-30-2008; Ord. No. 2009-11, § 1, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 69-2-16. - Same-Minimum at least to be charged. 
    A minimum rate shall be charged for each dwelling unit and each separate business or business operation, regardless of the number of water meters involved; provided, however, the charges for office buildings in which many different businesses may be located shall be charged a minimum rate for each separate toilet or lavatory. 
(Code 1959, § 22-17; Code 1981, § 6-1-16) 
Sec. 69-2-17. - Late fee, nonpayment, discontinuance, additional penalty fee. 
    All utility bills unpaid after due date, as posted on bills, will be assessed a late fee of ten percent of the bill, or $5.00, whichever is greater; all utility bills unpaid after ten days from due date, as posted on bills, will incur an additional late fee of $25.00 and service will be scheduled for disconnection. Reconnections will only be performed during normal working hours. If payment is received after 4:00 p.m. on a normal workday for service to be reconnected, the reconnection will not be accomplished until the next duty day. 
(Code 1959, § 22-18; Code 1981, § 6-1-17; Ord. No. 90-2, 2-6-1990; Ord. No. 92-8, 12-1-1992; Ord. No. 93-10, 7-6-1993) 
Sec. 69-2-18. - Unlawfully restoring service; tampering. 
    It shall constitute an offense against the city for any person to attempt himself or permit an unauthorized person to restore water service once it has been suspended by the city, or to tamper with the meter in any way without the specific authorization of the superintendent of the water department of the city, and the fact that water service has been restored by someone other than a proper city official, once it has been interrupted by action of the city, shall constitute a presumption that the owner of the property affected thereby either committed the act himself or authorized the same. 
(Code 1959, § 22-19; Code 1981, § 6-1-18) 
Sec. 69-2-19. - Backflow prevention and cross connection control. 
(a)  Implementation. The department of community services shall implement a backflow prevention/cross connection control program that: 
(1)  Protects the public potable water system at the service connection by containment within the consumer's premises of the actual or potential pollution or contamination which may result from backflow through cross connection; and 
(2)  Provides means whereby the department of community services may segregate the domestic, irrigation and industrial water uses into separate systems to prevent possible pollution or contamination of the public water system which may result from backflow through cross connections. 
(b)  Definitions. The definitions, as used in this section, shall apply only to this section, unless a different meaning is apparent from the content: 
    Acceptable entry conditions. The conditions which must exist in a permitted space to allow entry and to ensure that employees involved with a permit-required confined space entry can safely enter into and work with the space. 
    Approved. This term is used in reference to a water supply that has been approved by the director of community services, or his/her designee. Secondly, as herein used in reference to air gap separation, double checkvalve assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or method, the term approved shall mean as allowed or sanctioned by the Southern Builders Plumbing Code. 
    Backflow. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the potable supply of water. 
    Backflow prevention assembly (approved). An assembly that has been investigated and approved by a state or federal regulatory agency, used to prevent backflow into a potable water system, based on the degree of hazard either existing or potential. 
    Backpressure. An elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system above the supply pressure at the point of consideration which would cause or tend to cause a reversal of the normal direction of flow through the backflow prevention assembly. 
    Backsiphonage. A form of backflow due to a reduction in system pressure which causes a negative or subatmospheric pressure to exist at a site in the water system. 
    Confined space. A space which is large enough and so configured that an employee can bodily enter and perform assigned work; has limited or restricted means for entry or exit (for example, tanks, vessels, silos, storage bins, hoppers, vaults, and pits are spaces that may have limited means of entry); and is not designed for continuous employee occupancy. 
    Consumer. The owner of private industries or operator of a private water system or residence, receiving service from the city water system. 
    Containment. The total isolation of a facility with a potential hazard from the public water supply system commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Contamination. An impairment of the quality of the water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste. 
    Cross connection. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or structural arrangement between a public, or a consumer's/owner's potable water system and any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. 
    Degree of hazard. The degree derived from the evaluation of conditions within the city water system which can be classified as either a pollutant (nonhealth) or a contaminant (health) hazard. 
    Health hazard. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a physical or toxic nature to the public potable water system that would be a danger to health. 
    Owner. Any person or entity which has legal title to a property upon which a cross connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross connection is present. 
    Permit. A document issued by the department of community services which allows the use of a backflow preventer. 
    Pollution. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use. 
    Purveyor. A water supplier. 
    Service connection. The point of delivery of water to a premises, the normal location of the meter. 
(c)  Department requirements. 
(1)  The department of community services shall provide an on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine if, and which type of backflow preventer will be required. The department will issue applicable permits and perform inspections. 
(2)  Plans for new installations must be approved prior to installation. 
(3)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the department will have jurisdiction to perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of implementing the connection, and the time allowed for the correction to be made, depending upon the degree of hazard. 
(4)  The department will not allow any service connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a permit has been issued and which will be tested regularly to ensure satisfactory operation. 
(5)  The department shall provide written notice of violations at the time of the first reinspection. The department will allow an additional 15 days for the required corrective action. In the event the owner fails to complete corrective action at the time of the second reinspection, the water service to the premises shall be terminated. In the event that the owner demonstrates to the department that extenuating circumstances existed which prevented completion of corrective action, a time extension may be granted by the department. However, in no case shall the extension exceed an additional 24 hours from the conclusion of the reinspection. 
(6)  If the department determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately and other corrective action may be taken. 
(d)  Owner requirements. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the owners of the commercial, industrial and residential premises to provide necessary protection against thermal expansion as needed and specified by relevant standards enforced by the city plumbing inspector or his/her designee. 
(2)  The owner shall comply with OSHA Regulations codified at 29 CFR 1910.146, regarding permit-confined spaces as amended and adopted herein by specific reference. 
(3)  The department of community services shall provide an on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine if, and which type of backflow preventer will be required. The department will issue applicable permits and perform inspections. 
(4)  Plans for new installations must be approved prior to installation. 
(5)  The owner's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the department of community services to determine the existence of cross connection, other structural or sanitary hazards, or violations of this article. 
(6)  The owner shall be responsible for elimination or protection of all cross connection on his premises. 
(7)  The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow or protection of all cross connections on his premises. 
(8)  The owner, after having informed in writing by the department, shall, at his expense, install, maintain, and test, or have tested, any backflow preventer on the premises. Residential backflow devices are to be tested or replaced five years after the initial installation. Commercial backflow assemblies are to be tested on installation and once annually after the initial five-year term all testing is to be preformed by accredited testing agencies and/or agents whose credentials are on file with the department of community services. 
(9)  The owner shall inform the department of any proposed or modified cross connections and also any existing cross connections of which the owner is aware but have not been found by the department. 
(10)  The owner shall install backflow preventers approved by the department. 
(11)  The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semiannual device testing, retesting in the case that the device fails to operate correctly, and second inspections for noncompliance with these standards. 
(e)  Enforcement/penalties. 
(1)  A written notice of noncompliance will be given to the owner including a recommendation that will bring the owner into compliance within a specified time period. The time period will be determined based on the degree of hazard but in no event shall the time period exceed 30 days. 
(2)  If an owner fails to comply at the expiration of the specified time period, such owner may be subject to: 
a.  Assessment of a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each day of violation; and/or 
b.  Termination of water service at the main until compliance has been reached and all fees have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 2001-10, § 1, 6-5-2001) 
Sec. 69-2-20. - Commercial car wash water recycling. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to reduce water consumption from commercial car wash facilities by requiring all new conveyor car washes to install, utilize, and maintain water recycling systems. 
(b)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, whenever used in this section, shall have the meaning defined in this subsection: 
    Conveyor car wash means a commercial car wash where a vehicle moves on a conveyor belt during the wash and the driver remains in the vehicle or waits outside of the vehicle. 
    In-bay automatic car wash means a commercial car wash in which a driver steers the vehicle into a bay and parks it. The vehicle remains stationary while a machine moves back and forth over the vehicle to clean it, instead of the vehicle moving through a tunnel. 
    Self-service car wash means a commercial car wash in which the customers wash their own vehicles with spray wands and brushes. 
    Water recycling system means a plumbing system that captures and reuses water previously used in wash or rinse cycles. 
(c)  Commercial car wash water recycling requirement. All new commercial conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after March 7, 2017 must install, utilize, and maintain a water recycling system which recycles and reuses at least 50 percent of wash and rinse water. 
(d)  Applicability. 
(1)  This section applies to all new conveyor car washes permitted and constructed after March 7, 2017, regardless of the water source. 
(2)  The provisions of this section do not apply to commercial conveyor car washes that were permitted or constructed before March 7, 2017. 
(3)  The provisions of this section do not apply to self-service car washes or in-bay automatic car washes. 
(Ord. No. 2017-05 , § 1, 3-7-2017) 
ARTICLE 3. - SEWAGE COLLECTION, TREATMENT AND DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 69-3-1. - Obstructing sewers or drains prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with or in any manner obstruct or partially obstruct any drainage or sewerage opening, culvert, ditching or other established fixtures which have been installed, constructed or which are controlled or supervised in any manner by the city, or in any way whatsoever to interfere with or disrupt the natural flow of drainage or sewage water, or other liquid or semiliquid matter, whether or not such openings, culverts, ditching or other drainage fixtures and equipment established by the city are located on or about private property. 
(Code 1959, § 17-1; Code 1981, § 6-2-1) 
Sec. 69-3-2. - Connections required upon notice. 
    Property owners within the city are required to connect with the city sewer system, provided the city sewers are accessible to their property. It shall be the duty of the mayor and council to determine in each instance whether such sewer is available and a failure on the part of any property owner to so connect with the same after 30 days' notice so to do shall be prima facie a violation of this section. Such notice shall be given in writing, bearing the attestation of the mayor and council, and shall specify the point at which the connection shall be made. 
(Code 1959, § 17-2; Code 1981, § 6-2-2) 
Sec. 69-3-3. - Application for new connection construction; fees. 
(a)  All persons, contractors or private builders, when applying for water meter installation for new buildings to be constructed, shall also be required to apply for sewer connections, where sewer is available, so it shall be required that the sewer and water connections shall be made in one connection. 
(b)  The applicant shall pay all fees required by the director of public service in connection with sewer connections at the time of the application at $500.00 for each sewer connection plus the sum of $35.00 for each unit served over the first unit. In connection with this section, each apartment in multi-housing and each office in an office building shall be considered a unit. 
(Code 1981, § 6-2-3; Ord. No. 95-02, § 4, 2-7-1995) 
Sec. 69-3-4. - Privies prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, use or maintain on his premises any surface toilet or privy after sewerage has been made available and after he has been notified under the provisions of section 69-3-2. After the expiration of 30 days from the date notice was served in accordance with such section referred to, each day such surface toilet or privy is allowed to remain on such premises shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this Code. 
(Code 1959, § 17-4; Code 1981, § 6-2-4) 
Sec. 69-3-5. - Water closets, privies, etc., not to constitute nuisance; interference with officer. 
    No person shall keep a water closet, privy, cesspool or place of like character in such neglected or filthy condition as to endanger public health or make them offensive to persons in this city, nor obstruct or interfere with any sanitary officer or other officer whose duties require him to inspect such places or to abate nuisances in connection therewith within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 17-5; Code 1981, § 6-2-5) 
Sec. 69-3-6. - Grease and oils not to be discharged into sewers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person operating a filling station or other business in the city, where quantities of grease or motor oils are used, or disposed of, to turn such grease or motor oils into any sewer of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 17-6; Code 1981, § 6-2-6) 
Secs. 69-3-7-69-3-20. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REGULATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, adopted June 2, 2009, amended div. 2 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former div. 2 derived from Code 1981, §§ 6-2-11-6-2-31. 
Note- Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, or the laws of Georgia will not permit city jurisdiction, this division shall apply not only to customers of the city's sewer service located in the corporate limits of the city, but also to customers of the city's sewer service located outside the corporate limits of the city. 

Sec. 69-3-21. - Definitions 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this division shall be as follows: 
    Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Public Law 92-500, as amended by the Clean Water Act of 1977, Public Law 95-217, and as subsequently amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" in five days at 20°, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which received the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the outer face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection, house sewer, or service connection. 
    Categorical standard shall mean any regulation containing pollution-discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with sections 307 (b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N, parts 405-471. 
    Chemical oxygen demand shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    City shall mean the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
    Composite sample shall mean the accumulation of a number of individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the nature of the wastewater. 
    Cooling water shall mean the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling, refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Customer shall mean every person who is responsible for contracting (expressly or implicitly) with the city in obtaining, having, or using sewer connections with, or sewer tap to, the sewer system of the city and in obtaining, having, or using water and other related services furnished by the city for the purpose of disposing of wastewater and sewage through said system. Said terms shall include the occupants of each unit of a multiple-family dwelling unit building as a separate and distinct customer. 
    Designated city representative shall mean the City Manager of the City of Hapeville, or his authorized deputy or representative. 
    Director shall mean the director or superintendent of the public services/community services department of the city or his duly authorized agent, assistant or representative. 
    Discharge shall mean the introduction of pollutants into the city's sewerage system from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Fats, oils and grease (FOG) and wax shall mean fats, oils, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not and substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150° F (0 to 65° C). 
    Flammable shall be defined by current City of Atlanta Fire Department regulations. 
    Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Flush toilet shall mean the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
    Food service establishment shall mean any facility discharging kitchen or food preparation wastewater, including, but not limited to, restaurants, motels, hotels, cafeterias, hospitals, schools, bars, delicatessens, meat-cutting and -preparation facilities, bakeries, convenience stores with on-site food preparation, and any other facility which, in the opinion of the city, would require grease trap installation by virtue of its operation. 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving, and sale of foods or produce. 
    General pretreatment regulations shall mean 40 CFR, chapter I, part 403-General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, as amended. 
    Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a wastewater stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the wastewater stream and without consideration of time. 
    Grease shall mean a group of substances including oils, fats, cellulose, starch, proteins, wax, or grease, whether emulsified or not, in the city's sanitary sewer system. These are substances that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 and 150° Fahrenheit (0 to 65° Celsius). 
    Grease-generating establishments shall mean all retail food establishments, catering establishments, commercial food-preparation facilities, meat-processing facilities, and other establishments that may be capable of accumulating and discharging grease into the city sewer system. 
    Grease trap or grease interceptor shall mean a device utilized to effect the separation of grease and oils in wastewater effluent from a food service establishment. Such traps or interceptors may be of the "outdoor" of underground type, normally a 1,500-gallon capacity, or the "under-the-counter" package units type, which are typically less than 100-gallon capacity. For the purpose of this definition, the words "trap" and "interceptor" are used interchangeably. 
    Grit shall mean the heavy suspended mineral matter present in wastewater such as sand or gravel. 
    Grit interceptor shall mean a tank or vessel designed to interrupt the flow of wastewater so as to cause grit to settle out of the wastewater stream prior to discharge to a public sewer. 
    Health department shall mean the Fulton County Department of Health and Wellness and its duly appointed representatives, or any successor agency. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business, or from development or recovery of any natural resource (as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes). 
    Infiltration/inflow shall mean groundwater and surfacewater which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
    Interference shall mean a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits and/or disrupts the public sewer system. Interference includes, but is not limited to, a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources causes, in whole or in part, a violation(s) of the city's collection system permit and/or the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued hereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulation(s): section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345), or any criteria, guideline or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. § 6901, et seq.); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA); or more-stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to title IV of the Solid Waste Disposal Act) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the public sewer treatment facilities. 
    May is permissive (see definition for "shall"). 
    Municipality shall mean the governmental body having jurisdiction over the maintenance and operations of the water and sanitary sewer systems within the city. 
    Natural outlet shall mean any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    Normal wastewater shall mean wastewater discharged into the sanitary sewers in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l), BOD5 is not more than 300 mg/l, total phosphorous is not more than 15 mg/l, total oil and grease is not more than 100 milligrams per liter (mg/l), total Kjeldahl nitrogen is not more than 20 mg/l, and the total flow is not more than 25,000 gallons per day. 
    Owner means individual, person, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group, in singular or combination, on whose property a building or structure is located or will be constructed. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, institution, firm, company, association, society, corporation, trust, estate, group, or any other legal entity. 
    pH shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. 
    Pit privy shall mean shored, vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a fly-tight slab on which is securely located a fly-tight riser covered with hinged fly-tight seat and lid. 
    Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of the pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the public sewer. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer shall mean a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Septic tank shall mean a subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(a)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(b)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified discharge from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
    Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surfacewater, and stormwater as may be inadvertently present. The equivalent term is "wastewater". 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    Shall is mandatory (see definition for "may"). 
    Slug shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Storm drain (sometimes termed storm sewer ) shall mean a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source and excluding sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Suspended solids shall mean total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in 40 CFR, chapter I, section 401.15. 
    Unpolluted water shall mean water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    User shall mean any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into public wastewater facilities. 
    Wastewater shall mean the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities shall mean the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
    Wastewater treatment works shall mean an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant". 
    Water meter shall mean those devices approved by the designated city representative for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water used by a premises or person. 
    Watercourse shall mean a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-22. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city's jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way, in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, and as described in section 69-3-2. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow, to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this division. 
(d)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances and swimming pool drains and overflows shall be connected to the public sewer; provided, that where no public sewer is available, septic tanks or other private subsurface disposal facilities approved by the health department may be used. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-23. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 69-3-22, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this division and the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction on any private wastewater disposal system, except for septic tanks or pit privies, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the designated city representative. Septic tank and pit privy installations are under the jurisdiction of the health department. 
(c)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged and maintained in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the health department. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(d)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless the person holds a valid permit for such work issued by the health department. The health department may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health department of the site and location of the proposed work. 
(e)  Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health department. A copy of the approval shall be provided to the city by the owner of the private wastewater disposal system. 
(f)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all requirements of state and federal water pollution control agencies having jurisdiction, including the health department. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 25,000 square feet. No septic tank shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(g)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health department deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well being. 
(h)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 69-3-22, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer. Any septic tanks, pit privies, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(i)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(j)  Every flush toilet shall be connected to a public sewer where available, to a septic tank, or other permitted private wastewater disposal system. Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(k)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved, as described in section 69-3-4; or, 
(2)  In areas where the health department deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; or, 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or, 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(l)  Discharge of septic tanks in sewer system. 
(1)  [Unlawful activities.] It shall be unlawful to empty, dump, throw or otherwise discharge into any manhole, catch basin or other opening into the city sewer system, or any sewer connected with and discharging into the sewer system, the contents of any septic tank, chemical toilet, sludge, sewage or other similar matter or material, except as provided in subsection (2) hereof. Pumpings or contents taken from grease, grit, or oil interceptors are prohibited. 
(2)  [Discharge permits.] The designated city representative is hereby authorized to issue permits to discharge the contents of septic tanks at locations specified by the designated city representative and under his supervision. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the designated city representative, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. Prior to permit issuance, the designated city representative may require a complete analysis of waste products to be discharged to determine compatibility with the treatment process. The analysis will be at the expense of the person requesting the discharge permit. 
(3)  Charges. A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks as authorized under subsection (2) hereof. Charges shall be determined annually by the director. A record shall be kept of such dumpings. Charges for dumping shall be paid prior to the city accepting the waste material. 
(m)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 60 days from the receipt of written notification from the health department, the state or the city that said system is not functioning in a sanitary manner, and order that said system be corrected. 
(n)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(o)  No statement contained in this Division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health department or the state. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-24. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  The owner or owner's agent shall make application for a building sewer permit on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the designated city representative. A permit and inspection fee for a building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the designated city representative, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in construction, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of Code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and Water Environment Federation (WEF) Manual of Practice No. 9, latest edition, shall apply. Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within city jurisdiction: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A 74, latest revision; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specification A21.51, latest revision; polyvinyl chloride (PVC), ASTM specification D 2665, D 2949 or D 3034, latest revision; or extra-strength clay pipe, ASTM specification C 700, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. 
(2)  Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe with bolted mechanical or restrained joints. If installed in filled or unstable ground, or exposed to damage by tree roots, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe. 
(3)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the designated city representative, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four0nch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. 
(4)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(5)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the designated city representative. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM specification C 12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved. 
(6)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. 
a.  Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have rubber gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM specification C 564, latest revision. 
b.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have rubber gaskets in accordance with ASNI specification A21.11, latest revision, and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
c.  Compression joints for clay pipe shall be in accordance with ASTM specification C 425, latest revision. 
d.  PVC pipe joint material shall be bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber "O"-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes (including oils), and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
e.  Other jointing materials and/or systems may be used when approved by the director. 
(7)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 4) degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the designated city representative. 
(8)  The installation of all building sewers and connections to the public sewer shall conform to all pertinent Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) requirements. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be built parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the designated city representative for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WEF Manual of Practice No. FD-5, latest edition. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the designated city representative before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the designated city representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the designated city representative. 
(k)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades, lights and other devices so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(m)  The city may specifically review and permit wastewater pump stations and other sewer facilities not covered elsewhere in this division. 
(n)  If any building sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the building sewer. 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage collection and disposal from the owner's property. 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-25. - Restricted use of public sewers. 
(a)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sewer, except that stormwater runoff from limited areas such as solid waste dumpster pads, in which stormwater may be polluted at times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the designated city representative. 
(b)  Stormwater other than that exempted under subsection 69-3-25(a) and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the designated city representative and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling or condensing water may be discharged, on approval of the designated city representative and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any sanitary wastewater into a storm sewer system. 
(d)  No persons shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, kerosene, benzene, naphtha, acetone, toluene, turpentine, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides, sulfides, fuel oil, mineral spirits or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid, or gas in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other waste, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the sewer system. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the sewer system. 
(3)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the waste treatment process; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewer system. 
(5)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, grinding and polishing wastes, sand, mud, grass clippings, leaves, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, fibers, feathers, tar, plastics, rubber, latex, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, offal, paper or plastic dishes and cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(6)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° [Fahrenheit] (65° [Celsius]), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment works resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment works to exceed 104° [Fahrenheit] (40° [Celsius]); 
(7)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cap flashpoint of less than 140° [Fahrenheit] (60° [Celsius]) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points specifically permitted by designated city representative in accordance with subsections 69-3-23(1) and (2); 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard or life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surfacewater, groundwater, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the designated city representative; 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the designated city representative in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming; 
(16)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(17)  Wastewater containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of oils, fat, grease, or wax, whether emulsified or not, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° (0° [Fahrenheit]) and 150° (65° [Celsius]). 
(e)  The following described substances, materials, waters, or wastes shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not, either singly or by interaction with other substances, harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The designated city representative may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more-severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability, the designated city representative will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the city are as follows: 
(1)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see section 69-3-21 for [definition of] properly shredded garbage). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, motels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments, or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing heavy metals and similar objectionable or toxic substances which, in the judgment of the designated city representative, may damage collection facilities or be detrimental to the treatment process. 
(3)  All industrial discharges to the city sewer system must comply with the federal industrial pretreatment standards (40 CFR parts 401 to 471) and those industrial pretreatment standards established or set by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division or the city. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the designated city representative. 
(5)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(6)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a "slug" as defined in section 69-3-21. 
(7)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to receiving waters. 
(8)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other wastes or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(9)  Wastewater containing any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, COD and others) released in a discharge at a flow rate which cause interference with the wastewater treatment plant. 
(10)  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Any unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, Fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate). 
b.  Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions). 
c.  Unusual BOD (above 300 mg/l), biochemical oxygen demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
d.  Unusual COD (above 500 mg/l), chemical oxygen demand in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
e.  Unusual suspended solids (above 300 mg/l) in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
f.  Unusual Kjeldahl nitrogen (above 20 mg/l) in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
g.  Unusual phosphorous (above ten mg/l) in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment plant. 
(f)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated above and which in the judgment of the city may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes, 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers, 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or 
(4)  Require surcharge payment to cover added cost of handling and treating the wastes. 
(g)  Grease, oil, and grit interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the city or its designated authority, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, sand, or other harmful ingredients, in accordance with this section. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city or its designated authority and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintenance of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which are subject to review by the designated city representative. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(h)  When required by the designated city representative, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, protected against vandalism, supplied with electrical current and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the designated city representative. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge, or cause or allow to be discharged, any industrial wastewater which bypasses or does not flow through the monitoring manhole, unless discharged through an NPDES-permitted facility or disposed of off site at a licensed disposal facility. 
(i)  The industrial users may be required to provide information needed to determine compliance with this division. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control; 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location; 
(6)  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; and 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the public sewer. 
(8)  A baseline monitoring report as outlined in section 154-214 of article V of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances; a slug control plan as outlined in section 154-303 of article V of the City of Atlanta Code of Ordinances; and all other reports and data as required by the City of Atlanta Sewage Disposal Ordinance (article V). 
(j)  All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater", published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations, and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the designated city representative. 
(k)  No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment provided that all applicable state and federal pretreatment requirements are met. 
(l)  Persons discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system may be required to pretreat such wastes. Plans for all pretreatment facilities shall be approved by the designated city representative or the city's designated authority prior to construction. At the time written plans are submitted for approval, written maintenance plans shall also be submitted and approved by the designated city representative. The facilities shall be allowed to operate only as long as they are maintained in accordance with the approved maintenance plans. Pretreatment requirements shall be determined on a case-by-case basis and shall include the following facilities as a minimum: 
(1)  Screening. Screens shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the City of Hapeville sewerage system when deemed necessary by the designated city representative to prevent excess suspended solids from reaching the city system. 
(2)  Neutralization. If plans are submitted for the neutralization of strong acid or alkaline wastes, the plans shall include the necessary instrumentation and controls to assure compliance with the above regulations at all times. 
(3)  Equalization. Holding tanks or equalization basins shall be required ahead of the receiving manhole of the City of Hapeville sewerage system when deemed necessary by the designated city representative to prevent peak flows that exceed the capacity of the system or that result in operational problems. 
(m)  Waiver of requirements-There shall be no provision for the granting of variances for discharge of incompatible wastes. If a user begins to violate any of the provisions of this section, it shall be his responsibility to apply to the designated city representative who can issue a temporary permit along with a compliance schedule for planning and construction of necessary treatment or pretreatment works. Each case will be carefully evaluated with respect to its effect on the wastewater collection and treatment system and the environment prior to issuance of a temporary permit and compliance schedule. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-26. - Grease interceptor requirements. 
(a)  A grease interceptor shall be installed in the waste line leading from sinks, drains or other fixtures in the following establishments where grease can be introduced into the drainage system in quantities that can effect line stoppage or hinder sewage disposal, or in other locations where, in the opinion of the city or its designated authority, they are warranted: 
(1)  All food service establishments shall have grease-handling facilities approved by the city or the city's designated authority. Establishments whose grease-handling facilities or methods are not adequately maintained to prevent floatable oils, fat or grease from entering the sewerage system shall be notified in writing of any noncompliance and required to provide a schedule whereby corrections will be accomplished. 
(2)  All food service establishment's grease-handling facilities shall be subject to evaluation and inspection by city representatives during normal working hours. Results of inspections will be made available to the facility owner, leaseholder or operator. 
(3)  Food service establishments receiving two consecutive unsatisfactory evaluations or inspections may be subject to penalties or other corrective actions as provided for in section 69-3-30. 
(4)  Food service establishments which continue to violate section 69-3-25 requirements may be considered grounds for discontinuance of sewer service. 
(5)  Food service establishments whose operations cause or allow excessive grease and/or oil to discharge or accumulate in the city's collection system may be liable to the city for costs related to service calls received by the city for line blockage, line cleanings, line and pump repairs, and other expenses, including all labor, materials, and equipment. Failure to pay all service-related charges may also constitute grounds for sewer service discontinuance. 
(6)  Regularly scheduled maintenance of grease-handling facilities and equipment by food service establishments is required to ensure adequate operation. In maintaining these grease interceptors, the owner, lease holder or operator shall be responsible for the approved removal and disposal of grease as required by this division, and shall maintain on-site records of all maintenance activities including, but not limited to clean out dates and names of clean out firms, covering a period of not less than the most recent three years. 
(7)  The owner shall be responsible for proper and legal disposal of waste or wastewater removed from the grease interceptor/grease trap. Introduction of waste material back into the sanitary sewer system is a violation of this division and can result in enforcement action. 
(8)  Any food service establishment whose effluent discharge to the sewerage system is determined by the city to cause interference in the conveyance or operation of the sewerage system may be required to sample its grease trap discharge and have it analyzed for oil and grease at the expense of the owner, lease-holder or operator. Results of such analysis shall be reported to the city community services department. 
(9)  All grease traps/interceptors shall be designed to have a minimum 24-minute detention time and installed to allow for complete access for inspection and maintenance of the inner chamber(s) and viewing and sampling of the effluent wastewater discharged to the sewer. 
(10)  Food service establishments shall adopt procedures for handling sources of floatable oil, fat or grease originating within their facility. A notice shall be permanently posted at a prominent place in the facility, readily accessible to employees, advising employees of the handling procedures to be followed. 
(b)  Under certain circumstances, the interceptor size and location may need special exceptions to this division. If an exception to this policy is requested, the user must demonstrate that the size and location will allow the facility meet the discharge requirements of the city. Any variance to the requirements of this division shall be granted at the discretion of the director for the city. 
(c)  The intent of this division is to ensure compliance with the city's NPDES Permit No. GA0023167, which is required by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. This division is in no way intended to discourage development, but rather to protect the facilities and the city's infrastructure as it relates to the sanitary sewer system. 
(d)  The city shall conduct a minimum of one compliance inspection annually. The city may inspect any food service establishment more frequently based on compliance history, collection system problems, or other factors indicating problems which may involve the food service establishment. 
(1)  Food service establishments determined to be in noncompliance of section 69-3-25 requirements that are linked to a collection line blockage or stoppage will be required to increase interceptor cleaning frequency. 
(2)  Food service establishments determined to be in noncompliance with the oil and grease policy requirements that are linked to a collection line blockage or stoppage will be required to reimburse the city for expenses associated with clearing the blockage or stoppage and associated clean up including fines or penalties imposed by the state for spills caused by the blockage or stoppage. 
(3)  The city may assess penalties for failure to keep required records, failure to clean "under counter" units daily, or failure to clean "in-ground" units every 30 days. 
(e)  Food service establishments determined to be in noncompliance with the record keeping requirements of section 69-3-25 will be issued a notice of violation (NOV). Food service establishments receiving two notices of violation for recordkeeping in a 12-month period may be issued a citation to appear in city court. The fine recommended by the policy for each such recordkeeping violation is $500.00. 
(f)  Any food service establishment that does not install a grease trap/interceptor when instructed to do so by the city will be issued a notice of violation (NOV) and may be issued a citation to appear in city court. The fine recommended by this policy for each such violation is $1,000.00 per month until cause of the violation is remedied. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-27. - Malicious damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-28. - Power and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the public wastewater system in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the public wastewater system. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-29. - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
    The provisions of this division shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as set forth in title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, part 403, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-30. - Violations. 
(a)  Violations of this division shall be a misdemeanor punishable under the laws of the state. Each day of continuing violation shall be considered a separate offense. Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of violation. 
(b)  In the event of violation of this division, the health department or designated city representative may verbally instruct the owner as to the necessary corrective action. If the owner fails to carry out verbal instructions in a timely manner or if a serious violation or hazard to public health exists, the health department or city may issue to the owner a written order stating the nature of the violation, the corrective action, and the time limit for completing the corrective action. The record of the mailing of said notice or order shall be prima facie evidence thereof and failure of said owner or owners to receive same shall in no way affect the validity of any proceedings conducted pursuant to this division. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any written order duly issued by the health department, the city, or its designated representative pursuant to this division or continuation of any violation hereof beyond the applicable time limit will constitute a separate misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof in the criminal court of the city shall be punished by the judge of said court within limits provided the Charter of the city. Provided further, that compliance with this division is required notwithstanding the fact that a written order might not have been issued. 
(d)  The violation of any provisions of this division, as now existing or as may be hereafter amended, may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Any public nuisance which is injurious to the public health, safety, or comfort may be abated by instituting appropriate proceedings for injunction in the court of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding the fact that such violation also constitutes a crime, and notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the city. 
(e)  Upon the receipt of a notice of a violation of this division and/or an order of the city requiring an act or thing to be done or to cease, the owner or owners of any premises then in question may, in writing, demand a hearing before the city to present the evidence challenging the validity of the city's order. The owner may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. Said demand must be filed with the clerk of the city and be made within five days from the receipt of the order being challenged. Upon receipt of a demand for a hearing, the city will set a date, time, and place for said hearing to be not less than 45 days from the date of filing of said demand. 
(1)  The hearing as provided herein shall apply to any customer's complaint, dispute, or challenge of the city's rules, regulations, resolutions, ordinances, or policies under this division. Upon customer's written complaint filed with the city clerk, the city shall set a hearing as provided herein or at a time agreed upon by the parties. 
(f)  Evidence before the city at any hearing conducted pursuant to subsection 69-3-29(e) herein shall be admitted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the superior courts of the state; provided, however, the city may take official notice of any order, rule, regulation, or any other document, record, or entry contained in its official record or minutes for evidentiary purposes. 
(g)  For the purposes of this division, the decisions of the city will prevail in any instance in which there is a conflict between it and the health department on any issue of sanitation, or lack of it, and its effect on human health or well being. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-31. - Service charges and fees. 
(a)  It is hereby determined necessary to fix and collect sewer service charges from customers. Such charges shall be published separate from this division and the revenue received shall be used for operation, maintenance, debt retirement, and other authorized expenses. 
(b)  All persons discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers shall be charged and assessed a surcharge, in addition to any sewer service charges, if these wastes have a concentration of pollutants that increase the cost of sewer system maintenance or wastewater treatment or disposal. Industrial wastes surcharges provided shall be prepared and rendered with the regular service bill, in accordance with a formula for determining surcharges published separate from this division. 
(c)  All owners or operators of a food service processing, sales, or service establishment shall obtain a food service wastewater discharge permit. An annual fee will be assessed for each new or existing food service wastewater discharge permit as set forth in a schedule published separate from this division. A re-inspection fee may also be assessed for any failed routine inspection, as set forth in a schedule published separate from this division. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Sec. 69-3-32. - Authority to disconnect service. 
    The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
(1)  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; or 
(2)  It is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
(3)  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of a permit issued by the approving authority; or 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process; or 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due; or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
(Ord. No. 2009-06, § 1, 6-2-2009) 
Chapter 70 - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
ARTICLE 1. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 70-1-1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-3. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    City means the City of Hapeville. 
    Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operations, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information, bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes the Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-4. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to the provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, and sanitation. 
(c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(d)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(e)  The city determines that there may be a risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-5. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer and a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number and personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-6. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city's IT and communications manager on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length, and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-7. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-8. - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account, or accepting payment for covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies, or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged. 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with the information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's death master file. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing addresses, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as the submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, the city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement, or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  [Notice of possible problem.] Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-9. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager. If the city manager, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within two business days of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  in the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-10. - Updating the program. 
    The mayor and council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the mayor and council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-11. - Program administration. 
    The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the mayor and council for consideration. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the city manager at least annually on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the Program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-1-12. - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts, the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 1, 10-21-2008) 
ARTICLE 2. - TREATMENT OF ADDRESS DISCREPANCIES 

Sec. 70-2-1. - Short title. 
    [This article shall be known as] Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-2-2. - Purpose. 
    Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this article is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-2-3. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
    City means the City of Hapeville. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-2-4. - Policy. 
    In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-2-5. - Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
(a)  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report related to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and the city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Sec. 70-2-6. - Methods of confirming consumer addresses. 
    The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 2008-17, § 2, 10-21-2008) 
Subpart C - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
Chapter 81 - ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 2009, amended Ch. 81 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 81 derived from Ord. No. 2006-13, § 1, adopted July 11, 2006. 

Sec. 81-1-1. - Introduction and purpose. 
(a)  Introduction. These urban design standards contain regulations that affect the design and character of the public and private realms of the city. Their intent is to carefully balance architecture, landscape design and urban stewardship at all levels to create the highest quality environment for residents and visitors. 

This chapter is intended to focus primarily on urbanism, as opposed to style, for most buildings. Unless specifically required by underlying zoning, it is intended to provide guidance to the city's design review committee (DRC) in the review process on universal principles such as: relationship of buildings to street; facade articulation; building orientation, etc. The standards are intended to balance historic urbanistic precedents in Hapeville with new building typologies not historically found in the area. As such, these standards generally do not indicate specific architectural styles for most parts of the city. 
The document contains both mandatory requirements (indicated with "shall") and optional best practices (indicated with "should" or "where possible.") Where a project does not meet the mandatory requirements, the burden of varying from them is placed on the applicant. In said case, the applicant may solicit support for such variation by providing documentation that the proposed development is consistent with the spirit of this document, precedent, and city policies. Final approval, however, shall be at the discretion of the DRC. 
This chapter comprises several sections. The first sections contain a review of the purpose of this chapter, followed by an overview of definitions, DRC duties, and applicability. These are followed by standards for the commercial/mixed-use area and the neighborhood conservation area. These sections contain text and supporting graphics. Unless specified, graphics and photos are for illustrative purposes only. 
(b)  General purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to encourage and provide a safe environment for pedestrian movement and improve open space areas throughout the community. Development goals include preserving and enhancing the character of existing residential properties and to address new and infill development opportunities. Increased density and intensity of development is allowed in order to maintain and enhance the existing characteristics of the community and to simultaneously improve the visual quality of the built environment throughout the city. 
The standards are separated into commercial/mixed-use area and neighborhood conservation area standards. They respond to issues related to the built environment including, but not limited to, building orientation, heights, articulation, finishes, pedestrian and vehicular access and landscape components. The chapter provides regulations based on maintaining and enhancing the visual characteristics of each district of the community, and providing for new and infill development that maintains its existing fabric. Commercial development is directed away from strip-type, vehicle-oriented centers and towards projects that maintain the feel of an old town requiring walkable, pedestrian-friendly centers to ensure a quality lifestyle and related set of experiences supported by the built environment. 
(c)  Goals. The goals of this chapter are to: 
(1)  Encourage and provide a safe environment for pedestrian movements throughout the city; 
(2)  Address new and infill development that maintains and enhances the existing characteristics of the community; 
(3)  Allow for increased density and intensity of development in underdeveloped portions of the city; 
(4)  Improve open space areas throughout the community; and 
(5)  Improve the visual quality of the built environment. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 81-1-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Words given customary meaning. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words or terms are herein defined. All other words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meaning. 
(b)  Interpretation of certain terms and words. 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, co-partnership or corporation. 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." 
(5)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(6)  The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
(7)  The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Addition. Any expansion of a structure beyond the original footprint thereof or alteration in the roof line of the original structure where such alteration is attached to the original structure. 
    Alley. A public or private vehicular driveway generally located to the rear of lots providing access to parking, service areas, and outbuildings. Alleys may serve more than one building. 
    Alignment, horizontal elemental. An architectural feature which is required for structures on interior lots so that building elements will remain comparably proportional to existing neighboring structures. 
    Architectural design standards. A set of building guidelines adopted by the city providing site planning, design, and building regulations under a unified plan to promote aesthetically pleasing and economical viable land utilization. 
    Articulation. Vertical or horizontal offsets in the roof or facade of a designed structure comprised of architectural features created to provide visual relief in nonresidential structures and to introduce architectural character and prohibit establishment of blank building facades. 
    Basement. A story partly underground but having at least one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. 
    Big box store. A retail establishment with a floor area greater than 25,000 square feet. 
    Board of appeals. A group of seven members appointed by the mayor and council who hear issues of administrative review of decisions of the building officials, perform reviews in zoning matters, and consider variances. 
    Build-to line. The line generally parallel to the front lot line to which buildings shall enfront to the extent identified in this chapter and the underlying zoning. It is a requirement, not a permissive minimum, as is a setback, however, where a minimum and maximum build-to line exists, the building may enfront any where between the two lines. The line shall be measured from the back of the required sidewalk clear zone along all street frontages and not from the front lot line. For the purposes of this chapter, the build-to line shall exist even when not enfronted by a building. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels (personal property). 
    Building, accessory. See definition of "Outbuilding." 
    Building, front line of. A line parallel to the street, intersecting the foremost point of the building, excluding steps. 
    Building official. The director of community services or such other city official duly designated to enforce and interpret the building codes of the city and his/her designees. For zoning purposes this term shall refer to the planning and zoning manager. 
    Building, principal. A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which the building is located. 
    Bungalow. An architectural style characterized by: a long and low-form building, an irregular floor plan within an overall rectangular shape including such common features as an integral porch and low-pitched roof with wide overhang. 
    Bungalow, craftsman. An architectural style characterized by an asymmetrical open plan, emphasizing materials, especially woodwork, demonstrating how the structure is built, use of a wide variety of materials for the structure and detailing, a low-pitched roof, usually gabled, but sometimes hipped giving a horizontal effect, wide overhanging eaves with open exposed rafters, and large gables decorated and covered with half-timbered porches and short square columns of heavy masonry piers extending to the ground. 
    Carport. A roofed and open-sided structure that covers a driveway or other parking area. 
    Cellar. A story partly underground but having at least one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. See definition of "Basement". 
    City council. The Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville. 
    Commercial, infill. A single structure built in an existing business development characterized by limited lot size, limited frontage, and construction on an existing lot of record. 
    Commercial/mixed-use area. Generally, properties zoned for commercial and mixed-use development. The commercial/mixed-use area boundary is more specifically shown on the special design areas map in section 81-1-3. 
    Converted, infill. A single structure rehabilitated from one use to another such as from a home to an office located in an existing building development characterized by limited lot size, limited frontage and construction on an existing lot of record. 
    Curb cut. Any interruption or break in the line of a street curb in order to connect a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. Alleys shall not be considered curb cuts, nor shall the relocation of an existing curb for the purpose of creating on-street parking. 
    Demolition, multistructure. The process of eliminating more than one structure per lot requiring DRC review including a consideration of existing conditions on site and proposed build back options. 
    Demolition, single structure. The process of eliminating one existing structure per lot excluding permitted accessory buildings, which requires a permit but does not trigger application of DRC review except where such structures are otherwise regulated by this Code. 
    Design. For the purposes of this chapter only, any application or project requiring a building permit, site plan or landscape plan excluding single-structure demolition permits and remodeling. 
    Destruction. The involuntary loss of a structure by fire, storm, flood, war or other catastrophic event. 
    Design review committee. A group of persons charged with the task of reviewing all development designs, when such designs are required, to determine whether or not the same are consistent with the architectural design standards and to make recommendations on said designs where appropriate. 
    Door, main entry. An entry portal of a structure allowing pedestrian access to the street and located along an enfronting facade. 
    Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used mainly for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, mobile homes or recreation vehicles. 
    Dwelling, one-family. A building designed, arranged or used mainly for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, mobile homes or recreation vehicles. 
    Dwelling, one-family attached. A type of residential development which includes a dwelling unit on a subdivided lot usually individually owned, though attached by a common party wall to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A building designed, arranged or used for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A multifamily dwelling is a residential building designed, arranged or used for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit. A dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one family. 
    Eave. The overhanging lower edge of a roof. 
    Enfront. To place an element such as a building along a build-to line. In the absence of a zoning build-to line requirement, enfront shall also mean to place an element along the front setback or side setback abutting a street. 
    Facade. The exterior vertical portion of a building. 
    Fenestration. The arrangement, size, proportion and design of transparent windows, doors and other openings. 
    Fiber cement siding. A construction product made from silica, cement, wood fiber, water, and other ingredients also known proprietarily as "hardy board/plank" or cementitious siding. 
    Floodplain. An area identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other surveying agencies as subject to flooding once every 100 years and necessary for the flow of floodwaters. 
    Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of each floor/story of a dwelling unit, exclusive of porches and balconies, garages, basements and cellars, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center lines of walls or partitions separating dwelling units. For uses other than residential, the floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center lines of walls or partitions separating those uses, and shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements and similar areas devoted to those uses. 
    Frontage. The length of the front lot line. 
    Garage. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used for vehicular storage only, and having a capacity adequate to accommodate the automobiles or light trucks owned and registered in the name of the occupants of the principal building. 
    Grids between glass. Dual-paned windows having a grid (muntins) between the two panes of glass. The muntins are a series of thin bars that simulate the look of window made up of several panes of glass. The muntins serve no functional purpose and are simply cosmetic. 
    Height. A vertical measurement from the average adjacent grade of the ground to the ridge line of a structure. 
    H.E.L.P. Project Design Manual. A nonbinding study prepared by the Hapeville Emerging Land Use and Planning Committee of the city which includes identification of some community planning goals, surveys of existing housing and commercial-facility stock, and recommendations for guidelines to provide a unified approach to planning and development in the city. 
    Lot. A portion or parcel of land devoted to a single principal use, or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
    Lot, corner. A lot fronting on two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot coverage. The total horizontal ground area of a lot covered by all buildings on the lot and which is not open to the sky. 
    Lot coverage, maximum. The maximum permitted ratio of lot coverage to usable area of the lot. Usable area shall not include flood plains or slopes in excess of 30 percent grade. 
    Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured perpendicular to the front lot line. 
    Lot, double frontage. An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets not intersecting at a point common with the boundary lines of lot. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front. The lot line coincident with a street right-of-way line. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Fulton County; or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the same offices as of the effective date of this chapter. 
    Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth. 
    Neighborhood conservation area. Generally, parcels north of North Central Avenue or west of Virginia Avenue having a single-family residential character warranting long-term preservation. The neighborhood conservation area boundary is more specifically shown on the special design areas map in section 81-1-3. 
    Outbuilding. A building subordinate in nature, extent or purpose to the principal building on a lot, and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal building. Such buildings may be connected to the principal building by an enclosed breezeway, and may include garages, home occupations, storage buildings or work studios. 
    Planning commission. A group of seven persons appointed by the mayor and council with the powers, duties, and responsibilities of site plan review and recommendations regarding text and map amendments to the zoning ordinance. 
    Porch. The covered portion of a building, with the sides exposed to the weather, in which furniture and a sitting area might occur as opposed to a stoop which serves as a covered area in front of a door to a building. Porches with less than 40 square feet of floor area shall be considered stoops. 
    Porte-cochere. A roofed structure covering a driveway at the entrance of a building and structurally connected to said building to provide shelter while entering or leaving a vehicle. 
    Ranch. A housing style characterized by: long, narrow, rectangle shapes, with or without projections, bedrooms usually clustered at one end, principal entry and living spaces located near the center of the house with a garage or carport often at the opposite end of the structure, typically with a low-pitched roof, often one story with a brick exterior. 
    Remodeling. The process of altering or renovating any structure where such work does not expand the footprint or roof line of the structure in existence before the renovation. 
    Remodeling, commercial. The process of altering or renovating a structure used for any nonresidential function where such work does not expand the footprint or roof line of the structure in existence before the renovation. 
    Remodeling, exterior. The process of altering or renovating the portion of a structure designed to be exposed to the elements and subject to the architectural design standards. 
    Remodeling, interior. The process of altering or renovating a portion of a structure designed not to be exposed to the elements and not subject to the architectural design standards. 
    Remodeling, residential. The process of altering or renovating a structure used for a dwelling for human beings where such work does not expand the footprint or roof line of the structure in existence before the renovation. 
    Residential, infill. Small-scale single-family residential development consisting of a single structure in developed neighborhoods constructed on an existing lot of record. 
    Setback. The distance from the public right-of-way to the nearest point of a building. 
    Sidewalk, required. The new sidewalk that is required to be constructed by a developer in accordance with the architectural design standards or the underlying zoning. Where a conflict exists between the architectural design standards and the underlying zoning, the wider sidewalk standard shall constitute the required sidewalk. 
    Space able to be occupied. Covered floor area utilized for any principal permitted use of the underlying zoning except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment. 
    Spandrel. The space between the top of a window in one story and the sill of the window in the story above. 

    Stoop. A small platform of less than 40 square feet, or a staircase leading to the entrance of a house or building. 
    Street. A public way for vehicular traffic which affords primary means of access to abutting property. 
    Street, centerline. A line surveyed at the direction of the mayor and council and designated as an official street centerline, or in the absence of such line, a line drawn parallel to and midway between the right-of-way lines of any mapped street. 
    Story. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor above it, the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement shall be counted as a story for height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for height measurement. 
    Story, half. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of that story. 

    Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site-built buildings, industrialized buildings, modular homes, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes, fallout shelters, telecommunications towers and facilities, and satellite communication facilities. 
    Supplemental area. The privately held area between the back of the required sidewalk clear zone and the build-to line. In the absence of a zoning build-to line requirement, the supplemental area shall be considered the front yard or side yard when adjacent to a street. The structures and landscaping within the supplemental area may be held to specific standards. 

    Transitional height plane. An imaginary plane (having a vertical component and angular component) specifically designed to restrict the maximum height of buildings or structures within mixed-use districts and their relationship to adjoining districts so as to provide adequate air and light to properties. 
    Such imaginary plane shall be: 
(a)  A vertical component measured at the required setback adjoining the common property line by a 16-foot vertical distance above the finished grade, and; 
(b)  An angular component extending inward over such structure at an angle of 45 degrees, and; 
(c)  Such determination shall be made on a point-by-point basis and not average grade. 
    No portion of any structure including, but not limited to, balconies, bay windows, porches, or chimneys shall protrude through such transitional height limiting plane as determined by specific sections. 
    Trash receptacle. A container designed for household or business garbage but not designed for hard goods, negative trimming, industrial debris or large unwanted items as opposed to a dumpster which is a device design to hold large amounts of household and other debris. 
    Use, accessory. A use subordinate in nature, extent or purpose to the principal use of a building or lot, and customarily incidental thereto. 
    Use, conditional. A use of a building or lot that is permitted only if the mayor and council specifically approve that use, and all plans, specifications, written conditions or written restrictions are complied with on a continuing basis. 
    Use, nonconforming. Any lawful use of a building or lot which does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter governing the use at that particular location. 
    Use, principal. The main use of a building or lot. 
    Window, fixed. An opening in a building to allow the entry of air and light with nonmovable glass fixtures inserted. 
    Window, movable sash. An opening in a building to allow the entry of air and light with a mobile structure holding glass. 
    Yard. An unoccupied space, open to the sky, on the same lot with a building. 
    Yard, front. A yard measured at right angles from the front lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear. A yard measured at right angles from a rear lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side. A yard measured at right angles from a side lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 2014-10 , § 3, 9-16-2014) 
Sec. 81-1-3. - Special design areas map. 

(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 81-1-4. - Design review committee. 
(a)  Membership. The DRC shall consist of up to five members appointed by the mayor and council. One of the members shall be a member of the staff of the city. With the exception of the member of the DRC who is a member of the staff of the city, each member of the DRC shall be a resident of the city or owner of a business or property within the city at the time of appointment and for at least six months immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city or owner of a business or property within the city while serving as a member of the DRC. The members shall be designated by Post 1 through 4 for the purposes of staggering terms only. Post 1 and 2 will serve initially one term of two years beginning January 1, 2004, and ending December 31, 2006. Posts 3 and 4 shall initially serve one term of three years beginning January 1, 2003, and ending December 31, 2007. Post 5 shall be held by an appointed city employee who shall serve during the employee's term of office. All appointees may be reappointed at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Training. Relevant city staff shall provide necessary training regarding the architectural design standards, architecture, community planning, urban design, land use, the zoning ordinance of the city, and on such other topics as the mayor and council may deem relevant to redevelopment and urban renewal. 
(c)  Officers, quorums, voting. The DRC shall elect a chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The DRC may appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city and may or may not be one of the five voting members depending upon the skills and willingness of the members to record such meetings in accordance with the open-meetings law. The DRC may make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting and shall meet at the call of the chairman or when deemed necessary by a majority of the members. However, the DRC shall have a scheduled meeting once a month. However, such meetings may be cancelled and rescheduled as may be needed within compliance of the law. All meetings of the DRC at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the DRC shall be a public record. 
Three voting members of the DRC shall be required in order to have a quorum to transact business, during both the initial phase and once the citizen body is impaneled. The presence of the chairman of the DRC is not required to constitute a quorum. The chairman may vote in all matters, unless he/she recuses himself/herself and shall vote in order to break a tie. 
(d)  Duties and authority. 
(1)  All design, as defined in this chapter, in the city requires design review except as listed herein below. 
(2)  When a design is submitted which does not require site plan review then the same shall be considered by the DRC solely. When a design is submitted which requires site plan review then the DRC shall review the same only after the planning commission has reviewed and supported the site plan. Commercial new construction, single-family residential construction and additions of structures that meet or exceed 50 percent of the existing structure, combining two or more parcels that are adjacent or subdividing two or more parcels, increase of commercial parking by 50 percent or more than 30 inches in elevation adjustments as approved by the city engineer for commercial parking require planning commission approval and DRC review. 
(e)  Standards of review. The DRC shall utilize the purpose and goals outlined in section 81-1-1, the requirements of this chapter as to specific architectural standards. 
(f)  Appeals. Although this chapter is not a zoning regulation, binding decisions of the design review committee are appealable to the board of zoning appeals. 
(g)  Design exceptions. Relief from these standards may be granted by the design review committee upon finding that the design exception: 
(1)  Will not increase traffic, decrease access to the proposed development, or adversely impact the general public safety; and 
(2)  Will not reduce the adequacy of off-street parking, loading, and service for the proposed development unless specifically granted by the planning commission, board of zoning appeals, or authorized shared parking arrangement; and 
(3)  Will not adversely affect the compliance with landscaping, buffering, and irrigation provisions of other Code requirements, and 
(4)  Will result in design that is compatible with adjacent parcels. As used herein "compatible" shall mean "a unified architectural design and signage program within a development having minimal impact on adjacent parcels." 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 2009-13, § 2, 8-18-2009; Ord. No. 2010-03, § 1, 2-2-2010; Ord. No. 2011-08, § 1, 9-6-2011) 
Sec. 81-1-5. - Applicability. 
(a)  Application of standards. The architectural design standards provided in this chapter shall be wholly applicable when the design is for: 
(1)  New structures; 
(2)  Residential, commercial or mixed-use infill; 
(3)  Exterior remodeling; 
(4)  Multistructure demolition projects; 
(5)  Replacement with new structures where destruction occurs; and 
(6)  Replacement structure built after single structure demolition. 
(b)  Exemptions from review. The following shall be exempted from review by the design review committee provided that construction complies with all applicable design requirements: 
(1)  Interior remodeling; 
(2)  Single-structure demolition; 
(3)  Replacement windows on existing structures; 
(4)  Replacement siding; 
(5)  Accessory structures less than 144 square feet, including, but not limited to, decks, porches, patios, landings, sheds, arbors, and gazebos. 
(c)  Submittal requirements. All applications shall be prepared in accordance with the current application requirements established by the city planning and zoning manager. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009) 
Sec. 81-1-6. - Commercial/mixed-use area. 
    Based on goals established in this chapter, the following standards are required in the commercial/mixed-use area identified in section 81-1-3. This includes three subareas: subarea A, subarea B, and subarea C. All of the standards contained in this section shall apply to all private development in subareas A and B. Subarea requirements are found within the applicable subsection. 

    Private development in subarea C shall be governed by section 81-1-7 Neighborhood conservation area. Although commercial and mixed uses are permitted in this subarea, the Hapeville Main Street Town Center LCI Plan established a desire to preserve a residential character of this subarea, regardless of use. 
    The above notwithstanding, applicants for one-family attached or detached dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multifamily buildings in the commercial/mixed-use area shall elect to comply with the requirements of this section or those of section 81-1-7. The section elected shall be applied to said structures in its entirety. 
    To the extent determined by the design review committee, this section's standards should also apply to industrial uses not within the commercial/mixed-use area. For example, certain standards, such as storefront requirements, may not be appropriate for industrial uses, while others, such as material and landscaping requirements, may be. 
(a)  Site development standards. 
1.  Except where indicated, setbacks shall be established by zoning. 
2.  On corner lots the principal building shall be located adjacent to the street intersection, subject to setback or build-to line requirements of zoning. 
3.  On new buildings in subarea A, where the adjoining buildings were built before 1950, the main facade of the new structure shall align with the average existing building facade line of the two adjoining structures closest to the proposed setback. This will maintain the historic uniform setbacks of subarea A and place buildings close to the public right-of-way, thereby, encouraging pedestrian access. 
4.  Except where a greater height is required by zoning, buildings shall provide a minimum height of 24 feet along the build-to line or front setback, including roof parapet walls. One-story buildings meeting this requirement are permitted. 
5.  Except where a greater height is required by zoning, the first story finished floor to ceiling slab height shall be a minimum of 12 feet. 
6.  Maximum building heights shall be established by zoning, except that buildings within 150 feet of a neighborhood conservation area and without an intervening street shall be limited to a maximum height of 35 feet, and shall meet the transitional height plane requirements. 
7.  Space able to be occupied requirements shall be as follows: 
a.  One-family attached and detached dwellings and two-family dwellings shall provide first-story occupiable space for a minimum of the first ten feet of depth along the enfronting facade. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  All other buildings, including parking decks, shall provide first-story occupiable space for a minimum of the first 20 feet of depth along the enfronting facade. 

8.  Individual front facades of one-family detached dwellings within 15 feet of the front lot line or build-to line shall have no more than two corners, excluding bay windows, porches or stoops. 
9.  Portions of enfronting facades containing first-story retail or restaurant uses shall be composed as a simple plane with jogs of less than ten feet. 
10.  Buildings along Atlanta Avenue, North Central Avenue, South Central Avenue, Virginia Avenue, Dogwood Drive (except in subarea C), or Sylvan Road shall enfront for a minimum of 80 percent of the width of the front setback or build-to line. In no case shall a break in buildings along said streets exceed 30 feet in width. Enfronting facades along said streets shall also meet the requirement of subsection (g)11. for all uses. 
11.  Sidewalks shall be located along all public and private streets. Sidewalks shall be of the widths indicated on the "Commercial/Mixed-use Area Sidewalk Table" and shall consist of two areas: a landscape area and a clear area. 

a.  The landscape area shall be adjacent to the curb and is intended for the placement of trees, street furniture (including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs and newspaper vending boxes), bus shelters, bicycle racks, public kiosks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility. 
b.  The landscape area may be primarily paved adjacent to on-street parking and shall be landscaped in all other areas. Street trees shall be planted a maximum of 40 feet on center, spaced equal distance between streetlights, and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. Al newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches measured 12 inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven feet and shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet. Variations to this may be reviewed as approved by the city planning commission. 

COMMERCIAL/MIXED-USE AREA SIDEWALK TABLE 
General Subarea A Subarea B Subarea C Landscape 
Area Clear Area Landscape 
Area Clear Area Landscape 
Area Clear Area Landscape 
Area Clear Area South Central Avenue 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a North Central Avenue (west of Whitney Ave) 5 ft. 6 ft. n/a n/a n/a n/a 5 ft. 6 ft. North Central Avenue (east of Whitney Ave) 5 ft. * 10 ft. * 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a 5 ft. 6 ft. Perry Hudson Blvd 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a Dogwood Drive 5 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a 5 ft. 6 ft. Sylvan Road 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Virginia Avenue 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a International Blvd 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a Atlanta Avenue 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a 5 ft. 10 ft. n/a n/a Other Streets 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 10 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 5 ft. 6 ft. * For developments where the adjoining buildings were built before 1950, the minimum required sidewalk width shall match the average width of the two adjoining sidewalks.  
c.  The clear area shall be the portion of the sidewalk reserved for pedestrian passage and unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight feet, including, but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic-control boxes, and utility structures. The sidewalk clear area shall have a consistent cross-slope not exceeding two percent. No awning or canopy shall extend more than five feet over the clear area. 
d.  Where property abuts a neighborhood conservation area without an intervening street, the sidewalk area within 20 feet of such shall taper when necessary to provide a smooth transition to the existing residential sidewalk. In the event that the abutting residential area has no existing sidewalk the sidewalk shall taper to a width of six feet, measured from the street curb, or as approved by the planning commission. 
(c)  Supplemental area and fence standards. 
1.  Supplemental areas in the commercial/mixed-use area shall limited to the treatments identified in Figure 3 and as otherwise identified in this section. 
2.  All first story enfronting commercial uses and all enfronting buildings on Atlanta Avenue, North Central Avenue, South Central Avenue, Virginia Avenue, Dogwood Drive (except in subarea C), or Sylvan Road shall provide the "storefront and awning treatment" identified in Figure 3, and subject to the following additional requirements: 
a.  The supplemental area shall be hardscaped. 
b.  Temporary or movable fences surrounding outdoor dining are permitted in the supplemental area. 
3.  Fences, walls or hedges having the same setback as the adjacent building, with provisions for pedestrian access, are encouraged where a parking lot or other un-built area fronts a required sidewalk. 
4.  All enfronting buildings not along Atlanta Avenue, North Central Avenue, South Central Avenue, Virginia Avenue, Dogwood Drive (except in subarea C), or Sylvan Road shall provide any of the treatments identified in Figure 3. 
5.  "Common yard, porch and fence, terrace or light court," or "forecourt" treatments identified in Figure 3, the supplemental area shall be landscaped and shall include a minimum of one tree every 50 feet of frontage. See list of allowed trees on in section 93-2-14. 
6.  For "porch and fence, terrace or light court, stoop-front," or "forecourt" treatments identified in Figure 3: 
a.  Fences in the supplemental area are permitted and shall be picket-wood, stone, composite materials or ornamental metal, with the finished side facing the street. 
b.  Retaining walls in the supplemental area are permitted and shall not exceed 32 inches in height unless required by topography. 
c.  All street-facing walls shall be faced with stone, full-depth brick, or smooth stucco. 
7.  Chain link fencing is not permitted in areas visible from a public right-of-way. 

Figure 3: Commercial/Mixed-Use Area Supplemental Area Treatments (Courtesy of Smart Code 8.0 and Duany Plater-Zyberk & Co.) 
a)  Common yard: a treatment wherein the facade is set back substantially from sidewalk. The supplemental area shall be unfenced, unwalled, and visually continuous with adjacent supplemental areas, supporting a common landscape. 
b)  Porch and fence: a treatment wherein the facade is set back from the sidewalk with an attached porch permitted to encroach. A fence at the back of the required sidewalk is required as a demarcation of the yard. The porch shall be no less than 8 feet deep. 
c)  Terrace or light court: a treatment wherein the facade is set back from the sidewalk by an elevated terrace or a sunken light court. This type buffers residential use from urban sidewalks and removes the private yard from public encroachment. Fences and walls are permitted in this treatment. 
d)  Forecourt: a treatment wherein a portion of the facade is close to the sidewalk and the central portion is set back. The forecourt is suitable for circular drives or other vehicular drop-offs. Large trees within the forecourts may overhang the sidewalks. Fences and walls are permitted in this treatment. 
e)  Stoopfront: a treatment wherein the facade is aligned close to the sidewalk with the first story elevated from the sidewalk sufficiently to secure privacy for the windows. The entrance is usually an exterior stair and landing. This type is recommended for ground-floor residential use. Fences and walls are permitted in this treatment. 
f)  Storefront and awning: a treatment wherein the facade is aligned close to the sidewalk with the building entrance at sidewalk grade. This type is conventional for retail use. It meets the requirements of subsection 81-1-6(g)11. Awnings are encouraged to overlap the sidewalk. Permanent fences and walls are prohibited. 
8.  Where a development adjoins the neighborhood conservation area, the development shall provide a physical barrier between the two to minimize disruptive light, noise, odor, dust, unsightly appearances and intrusive activity relative to the residential area. A smooth transition to the adjacent neighborhood conservation area shall be ensured by providing: 

a.  A minimum 20-foot landscaped buffer located within the development site along the boundary with the neighborhood conservation area. Said buffer shall be planted with a minimum of one tree per 40 linear feet. Shrubs, flowers or grasses shall also be provided and maintained to a minimum height of four feet to visually screen new development and provide an attractive boundary that encourages continued investment in adjacent residential zones. 
b.  A permanent opaque wall between six and eight feet in height and faced in wood, stacked stone, full-depth brick or hard-coat true stucco. Said wall may be located anywhere within the required landscaped buffer. 
c.  Where a public or private alley separates the development from a neighborhood conservation area the landscape buffer and permanent opaque wall shall be provided adjacent to the alley. 
(d)  Utility standards. 
1.  Mechanical features shall be screened from view from any park or along any public right-of-way with planting, walls or fences of equal or greater height. Acceptable nonvegetative materials for screening shall include painted wood or those found in section 93-2-5. Said features are encouraged not to be located in the supplemental area. 
2.  When located on rooftops, mechanical features shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with materials similar to the building. 
3.  Skylights are not permitted facing a public right-of-way. 
4.  Street lights shall be provided by the developer in an effort to maintain a safe, walkable and well-lit public area throughout the city; pedestrian scale street lights as approved by the DRC and the department of community services shall be provided by the developer, subject to site plan and design review in new development. This requirement does not apply to projects on lots with less than ten feet of frontage along a public right-of-way. 
5.  Trees shall not be planted on top of storm drains. 
6.  Service areas and dumpsters: 

a.  Shall be in the rear or side yard of the development; and 
b.  Shall be screened from the public right-of-way to a height of eight feet with an opaque material on all sides, consistent with a primary building material. Acceptable materials for screening shall include painted wood or those found in section 93-2-5. 
(e)  Parking and traffic standards. 
1.  Two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall be counted as one curb cut. 
2.  Public or private alleys or driveway providing vehicular access to two or more parcels shall not constitute a curb cut. 

3.  New public streets shall not count as curb cuts. 
4.  Parcels are permitted a maximum of one driveway curb cut per street frontage. In cases where a property abuts multiple streets the total number of curb cuts or portions thereof may be allocated to a single street. 
5.  Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotel and hospital uses. 
6.  No curb cuts shall be permitted on North Central Avenue, South Central Avenue, Virginia Avenue or Atlanta Avenue when access can be provided from another street. 
7.  Driveways shall have widths of: 
a.  One-family attached dwellings. A minimum of ten feet for a one-way and a maximum of 15 feet for two-way. 
b.  All other uses. A maximum of 12 feet for one-way and a maximum of 24 feet for two-way. 
8.  Carports are only permitted subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Carports shall be located in the rear or side yard and shall not be visible from a public right-of-way. 
b.  Carport roofs shall be supported by columns with a minimum width and depth of eight inches. 
c.  The base of carport columns shall be faced in stacked brick or stacked stone to a minimum height of three feet above grade. 
9.  Parking is prohibited in the supplemental area and between a building and the adjacent street. This shall not be interpreted as restricting on-street parking. 

10.  A continuous off right-of-way landscape buffer with a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided between parking and the adjacent sidewalk. This requirement shall apply when existing sidewalks not meeting this requirement are repaired or replaced. 
11.  Parking decks shall conceal automobiles from visibility and have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; parking structures must be faced in full-depth brick, stone, cast stone, or precast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. Retail or restaurant fronted decks are encouraged. 
12.  Underground parking is allowed when possible. 
13.  Drive-through windows and all vehicular queuing, when permitted by zoning, shall be placed to the rear or side of the building facade, shall not be visible from any public right-of-way, and shall not be located within 25 feet of the back of the required sidewalk. 
14.  Gasoline and service stations shall place all fuel dispensing, service canopies and service entry doors to the rear of the building and away from the public right-of-way. Said facilities and associated queuing shall not be visible from any adjacent street or located within 25 feet of the sidewalk. 
(f)  Roof and chimney standards. 
1.  Principal building roofs for one-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum usable life of 30 years, per manufacturer's warranty. 
2.  Roof shingles shall be slate, cedar, or asphalt. 
3.  Roof tiles shall be clay, terra cotta or concrete. 
4.  Street-facing gutters shall be copper, aluminum or galvanized steel. 
5.  Downspouts shall match gutters in material and finish. 
6.  Metal flashing, where utilized, shall be copper or factory-finished sheet metal and shall be of a color that blends with other building materials. 
7.  Chimneys visible from a public right-of-way shall not be faced in wood or fiber cement siding and shall not be a metal or ceramic pipe. Chimneys shall be wrapped in a full-depth brick, stone or masonry finish material. 

8.  Chimneys located on an exterior building wall shall begin at grade. 
9.  Flat roofs shall be permitted. 
10.  Buildings with sloped roofs not completely screened from the adjacent street by a parapet shall have a pitch between 4:12 and 12:12. Mansard roofs are prohibited. Pitched-roof materials are limited to roof shingles, natural slate, wood shake, factory-finished sheet metal, and terra cotta tile, unless determined to be historically appropriate by the planning and zoning manager. 
11.  Roof-mounted lights and flagpoles are prohibited. Roof-mounted satellite dishes or telecommunication devices shall be screened from public view and shall blend with the background of the building as practical. 
12.  In subarea A roof lines shall appear flat from the adjacent street and roof structures shall be vertically screened by a parapet wall. 
(g)  Facade and style standards. 
1.  Exterior facade materials shall be limited as follows: 
a.  Subarea A. Unpainted full-depth brick. 
b.  Subarea B. Full-depth brick, cast stone, hard-coat stucco, fiber-cement siding, natural-wood siding or stacked stone. 
c.  Subarea C. See neighborhood conservation area. 
d.  Remaining commercial/mixed-use area. Full-depth brick, cast stone, hard-coat stucco, fiber-cement siding, natural-wood siding or stacked stone. 
e.  Split-face block. In addition to the above materials, split-face block may be utilized on exterior facades, but only along a non-enfronting side or rear facade that is not visible from an adjacent street, public park, or plaza. 
f.  [Materials on enfronting facades.] The materials utilized along an enfronting facade shall be provided for the first 20 feet in length along adjacent non-enfronting facades. 
g.  [Façade colors, materials.] Facade colors and materials shall be limited to three per facade face. 
2.  Where allowed, the combined enfronting facade area covered with fiber-cement siding and/or natural-wood siding shall not exceed 20 percent of the total enfronting facade area, provided that: 
a.  Where a development includes only one building this requirement shall apply to said building. 
b.  Where a development includes two or more buildings this requirement shall apply to the sum of the total enfronting facade areas. This may result in individual buildings containing front facades entirely of fiber cement siding and/or natural wood siding. 
3.  Where allowed, hard-coat stucco shall have a smooth finish. Furthermore, architectural details such as sills, trim, pediments, cornices, railings, door enframements, or similar details shall not be of stucco. 
4.  In subarea A exterior building colors shall be consistent with the existing historic characteristics of each individual building as a contributing resource from its significant period of design and style. If the building was designed to be of natural or unique brick pattern, it should be returned to this style. All mortar and brick repairs should match the material and hue. Earth hues are suggested for paint, when used on most facades of brick construction, however there may be exceptions. A palette should be established on a building-by-building basis, with a suggested complimentary hue trim color to the base color. It is highly suggested the complete building color palette be limited to three colors for field and trim selections. Two adjacent buildings may use the same color palette only if the field and trim colors are reversed on each of the buildings. No sandblasting or abrasive cleaning methods (including high-pressure washes) shall be used on facades. Final review of selected color, restoration procedures, fixtures, and applications shall be coordinated on a building-by-building analysis through individual design review of visual concepts. The DRC shall make these determinations based on these standards, taking in consideration the style of the building, the nature and marketing of the applying business, the Main Street guidelines, the secretary of the interior's guidelines for renovation, section 93-2-7 et seq. of the zoning ordinance, and the standards for historic preservation. 
5.  Facade materials shall be combined horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. 
6.  Enfronting upper and lowers facades shall be differentiated. Potential ways to achieve this include windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural details. This is intended to prevent buildings in which individual floors cannot be identified from the building exterior; it should not be interpreted to limit architectural expression. 
7.  Blank, windowless walls are prohibited along enfronting facades, except where a building enfronts multiple streets. In the latter case, it was not historically uncommon for buildings (especially commercial or mixed-use ones) to orient towards the more intensely developed street. As such, along the first story of enfronting mixed-use and commercial facades this requirement may be waived by the building official along streets that are predominantly residential in character when: 

a.  The first 20 feet of said facade meets the above requirements, and 
b.  The area beyond the first 20 feet is treated with architectural detailing, such as pilasters, false windows, or similar features. 
8.  Enfronting upper-story windows are encouraged to be equally sized, vertically oriented, equally spaced and arranged in a grid pattern. 
9.  Foundations shall be constructed as a distinct building element that contrast with facade materials. Foundations that are exposed above the ground, must be parged with cement, stuccoed over or be faced in full-depth brick, natural stone, or cast stone. 
10.  Vending machines, video or other outdoor merchandise displays, mechanical/electrical games, amusement rides, telephones, ice machines, freestanding automated teller machines excluding automated teller machines attached to buildings or integrated into buildings by canopies, and shopping carts shall be placed within the structure of a building and shall be out of view from the public right-of-way. 
11.  Safety pylons, bollards, and trash receptacles in the supplemental area or along an enfronting facade shall be permitted based upon design compatibility with the main facade and neighboring comparable facilities. 
(h)  Door and window standards. 
1.  The main entry door to enfronting principal buildings shall face, be visible from, and be accessible from the adjacent public sidewalk. 
2.  The main entry door to all uses shall be linked to the sidewalk via a pedestrian walkway or wheelchair access. 
3.  First-story doors or windows operating on sliders are only permitted when they open directly onto a required sidewalk or supplemental zone. 

4.  Building numbers, at least six inches in height, shall be located above or beside the street-facing pedestrian entrance. 
5.  Window panes serving commercial uses shall be recessed a minimum of three inches and a maximum of eight inches from the adjacent facade. 
6.  Where window lights are utilized they shall be true divided lights, simulated divided lights, or one-over-one lights. Grids between glass are prohibited. 
7.  Where used, window shutters shall match one-half the width of the window opening. 
8.  Enfronting windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width, including display windows but not transoms. 
9.  Enfronting windows and door glass (except on churches and fire stations) shall utilize clear glass or tinted glass. Tinted glass shall have a transmittance factor of 50 percent or greater and shall have a visible light reflectance factor of ten or less. 
10.  Painted window or door glass is prohibited. 
11.  All enfronting "storefront and awning" treatments identified in Figure 3, and all enfronting facades along Atlanta Avenue, North Central Avenue, South Central Avenue, Virginia Avenue, Dogwood Drive (except within subarea C), and Sylvan Road shall provide a storefront consisting of: 
a.  A nonglass base or knee wall beginning at grade and extending not more than 24 inches above the sidewalk. 
b.  A glass display window beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten feet and not more than 12 feet above the adjacent required sidewalk. Such glass shall provide views into display windows having a minimum depth of two and one-half feet and that are accessible from the building interior. 
c.  A main entry door remaining unlocked during normal business hours, and having a surface area that is a minimum of 70 percent glass. 
d.  A glass transom located above the glass display window having a minimum height of 18 inches and a maximum height of 36 inches. 
e.  A minimum of 75 percent of the length of the enfronted portion of the build-to line shall be provided in glass, including glass doors and display windows. 

f.  No linear distance of more than ten feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. 
g.  First-story drop ceilings recessed a minimum of 18 inches from the display window opening. 
12.  Awnings projecting from buildings, serving as an entry canopy and/or providing identification to the business, are allowed, provided that: 
a.  Awnings shall be at least five feet deep as measured from the building's front facade. 
b.  Awnings serving as an entry canopy shall match adjacent business awnings in depth and height. 
c.  Valance width and height must align horizontally. 
d.  Frame construction on awnings should be square aluminum tubes. Thin, one-and-one-half-inch-diameter round aluminum tube frames are not permitted. It is suggested that Steel Stitch(tm) brand be used. 
e.  Valance on awnings should always be loose as valances should not be rigidly framed. 
f.  Approved awnings may be externally lighted with light fixtures in keeping with the style of the building, as approved by the DRC. 
g.  Light fixtures in awnings may light the ground surface or storefront below, however, light fixtures may not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
h.  Internally, back lit awnings, where the lights actually illuminate the awning fabric, are prohibited. 
i.  Signs on awning must meet all requirements of the sign ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 2015-05 , § 2, 5-19-2015) 

Sec. 81-1-7. - Neighborhood conservation area. 

    Based on goals established in this chapter, the following standards are required in the neighborhood conservation area identified in section 81-1-3. This includes two subareas: subarea D and subarea E. All of the standards contained in this section shall apply to all development in all subareas. Subarea requirements are found within the applicable subsection. 
    This section shall govern subarea C of the commercial/mixed-use area. It may also govern one-family detached dwellings and two-family dwellings in the commercial/mixed-use area, provided that the section is applied in its entirety. 
(a)  Site development standards. 
1.  Except where indicated, setbacks shall be established by zoning. 
2.  On corner lots the principal building shall be located adjacent to the street intersection, subject to setback or build-to line requirements of zoning. 
3.  Minimum building heights shall be established by zoning. 
4.  Within subareas D and E maximum building heights shall be as established by zoning, except that: 
a.  Where this chapter provides a more-stringent standard as compared to the zoning code, the more-stringent standard shall prevail. The only exception to this shall be a use grandfathered under the zoning code. 
b.  Portions of buildings equal to or less than five feet from a side or rear lot line shall be limited in height to the greater of 16 feet. 
c.  Portions of buildings between five and ten feet of a side or rear lot line shall be limited in height to the greater of 25 feet. 
d.  Portions of buildings ten) feet or greater from a side or rear lot line shall be limited in height to 35 feet. 
5.  Outside of subareas D and E maximum building heights shall be as established by zoning. 
6.  All buildings shall provide first-story occupiable space, for the first ten feet of building depth along the enfronting facade. 
7.  Sidewalks shall be located along all public and private streets. Sidewalks shall consist of two areas: a landscape area and a clear area. 
a.  Developments less than one acre shall provide a minimum one-foot landscape zone and a minimum four-foot clear zone. 
b.  Development of one acre or more shall provide a minimum two-foot landscape zone and a minimum five-foot clear zone. 
c.  The above notwithstanding, multifamily developments and all developments along Dogwood Drive shall provide a minimum five-foot landscape zone and a minimum six-foot clear zone. 
(b)  Supplemental area and fence standards. 
1.  Developments shall locate landscape supplemental areas adjacent to first-story residential uses and place a minimum of one tree every 50 feet in the supplemental area. See list of allowed trees in section 93-2-14. 

2.  Chain link fencing is not permitted in areas visible from a public right-of-way. 
3.  On all lots a fence, wall, curb or hedge between six and 48 inches in height is encouraged at the back of the required sidewalk, except at openings to access steps, drives or pedestrian walkways. 
4.  Fences adjacent to the street shall be picket-wood, stone, composite materials or ornamental metal, with the finished side facing the street. 
5.  Retaining walls adjacent to the required sidewalk shall not exceed 32 inches in height unless required by topography. 
6.  All street-facing walls shall be faced with stone, brick, or smooth stucco. 
7.  Small planting between retaining walls and the required sidewalk are encouraged and should have a minimum width of six inches. 
(c)  Utility standards. 
1.  Mechanical features shall not be located in the supplemental area or front yard and shall be screened from view from any park or along any public right-of-way with planting, walls or fences of equal or greater height. Acceptable materials for screening shall include those materials found in subsection (f)1., provided they are compatible with the principal structure. 

2.  When located on rooftops, mechanical features shall be incorporated in the design of the building and screened with materials similar to the building. 
3.  Street lights may be provided by the developer in an effort to maintain a safe, walkable and well-lit public area throughout the city; pedestrian-scale street lights as approved by the DRC and the department of community services shall be provided by the developer, subject to site plan and design review in new development. 

4.  All developments shall provide a light at the front door. Lighting designed to illuminate the path to the front door is allowed. Spotlighting may be provided as long as it is properly shielded and does not become an annoyance to adjacent property owners or the public. General area illumination with oversized flood lights is prohibited. Specifically, lighting shall be shielded so that the source of light is not visible from adjacent properties or the public right-of-way. 
5.  Trees shall not be planted directly above storm drains. 
(d)  Parking and traffic standards. 
1.  One-family detached dwellings and two-family dwellings shall meet the following requirements: 

a.  Driveways shall have a minimum width of nine feet and a maximum width of 15 feet. 
b.  Circular drives are permitted. 
c.  A grass strip in the middle of driveways is encouraged. 
2.  All other buildings shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  Parcels are permitted a maximum of one driveway curb cut per street. In cases where a property abuts multiple streets the total number of curb cuts or portions thereof may be allocated to a single street. 
b.  Driveways shall have a maximum width of 12 feet for one-way and 24 feet for two-way. 
c.  Two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall be counted as one curb cut. 
d.  Public or private alleys, or driveway providing vehicular access to two or more parcels shall not constitute a curb cut. 
e.  New public streets shall not count as curb cuts. 
f.  Parcels are permitted a maximum of one driveway curb cut per street frontage. In cases where a property abuts multiple streets the total number of curb cuts or portions thereof may be allocated to a single street. 
3.  Carports are only permitted subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Carports shall be located in the rear or side yard, but shall not be visible from a public right-of-way. 
b.  Carport roofs shall be supported by columns with a minimum width and depth of eight inches. 
c.  The base of carport columns shall be faced in stacked brick or stacked stone to a minimum height of three feet above grade. 

4.  On-site parking shall be prohibited in the supplemental areas. This shall not be interpreted as restricting on-street parking located along a public street. 
5.  Garage access on single-family lots shall be prohibited in the front yard of the home. 
(e)  Roof and chimney standards. 
1.  Principal building roofs for one-family detached dwellings shall have a minimum usable life of thirty (30) years, per manufacturer's warranty. 
2.  Roof shingles shall be slate, cedar, or asphalt. 
3.  Roof tiles shall be clay, terra cotta or concrete. 
4.  Metal roofs are: 
a.  Permitted on one-family and two-family detached dwellings if approved by the design review committee; and 
b.  Permitted on multifamily and townhouse dwellings only when screened from the adjacent street by a parapet wall. 
5.  Gutters shall be copper, aluminum or galvanized steel. 
6.  Downspouts shall match gutters in material and finish. 
7.  Roof forms shall be based on architectural style. 
8.  All roofs, excluding dormers, shall overhang a minimum of 12 inches beyond the facade. 
9.  Dormers are permitted on all style homes (unless specified), but shall not be taller than the main roof to which they are attached. 
10.  Chimneys exposed to the public view may not be faced in wood or cement based siding and may not be of an exposed metal or ceramic pipe. All chimneys shall be wrapped in a brick, stone or suitable masonry finish material. 
11.  Chimneys on exterior building walls shall begin at grade. 
12.  Chimneys shall begin at grade and be faced with brick or stacked stone; extend chimneys between three and six feet above the roof line. 
(f)  Street facing facade and style standards. 
1.  Exterior facade materials shall be limited to: 
a.  Full-depth brick; 
b.  Natural or cast stone; 
c.  Smooth natural-wood siding and/or cement-based siding; 
d.  Shake siding; 
e.  Painted fish-scale style shingles, but only when used in front gables; 
f.  True, smooth hard-coat stucco, provided that its use is limited to gables of Tudor revival-style buildings. 
2.  Exterior building materials shall not be: 
a.  Simulated brick veneer, such as Z-Brick; 
b.  Exterior insulation and finish systems (EIFS); 
c.  Exposed concrete block; 
d.  Metal siding or other metal exterior treatment; 
e.  Glass curtain walls; 
f.  Liquid vinyl; 
g.  T-1-11 siding; 

h.  Vinyl siding, except that existing one-family detached homes with vinyl siding covering more than 70 percent of the exterior facade may replace said siding or construct an addition faced in vinyl siding. 
3.  Facade materials shall be combined horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. 
4.  Blank, windowless walls are prohibited along all facades. See subsection 81-1-7(g)11. 
5.  Foundations shall be constructed as a distinct building element that contrasts with facade materials. Foundations that are exposed above the ground, must be parged with cement, stuccoed over or be faced in brick, natural stone, or cast stone. 

6.  All exterior stair risers visible from a street shall be enclosed. 
7.  Porches, stoops, and balconies may be located in the front or side yard. 
8.  Porches, stoops, and balconies along front and side building facades shall not be enclosed with screens, plastics, or other materials that hinder visibility and/or natural air flow. 
9.  Porches, stoops, and balconies shall be made of painted or stained wood, stone, brick, or ornamental metal, subject to the additional restrictions below. 
10.  Wooden porches, stoops, and balconies shall provide top and bottom horizontal members on railings. The top railing shall consist of two elements. The upper element shall measure two [inches] by six inches and the lower element shall measure two [inches] by four inches. The bottom railing shall measure two [inches] by four inches. 
11.  Front porches and front stoops of principal buildings shall face and be parallel to the front lot line or build-to line. 
12.  Porch and stoop foundations shall be enclosed. 
13.  Front and side porches and stoops shall not have unpainted, unstained or otherwise untreated or exposed pressure treated lumber along the building line that abuts a public right-of-way. 
14.  Balconies shall have not less than two clear unobstructed open or partially open sides. Partially open is to be constructed as 50 percent open or more. The total combined length of the open or partially open sides shall exceed 50 percent of the total balcony perimeter. 
15.  Stoops and porch[es] shall be a minimum of two feet and a maximum of four feet from grade to the top of the stairs, unless existing topography is greater. 
16.  Stoops shall provide a minimum top landing of four feet by four feet. 
17.  Stoop stairs and landings shall be of similar width. 
18.  Stoops may be covered or uncovered. 
19.  When provided, porches shall have a minimum clear depth of eight feet from building facade to outside face of column. 
20.  Front porch widths shall be between 80 percent and 100 percent of the adjacent facade. 
21.  Side porch widths (including wraparound porches) shall be between 25 percent and 100 percent of the adjacent facade. 
22.  Enfronting porches may have multistory verandas, living space, or balconies above. 
23.  Porch columns shall be spaced a maximum distance of eight feet on center. 
24.  Front porch columns shall have foundation piers extending to grade. 
25.  All porches shall be covered. 
26.  Enfronting balconies are only permitted on attached or detached one-family home facades when porches are not provided on said facades. 

27.  Enfronting balconies shall have a minimum clear depth of four feet. 
28.  Enfronting balcony widths shall be between 25 percent and 100 percent of the adjacent facade. 
29.  Balconies may be covered or uncovered. 
(g)  Door and window standards. 
1.  The main entry door to enfronting principal buildings shall face, be visible from, and be accessible from the adjacent public sidewalk. 
2.  The main entry door to all uses shall be linked to the sidewalk via a pedestrian walkway or wheelchair access. 
3.  Building numbers at least six inches in height shall be located above or beside the street-facing pedestrian entrance, or above or beside the stairs accessing a front porch. 
4.  Doors that operate as sliders are prohibited along enfronting facades. 
5.  Window panes shall be recessed a minimum of three inches and a maximum of eight inches from the adjacent facade, except on frame houses, on which panes shall be recessed a minimum of two inches. 
6.  Where windows lights are utilized they shall be true divided lights, simulated divided lights, or one-over-one lights. Grids-between-glass (GBGs) are prohibited. 
7.  Window trim shall not be flush with the exterior facade and shall provide a minimum relief of one-quarter inch or greater. 
8.  Where used, window shutters shall match one-half the width of the window opening. 
9.  Painted window or door glass is prohibited. 
10.  Enfronting windows and door glass (except on churches and fire stations) shall utilize clear glass or tinted glass. Tinted glass shall have a transmittance factor of 50 percent or greater and shall have a visible light reflectance factor of ten or less. 
11.  Windows shall be provided for a minimum of thirty (30) percent and a maximum of 50 percent of the total street-facing facade of the principal building, with each facade and story calculated independently. 

12.  Street-facing window units shall not exceed 28 square feet with minimum height of three feet, with the exception of transoms and fan lights. 
13.  Wood trim between four and six inches wide shall surround windows of wood frame structures. Windows grouped together shall have center mullions two inches wider than the side trim. 
14.  Sills shall be of masonry, wood, stone, cast stone, or terra cotta. 
(h)  Detached one-family dwellings/two-family dwellings. In addition to the requirements of subsections (a) through (g), the following shall apply to detached one-family dwellings and two-family dwellings. 
1.  First stories. First stories shall be elevated above the grade between two and four feet, unless existing topography is greater or unless wheelchair access is desired and cannot be provided from the side or rear. 
2.  Window sills. Enfronting first story window sills should be no less than two and one-half feet and no more than three and one-half feet above finished floor elevation. 
3.  Wheelchair access. Where practical, wheelchair access, when provided, should be installed at the side or rear of the home in order to preserve the architectural character of the primary facade. 
4.  Architectural style. Architecture is one of the most critical components of place, and nowhere is this more evident than on building facades. The design and character of street-facing facades is a reflection of both buildings and their users, and must be carefully considered for its impact on the overall sense of place. 
New homes in the neighborhood conservation area should be designed to reflect the principal traditional styles found in the community. These include national folk, Queen Anne, ranch, Tudor revival, craftsman, and minimal traditional styles. 
These styles, however, do not reflect the only styles historically found in Hapeville, which also includes a few occurrences of neocolonial revival. Where an applicant desires to utilize a style historically found in Hapeville, but not reflected in the six principal styles identified in subsections (4)a. through (4)e., they shall provide the design review committee with photo documentation of the relevant style in Hapeville, a description of the key features of such style, and written justification of such style's appropriateness for the community. 

a.  National folk. National folk homes may include: 
i.  A building footprint that is rectangular, square, or "L-shaped," with the end of the short leg of the "L" facing a street. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of 30 and a maximum pitch of 45 degrees from horizontal, with roof lines running parallel or perpendicular to the street. 
iii.  Exposed roof rafters where roofs overhang or boxes soffit. 
iv.  Gable vents having a minimum size of one foot by one foot along all gables facing a public street. 
v.  Symmetrical front facade for buildings with rectangular footprints. 
vi.  No dormers. 
vii.  Equal height windows along a single floor. 
viii.  Windows that are taller than they are wide. 
ix.  A front porch usually extending the entire width of the building, except where an "L-shaped" footprint is provided, in which case said requirement does not apply to the short-leg of the "L." Said porch shall include turned columns, turned balusters, handrails, and optional lace-like spandrels. 

b.  Queen Anne. Queen Anne homes may include: 
i.  A square or rectangular building footprint. 
ii.  Pyramidal or gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of 30 and a maximum pitch of 45 degrees from horizontal, with roof lines running parallel or perpendicular to the street. 
iii.  Painted fish-scale style shingles used in front gables. 
iv.  Enclosed roof rafters where roofs overhang. 
v.  Varied, but primarily equal, height windows along a single floor. 
vi.  A first-story bay made up of individual window units. 
vii.  Windows that are taller than they are wide. 
viii.  Asymmetrical front facade. 
ix.  A front porch extending the entire width of the building. Said porch shall include rounded, unfluted columns or spun columns not less than eight inches thick and flanked by tracery where the column supports the porch roof. They shall also include rounded balusters and square or rectangular handrails. 

c.  Craftsman. Craftsman homes may include: 
i.  A rectangular building footprint, with the short end facing a street. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of 20 and a maximum pitch of 40 degrees from horizontal and with roof lines running parallel or perpendicular to the street. 
iii.  Decorative beams, brackets or braces under gables. 
iv.  Exposed roof rafters where roofs overhang. 
v.  Optional dormers. 
vi.  Windows that are taller than they are wide. 
vii.  Equal height windows along a single floor. 
viii.  Symmetrical or asymmetrical front facade. 
ix.  A front porch extending the entire width of the building or with a width of one-half of the building. Said porch shall include square columns that taper from bottom to top, but are not less than eight inches thick. Said columns shall be set atop stone or masonry bases extended to the ground. They may include optional square or rectangular balusters and handrails. 

d.  Tudor revival. Tudor revival homes may include: 
i.  A rectangular building footprint, with the short end facing a street. 
ii.  Steeply pitched roof, usually side-gabled and with facade dominated by one or more prominent cross gables. 
iii.  Decorative half-timbering present on about half of examples. 
iv.  Tall and narrow windows, usually in multiple groups and with multi-pane glazing. 
v.  Massive chimneys commonly crowned by decorative chimney pots. 
vi.  Asymmetrical front facade. 

e.  Ranch homes. Ranch homes shall include: 
i.  No more than one story as measured closest to the primary building line and excluding basements. 
ii.  A building footprint that is rectangular or "L-shaped," with the end of the short leg of the "L" facing a street. 
iii.  Hipped or gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of 15 and a maximum pitch of 35 degrees from horizontal, with roof lines running parallel to the street. 
iv.  Enclosed roof rafters where roofs overhang. No dormers. 
v.  Varied, but primarily equal, height windows along a single floor. 
vi.  A symmetrical or asymmetrical front facade. 
vii.  No front porch. 

f.  Minimal traditional (Cape Cod). Minimal traditional homes shall include: 
i.  A rectangular building footprint. 
ii.  Gabled roofs having gables with a minimum pitch of 20 and a maximum pitch of 45 degrees from horizontal, with roof lines running parallel to the street. 
iii.  Enclosed roof rafters where roofs overhang. 
iv.  Varied, but primarily equal, height windows along a single floor. 

v.  A symmetrical or asymmetrical front facade. 
vi.  Windows that are taller than they are wide. 
vii.  Covered stoops. 
viii.  No front porch. 

g.  Multifamily/townhome. In addition to the requirements of subsections a. through f. of this section, the following shall apply to detached one-family attached (townhome) or multifamily buildings. 
i.  Front facades. Individual front facades within 15 feet of the front lot line shall have no more than two corners, excluding bay windows, porches or stoops, subject to transitional height plane requirements. 
ii.  Front setbacks; facades. No more than three adjacent one-family attached dwelling units shall have the same front setback or have identical facades. 
iii.  Landscape buffers. A continuous off right-of-way landscape buffer with a minimum width of ten feet shall be provided between parking and the adjacent sidewalk. This requirement shall also apply when existing sidewalks not meeting this requirement are repaired. 
iv.  Architectural style. Because Hapeville has no historic precedents for townhomes or multifamily buildings the following guidelines shall apply: 
1)  Multifamily buildings with three or less units shall be designed to resemble a one-family detached home. 
2)  Primary roof forms shall be flat, pyramidal, side-gabled or shed. Shed roofs shall be concealed with parapets along the street frontage. 
3)  No more than three adjacent one-family attached units shall have the same roof form. 
4)  The minimum slope for gabled or hipped roof forms shall be 8:12. 
h.  Outbuildings. In conventional development, outbuildings are often designed and located as an afterthought. Yet in traditional towns and cities, outbuildings serve to enrich the quality of design through their placement, design and use. In Hapeville, where outbuildings are provided on many residential lots, their design must be to the same high standards found in the community's neighborhoods. 
The following standards shall apply to construction of new outbuildings in residential districts. 
i.  On lots with one street frontage, set outbuildings back at least 15 feet behind the front facade of the principal building. 
ii.  On corner lots, outbuildings should be setback at least 15 feet behind the front facade of the principal building and with a setback greater than or equal to that of the facade along the side lot line. 
iii.  Outbuilding may be linked to the principal building with covered walks, trellises or enclosed breezeway. 
iv.  Outbuildings shall be of compatible material and architectural style to the principal building. 
v.  Outbuildings shall have a minimum height of 14 feet and a maximum height of that of the principal building or 25 feet, whichever is less. 
vi.  Outbuildings shall be set a minimum of ten feet from any other outbuilding on adjoining lots. 
(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 1, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 2014-10 , § 4, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05 , § 3, 5-19-2015; Ord. No. 2016-26 , § 1, 11-1-2016) 
Sec. 81-1-8. - RSD and RMU zoned developments. 
    Based on goals of this chapter, the following variations from and additions to these standards shall apply to sites zoned "Regionally Significant Development (RSD) and Residential Mixed Use (RMU)". Due to their size, and the opportunity to create self-contained "mini-cities" that this provides, these sites have an option to establish architecturally unique identities that may or may not reflect those of other parts of Hapeville. This is particularly true for those with mid-rise buildings, big box retail, convention center, warehouses, and telecommunication centers, which are not envisioned by the standards in section 81-1-6. 

(a)  General standards. 
(1)  The requirements of section 81-1-6 shall apply except as herein noted or varied by design exception. Where a conflict exists between sections 81-1-6 and 81-1-8, the requirements of 81-1-8 shall prevail. 
(2)  The requirements herein shall apply to all public and private streets. Exemptions to the requirements of section 81-1-6 relating to supplemental zones 
(3)  For master planned developments in excess of 30 acres, the Hapeville Architectural Design Standards may be substituted with independent architectural design standards, provided the substituted regulations are consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter, and subject to final approval by the design review committee. At a minimum, substitute design regulations shall include site development standards, utility standards, parking and traffic standards, and general facade standards, including but not limited to exterior materials, architectural themes, and street-level facade treatments. In the absence of these required elements, the minimum architectural standards will default to sections 81-1-6 and 81-1-8 respectively. 
(b)  Parking and traffic standards. Circular drives are permitted on new streets. 
(c)  Standards for low-rise buildings. See subsection (d)(1) for big box retail, conference/convention centers, warehouses, and telecommunication or data centers. 
(1)  Buildings four (4) stories of less are deemed low-rise. 
(2)  Standards for stories one and two: 
a.  Exterior materials shall be limited as follows: 

i.  Within 20 feet of public street rights-of-way or twenty (20) feet of the sidewalk along a private street: glass (except glass block), full-depth brick, cast stone, hard coat stucco, fiber cement siding, natural wood siding or stacked stone. 
ii.  Other locations: The above materials, plus half-depth brick and split-face block. 
(3)  Standards for stories three and four. 
a.  Exterior facade materials shall be limited to: glass (except glass block), metal, brick, simulated brick, precast concrete panels, cast stone, hard coat stucco, fiber cement siding, natural wood siding, stacked stone, half-depth brick, or split-face block. 
b.  There shall be no minimum recess distance from the facade for window panes serving commercial uses. 
c.  Windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width. 
d.  Building floors shall not appear as single horizontal window bands separated by nonglass spandrels of equal or greater height than the windows. 
e.  Windows may utilize clear or tinted glass. Tinted glass may have any transmittance or light reflectance factor. 
(d)  Mid-rise building design standards. 
(1)  Buildings taller than four (4) stories are deemed midrise. 
(2)  Mid-rises shall have two- or three-part facades: 
a.  A two-part facade consists of: 
i.  A "base" zone (the lower stories); 
ii.  A "shaft" zone (all other floors). 
iii.  Zones may be differentiated by a change in facade materials, window pattern, or window material. They may also be separated by a cornice or expression line. 
b.  A three-part facade consists of: 
i.  A "base" zone (the lower stories); 
ii.  A "shaft" zone (middle stories); 
iii.  A "cap" zone (upper stories or cornice which provides a termination at the building top). 
iv.  Zones may be differentiated by a change in materials, window pattern, or window material. They may also be separated by a cornice or expression line. 
c.  Facade materials shall be arranged horizontally, with materials having a more visually heavy appearance placed below lighter ones. No more than two different materials or colors shall be used per facade zone. 
(e)  Big box retail, conference/convention centers, warehouse, telecommunication, and data center design standards. 
(1)  Big box retail, conference/convention centers, warehouse, and telecommunication or data centers shall comply with: 
a.  The requirements of subsection 81-1-8(c) "Low-rise buildings," or 
b.  The following requirements along each exterior facade visible from a public street, private street, private drive, or parking lot: 
i.  Materials shall be limited to: glass (except glass block), metal, brick, simulated brick, precast concrete panels, cast stone, hard coat stucco, fiber cement siding, natural wood siding, stacked stone, half-depth brick, or split-face block. 
ii.  Facade materials shall be combined only horizontally, with the heavier below the lighter. 
iii.  A minimum of 30 percent of the facade area shall be glass. Such glass shall allow visibility into the building a minimum depth of five feet. Display windows shall count towards this requirement. 
iv.  Facades over 100 feet in length shall incorporate wall projections or recesses a minimum of five feet in depth and a minimum of 20 contiguous feet in length per 100 feet of facade length. The combined length of said recesses and projections shall constitute more than 20 percent but less than thirty (40) percent of the total facade length. 

(Ord. No. 2008-19, § 1, 2-17-2009) 
Chapter 84 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE 2 - INSPECTION AND PERMIT FEES 

Sec. 84-2-1. - Fee schedule. 
    The mayor and council shall annually adopt by resolution an inspection and permit schedule of fees. The schedule shall be adopted within the month of December each year for the following calendar year unless the deadline is otherwise extended by the governing authority. The schedule shall be maintained at the city clerk's office and/or the office of the director of community services and upon adoption shall be a part of and incorporated into this Code as if fully set out herein. 
(Code 1981, § 8-2-81; Ord. No. 99-17, § 2, 10-5-1999) 
ARTICLE 3. - TECHNICAL CODES 

Sec. 84-3-1. - State minimum standard codes adopted. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts and incorporates by reference, as if set out at length herein, the latest editions of the state minimum standard codes enumerated in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B), as adopted and amended by the department of community affairs (hereinafter referred to as the "state minimum standard codes"). 
(b)  All buildings and structures of every kind or character erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the state minimum standard codes, and no permit shall be issued for the erection, building, repair, renovation or expansion of any building or structure of any kind unless the same to be erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in the city shall be erected, built, repaired, renovated or expanded in accordance with the state minimum standard codes. 
(c)  At least one copy of each of the state minimum standard codes shall be kept on file in the office of the community services director of the city. 
(d)  Where reference is made in the state minimum standard codes to the duties of certain officials named therein, the designated official of the city who has duties corresponding to those of the named official in the state minimum standard codes shall be deemed to be the responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the state minimum standard codes is concerned. 
(Ord. No. 2002-01, § 1, 1-8-2002) 
Sec. 84-3-2. - Fire codes adopted. 
    International Residential Code (IRC) for One- and Two-Family Dwelling, 2006 edition, with Georgia amendments, specifically excluding section(s), entitled Smoke Detectors. The following regulations pertaining to smoke detectors, previously contained in the IRC One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code: 
(a)  Smoke detectors required. Smoke detectors shall be installed in every sleeping room, outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and on each additional story of the dwelling, including basements and cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings or dwelling units with split levels, a smoke detector need be installed only on the upper level, provided the lower level is less than one full story below the upper level, except that if there is a door between levels, then a detector is required on each level. All detectors shall be interconnected such that the actuation of one alarm will actuate all the alarms in the individual unit and shall provide an alarm which will be audible in all sleeping areas. All detectors shall be approved and listed and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(b)  Fire safety code. International Fire Code (IFC), 2006 edition, with Georgia amendments. 
(Ord. No. 2007-14, § 2, 8-7-2007; Ord. No. 2008-01, § 2, 2-5-2008) 
Sec. 84-3-3. - Adoption of International Property Maintenance Code. 
(a)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, is adopted for use by the city. 
(b)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, is hereby made a public record of the city. 
(c)  The International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, shall be found in the office of the city clerk and in the community services department. These same regulations shall be accessed by the public through these sources. 
(d)  Subsection (c) above constitutes public notice of the accessibility of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 11-2-2004) 
Sec. 84-3-4. - Local revision to International Property Maintenance Code. 
    The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2003 edition, are hereby revised to read as follows: 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of City of Hapeville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall as indicated in the schedule set out pursuant to Section 8-2-81 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
Section 302.4 Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of six (6) inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants, and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Section 304.3 Premises identification. Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals and/or alphabetic letters. Letters and numbers shall be a minimum of two (2) inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch.. 
Section 304.14 Insect screens. During the period from January to December, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm) and every swinging door shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other approved means, such air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
Section 602.3 Heat supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory, or guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September to May to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° (18° C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. 
Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September to May to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F (18° C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
(Ord. No. 2004-19, § 1, 11-2-2004) 
ARTICLE 4. - BOARDING UP BUILDINGS. 

Sec. 84-4-1. - Boarding-up permits. 
(a)  No person, firm, association or corporation shall erect, install, place, or maintain boards over the doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or otherwise secure such openings by a means other than the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure without first obtaining a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with this article. Any properties with boards existing at the time of the adoption of this article will have 60 days from the date of the ordinance's adoption to submit an application to the department of community services for a permit to continue to board. 
(b)  The department of community services is authorized to prepare the necessary application forms for a boarding-up permit which shall include the owner's name, address and telephone number; the name, address and telephone number of any other responsible party or local representative of the owner; the common address of the property as well as the tax map, map block and parcel tax identification. The department of community services is further authorized to establish a fee schedule so as to enable the city to offset its reasonable expenses in reviewing the application and monitoring the boarding-up process. 
(c)  The department of community services may issue a boarding-up permit only upon satisfaction that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Submission of a written application by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative; 
(2)  Payment of the required fee by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative; 
(3)  Confirmation through inspection by code enforcement that the building, structure, and/or lot is in compliance with all applicable code requirements; and 
(4)  Submission of a written statement of plan by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative specifying: 
a.  The length of time the owner expects the boarding up to continue; and 
b.  The proposed rehabilitation, maintenance, improvements, and/or demolition to be made to the property so as to make it suitable for its intended use 
A boarding-up permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall authorize the boarding up or other securing of a building or structure for a period of three months. 
(d)  An owner of a property desiring to continue to board his/her property beyond the three-month term authorized by subsection (c) must submit a written application to the mayor and council 15 business days prior to the expiration of his/her boarding-up permit. The mayor and council may authorize the owner of the property to continue to board for a period of time of its discretion only upon satisfaction that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A showing by the owner of the property that failure to grant the additional time to board would result in exceptional hardship to the owner of the property; 
(2)  Payment of the required fee by the owner of the property or his/her authorized representative; 
(3)  Confirmation through inspection by code enforcement that the building, structure, and/or lot is in compliance with all applicable code requirements; and 
(4)  Confirmation through inspection by code enforcement that the boarding up or other method of securing the building or structure is in compliance with section 84-4-2. 
(e)  No boarding-up permit shall be required to board up a building or structure for up to 30 days in the event of a temporary emergency situation, including, but not limited to, damage caused by vandalism, theft or weather and hurricane preparation. In the event an emergency situation requires a building or structure to be boarded up for more than 30 days, the owner of the building or structure or his/her authorized representative must obtain a valid boarding-up permit in accordance with subsection 84-4-1(c). 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 4-7-2009) 
Sec. 84-4-2. - Standards for securing building or structure. 
(a)  The boarding of doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, shall be according to the specifications approved by the building official. 
(b)  All boarded openings shall be painted with a minimum of two coats of exterior paint, which is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 4-7-2009) 
Sec. 84-4-3. - Fines and penalties. 
    Any person who is convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with section 1-1-8 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. Every day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Fines assessed pursuant to this article shall be recoverable from the owner and shall be a lien on the property. 
    If the owner fails to appear at any hearing scheduled in regard to a citation issued pursuant to this article, the city is authorized to proceed to secure the building or structure so that it will not become open to the general public. The amount of the cost of such work shall be a lien against the real property and shall be subject to collection by fi. fa. and execution. 
(Ord. No. 2009-03, § 1, 4-7-2009) 
ARTICLE 5. - FENCES 

Sec. 84-5-1. - General fence regulations. 
    Barbed wire, concertina wire, razor wire, and electrified fencing are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 2015-05 , § 4, 5-19-2015) 
Chapter 85 - ACOUSTICAL STANDARDS 

Sec. 85-1-1. - Acoustical standards adopted. 
    These regulations shall apply to all new residential and commercial construction in areas east of Atlanta Avenue, south of South Central Avenue, and northeast of Airport Loop Road, hereby referred as the "noise attenuation district" within the city limits of the City of Hapeville, Georgia, in existence upon adoption of this chapter. Additionally, minimum acoustical standards must be met in areas which lie at or above the Federal Aviation Administration ("FAA") approved 65 day-night average sound level (DNL) contour line as such areas are designated on the date of adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide sound insulation regulations for all new residential and commercial construction within the city in areas set out in section 85-1-1. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Airport means any public use airport, including heliports, as defined by the Aviation Safety and Noise Abatement Act of 1979 (ASNA), including: 
(a)  Any airport which is used or to be used for public purposes, under the control of a public agency, the landing area of which is publicly owned; 
(b)  Any privately owned reliever airport; and 
(c)  Any privately owned airport which is determined by the secretary of transportation to enplane annually 2,500 or more passengers and receive scheduled passenger service of aircraft, which is used or to be used for public purposes. 
    Airport noise compatibly program means that program, and all revisions thereto, reflected in documents (and revised documents) developed in accordance with 14 CFR part 150, et seq. including the measures proposed or taken by the airport operator to reduce existing incompatible land uses and to prevent the introduction of additional incompatible land uses within the area. 
    Background sound level means the total sound pressure level in the area of interest excluding the noise source of interest. 
    Commercial area means a group of commercial facilities and the abutting public right-of-way and public property. 
    Commercial property means any premises, property, or facility involving traffic in goods or furnishing of services for sale or profit, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Banking and other financial institutions; 
(b)  Dining establishments; 
(c)  Establishments for providing retail or wholesale services; 
(d)  Establishments for recreation and entertainment; 
(e)  Office buildings; 
(f)  Transportation; and 
(g)  Warehouses. 
    Compatible use means suitable application relative to a specific context, i.e. compatible with a residential neighborhood, compatible with a business district, or, in the case of proximity to an airport, compatible with an environment that has aircraft noise exposure. 
    dBA means an A-weighted unit of sound level. 
    Daytime hours means the hours between 7:01 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
    Decibel (dB) means the unit of measurement for a sound pressure level and is equal to ten times the common logarithm of the ratio of two like quantities (see "sound pressure level"). 
    DNL (day-night average sound level) is a noise metric, a single-number descriptor, that accounts for the magnitude and duration of single noise events, the frequency of occurrence of single noise events, and the time-day or night-of single noise events. It is a weighted energy average. Each single event occurring between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. has a ten-dB penalty added to it; each one event is effectively counted as ten events of equal magnitude and duration. 
    Equivalent sound level (Leq) means the nonvarying sound level that would contain the equivalent amount of energy as a varying sound level. Note that Leq can be weighted or unweighted and can be integrated over durations ranging from less than a second to many hours. The notation should indicate weighting used and duration, e.g., 85 dBA Leq (six minutes) is an A-weighted decibel equivalent sound level, integrated over a six-minute period. 
    FAA means Federal Aviation Administration. 
    14 CFR part 150 means Code of Federal Regulations, subchapter 1, Airports, part 150, Airport noise compatibility planning. 
    Incompatible land use means the use of land that is identified under this chapter as normally not compatible with the outdoor noise environment (or an adequately attenuated noise reduction level for the indoor activities involved at the location) because the yearly day-night average sound level is above that identified for that or similar use under appendix A (table 1) of FAR 150. 
    Industrial facility means any activity and its related premises, property, facilities, or equipment involving the fabrication, manufacture, or production of durable or nondurable goods. 
    Maximum sound level (Lmax) means the peak sound pressure level a noise event. 
    Multidwelling-unit building means any building wherein there are two or more dwelling units. 
    Municipality means the City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
    Nighttime hours means the hours between 10:00 p.m. of any given day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
    Noise means any sound of such level and duration as to be or tend to be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or property throughout the city or in any portion thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a place of employment. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound that endangers the health, safety or welfare of any person, is detrimental to the peaceful enjoyment of private property, or endangers personal or real property. 
    Noise exposure map means a scaled, geographic depiction of an airport, its noise contours, and surrounding area developed in accordance with section A150.101 of appendix A of FAR (Federal Aviation Regulations) 150, including the accompanying documentation setting forth the required descriptions of forecast aircraft operations at the airport during the fifth calendar year beginning after submission of the map, together with the ways, if any, those operations will affect the map (including noise contours and the forecast land uses). 
    Noise level reduction (NLR) means the amount of noise level reduction in decibels achieved through incorporation of noise attenuation (between outdoor and indoor levels) in the design and construction of a structure. 
    Plainly audible means any sound produced by a noise source, which can be heard by any person at prescribed distances. Measurement standards shall be the auditory sense, based upon direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and low frequency sound reverberations are included. 
    Public property means any real property or structures thereon that is owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public right-of-away means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway sidewalk, or alley that is leased, owned, or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Residential area means a group of residential properties and the abutting rights-of-way public property. 
    Residential property means property used for human habitation, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Private property used for human habitation; 
(b)  Commercial living accommodations and commercial property used for human habitation; 
(c)  Recreational and entertainment property used for human habitation; and 
(d)  Community service property used for human habitation. 
    STC means sound transmission class. 
    Sound level per ASTM C 634) means a sound pressure level obtained using a signal to which standard weighting has been applied. 
    Sound pressure level (SPL) means the ratio in decibels of the square of the root mean square sound pressure divided by the square of the standard reference sound pressure of 20/gmPa. Mathematically, this is expressed as 10 * log p2/P2 ref,= 20 * log P/P ref, P ref, = 20/gmPa. 
    Weekday means the time period of each week that begins at 11:00 p.m. on each Sunday and ends at 5:00 p.m. on each Friday. 
    Weekend means the time period of each week that begins at 5:00 p.m. on each Friday and ends at 11:00 p.m. on each Sunday. 
    YDNL means the yearly day-night average sound level (see DNL above), i.e., an average annual day. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-4. - Acoustical standards. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to construct in the "noise attenuation district," any new building for "R3" occupancy as that term is defined in the International Building Code 2003, section 310, residential group R, subsection 310.1. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct in areas that exceed FAA-approved 65 DNL contour levels, any new building for residential occupancy unless a minimum 20 Db noise level reduction (NLR), outdoor to indoor is achieved. Conformance with this subsection shall be obtained either through adherence to the standards detailed in sections 85-1-5 through and including 85-1-12 or through a certification by an acoustical engineer that a minimum 20 Db NLR, outdoor to indoor will be achieved through the proper application of materials and methods specified by said acoustical engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 1, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 85-1-5. - Compliance. 
    Compliance with the following standards shall be deemed to meet the requirements of the compatible-use noise zones in which an NLR 30 is specified. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  All exterior walls shall be constructed airtight. All joints shall be grouted or caulked airtight. 
(2)  At the penetration of exterior walls by pipes, ducts, or conduits, the space between the wall and pipes, ducts, or conduits shall be caulked at the pipe duct or conduit or filled with mortar to the wall. 
(3)  Window and/or through-the-wall ventilation or air-conditioning units shall not be used. 
(4)  Operational vented fireplaces shall not be used. 
(5)  All sleeping spaces shall be provided with either a sound-absorbing ceiling or a carpeted floor. 
(6)  Through-the-wall/door mail slots shall not be used. 
(7)  Skylights are permitted provided they meet window requirements in section 85-1-7. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-12, § 2, 7-17-2007) 
Sec. 85-1-6. - Exterior walls. 
(a)  Exterior walls other than as described below shall have a laboratory sound transmission class (STC) rating of at least 44. 
(b)  At least one surface of concrete block walls shall be plastered or painted with heavy "bridging" paint. 
(c)  Stud walls shall be at least four inches in nominal depth and shall be finished on the outside with siding-on-sheathing, masonry composite siding, stucco, or brick. For the purposes of this code, all brick must be at least four inches thick. 
(1)  Interior surface of the exterior walls shall be of gypsum board or plaster at least five-eighths inch thick, installed on the studs. The gypsum board or plaster may be fastened rigidly to the studs if the exterior is brick or stucco. If the exterior is siding-on-sheathing, the interior gypsum board or plaster must be fastened resiliently to the studs. 
(2)  If the exterior is masonry composite siding, one-inch-thick sound-deadening insulation board shall be additionally installed. 
(3)  Continuous composition board, OSB sheathing, plywood, or gypsum board, or plaster sheathing at least one inch [thick] shall cover the exterior side of the wall studs behind wood, masonry composite siding, vinyl siding, metal siding, or any other kind of siding utilized. 
(4)  Sheathing panels shall be butted tightly and covered on the exterior with overlapping building paper. The top and bottom edges of the sheathing shall be sealed. 
(5)  Insulation material at least R-13 thick shall be installed continuously throughout the cavity space behind the exterior sheathing and between wall studs. Insulation shall be glass fiber or mineral wool. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-7. - Windows. 
    Windows other than as described in this section shall have a laboratory sound transmission class (STC) rating of at least 40. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-8. - Doors. 
    Doors, or door/storm assemblies, other than as described in this section, shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 40. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-9. - Roofs. 
(a)  Combined roof and ceiling construction other than described in this section and section 85-1-10 shall have a laboratory sound transmission class rating of at least STC 44. 
(b)  With an attic or rafter space at least six inches deep, and with a ceiling below, the roof shall consist of closely butted one-inch composition board, OSB sheathing, plywood, or gypsum board sheathing topped by roofing as required. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12, § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-10. - Ceilings. 
(a)  Gypsum board or plaster ceilings at least five-eighths-inch thick shall be provided where the roof complies with section 85-1-9 above. Ceilings shall be substantially airtight, with a minimum number of penetrations. For sleeping areas, the requirements of section 85-1-5 shall apply. 
(b)  Where roof construction is as described in section 85-1-9, the following applies for siding homes, provide one-inch resilient channel mounting and one layer of five-eighths-inch gypsum board, or three layers of gypsum board mounted directly. For stucco and brick homes, provide two layers five-eighths-inch gypsum board with direct mounting. 
(c)  Glass fiber or mineral wool insulation at least R-19 shall be provided above the ceiling between joists. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-11. - Floors. 
    The floor of the lowest occupied rooms shall be slab on fill, below grade or over a fully enclosed basement or crawlspace. All door and window openings in the fully enclosed basement shall be tightly fitted. If the basement is used as a habitable living area, the doors and windows must conform to the standards given above for these elements. All crawlspace vents must incorporate plywood backing plate or baffle, which prevents a clear line-of-sight from inside to outside without blocking airflow. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-12. - Ventilation. 
(a)  A mechanical ventilation system shall be installed that will provide the minimum air circulation and fresh-air supply requirements for various uses in occupied rooms without the need to open any windows, doors, or other openings to the exterior. 
(b)  Gravity vent openings in attic shall not exceed building code minimum in number and size. The openings shall be fitted with transfer ducts at least three feet in length containing internal sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall have a lined 90-degree (right-angle) bend in the duct such that there is no direct line of sight from the exterior through the duct in the attic. 
(c)  If a fan is used for forced ventilation, the attic inlet and discharge openings shall be fitted with sheet metal transfer ducts of at least 20-gauge steel, which shall be lined with one-inch-thick coated glass fiber, and shall be at least five feet long with at least one 90-degree (right-angle) bend. 
(d)  All vent ducts connecting the interior space to the outdoors shall contain at least a ten-foot length of internal sound-absorbing duct lining. Each duct shall be provided with a 90-degree (right-angle) bend in the duct such that there is no direct line-of-sight through the duct from the venting cross-section to the room-opening cross-section. Domestic range exhaust ducts to the outside shall be prohibited (see subsection (f)). 
(e)  Duct lining shall be coated glass fiber duct liner at least one inch thick. 
(f)  Range exhaust hoods should incorporate a filtered, air-recirculation system rather than ducting to the exterior. Other kitchen exhaust ducts to the exterior shall contain a baffle plate across the exterior termination that allows proper ventilation. The dimensions of the baffle plate should extend at least one diameter beyond the line of sight into the vent duct. The baffle plate shall be of the same material and thickness as the bent duct material. 
(g)  Building heating units with flues or combustion air vents shall be located in a closet or room closed off from the occupied space by doors. 
(h)  Doors between occupied space and mechanical equipment areas shall be solid core wood or 20-gauge steel metal at least one inch thick and shall be fully weather-stripped. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-13. - Substitution of materials. 
    Upon written application from any applicant for a permit under this chapter, the city building inspector may allow substitute materials ("substitute materials") in lieu of those required in subsection (b) above (the "required materials") so long as both of the following conditions are met: 
(a)  The substitute materials will have an STC rating equal to or greater than the STC rating of the required materials; and 
(b)  The city building inspector has been provided with documented manufacturers specifications demonstrating that the substitute materials will provide at least as much interior noise protection as the required materials. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Sec. 85-1-14. - Noise disclosure statement. 
    Prior to the issuance of a building permit for new residential construction or reconstruction where the total cost of improvements is 75 percent or more of the total assessed improvement value of the site, the owner must sign the city's noise disclosure statement. The noise disclosure statement acknowledges that the property is located at or above the FAA-approved 65 DNL contour level and signifies the owner's awareness of the associated Noise levels and that he/she understands that the property is not eligible to participate in any airport noise mitigation program now or in the future. The noise disclosure statement must be recorded in the Fulton County records as a rider to the deed by the owner of the property at the time of construction. The statement is available at the community services department. 
(Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1, 7-11-2006) 
Chapter 87 - PLANNING 
ARTICLE 2. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 87-2-1. - Planning commission created. 
    A planning commission, to be known as the Hapeville Planning Commission, is hereby created and established. 
(Code 1981, § 8-1-1) 
Sec. 87-2-2. - Membership; appointment; terms; vacancies. 
    The planning commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and council of the city for four-year staggered terms of office. Each member of the planning commission shall be a resident of the city at the time of appointment and for at least six months immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the planning commission. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. Except as provided in section 87-2-5, all members shall serve without compensation but may be paid for expenses in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1981, § 8-1-2; Ord. No. 86-4, 4-1-1986; Ord. No. 99-18, § 1, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 2009-13, § 3, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 87-2-3. - Organization; rules; staff; finances. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting and shall meet at the call of the chairman or when deemed necessary by a majority of the commission members. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(b)  The planning commission may appoint any employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with state agencies and city planners and other consultants for any services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Four members of the planning commission shall be required in order to have a quorum to transact business. The presence of the chairman of the planning commission is not required to constitute a quorum. The chairman shall only vote in matters concerning the planning commission in order to break tie votes. In the chairman's absence, a temporary chairperson shall be designated to direct the meeting. The temporary chairperson shall vote only in case of a tie vote. 
(Code 1959, § 2-42; Code 1981, § 8-1-3; Ord. No. 92-2, 4-7-1992; Ord. No. 99-18, § 2, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 87-2-4. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957. 
(Code 1981, § 8-1-4) 
Sec. 87-2-5. - Compensation. 
    Each member of the planning commission in attendance at a regularly advertised public hearing for the purpose of amending the zoning ordinance shall receive such compensation per member for each public hearing as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council, the same to be paid from the general funds of the city. 
(Code 1959, § 2-44; Code 1981, § 8-1-5) 
ARTICLE 3. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 87-3-1. - Appointment. 
    The board of appeals of the city is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. This board shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and council, the board members to be reimbursed for expenses as directed by the mayor and council. Each member of the board shall be a resident of the city at the time of appointment and for at least six months immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board. The members shall serve for overlapping terms of three years. No members shall hold any other public office or position, except that one member may also be a member of the planning commission. The board of appeals shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the conduct of its affairs. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-241; Ord. No. 99-18, § 3, 12-7-1999; Ord. No. 2009-13, § 4, 8-18-2009) 
Sec. 87-3-2. - Procedure. 
(a)  The board of appeals shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected and qualified. The board shall appoint a secretary, who may be a municipal official or a member of the planning commission. 
(b)  Meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at any other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and request the attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(c)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating same, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the building official and shall be of public record. 
(d)  Four members of the board of appeals shall be required in order to have a quorum to transact business. The presence of the chairman of the board of appeals is not required to constitute a quorum. The chairman shall only vote in matters concerning the board of appeals in order to break tie votes. In the chairman's absence, a temporary chairperson shall be designated to direct the meeting. The temporary chairperson shall vote only in case of a tie vote. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-242; Ord. No. 99-18, § 4, 12-7-1999) 
Sec. 87-3-3. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  Generally. The board of appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Variances. To authorize, upon appeal in specific cases, those variances from the provisions of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. A variance may be granted in any individual cases of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the board of appeals that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of this chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of this chapter. 
(b)  Use variance. A variance may not be granted for a use of land or building. Specifically, the board of appeals shall not have authority to permit by variance in any district a use of land or building not otherwise permitted in the district. Further, the board of appeals shall not have authority to permit by variance an increase in the density on any lots as permitted in the district regulations. 
(c)  Procedure for requesting a variance. Requests for a variance shall be filed in writing with the building official. Within ten days after receiving a request for a variance, the building official shall: 
(1)  Send the request, with any comments deemed necessary, to the board of appeals; and 
(2)  Cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property one or more signs, each of which shall be not less than 12 square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information as to the proposed change and the date and time of the public hearing before the board of appeals. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-243; Ord. No. 99-05, § 1, 4-6-1999) 
Sec. 87-3-4. - Action on appeals. 
    In exercising the above powers, the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determination of the building official, and to that end shall have all powers of the building official and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-244) 
Sec. 87-3-5. - Appeals; how taken. 
(a)  Appeals to the board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the building official or other city officials based on this chapter. 
(b)  These appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the building official and any other city official involved, and with the board of appeals, a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds therefor. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the board of appeals. 
(c)  When an appeal is for a variance, a payment to the city in the amount of $350.00 to defray the costs of processing and erection of signs for variances must accompany the notice of appeal filed with the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-245; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 87-4, 2-3-1987; Ord. No. 99-05, § 2, 4-6-1999; Ord. No. 2003-07, § 1, 3-4-2003) 
Sec. 87-3-6. - Public hearings on appeals. 
    The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to it, and give at least 15 days' public notice thereof, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent or attorney. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-246) 
Sec. 87-3-7. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the building official certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board of appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-247) 
Sec. 87-3-8. - Explanation of decisions. 
    On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the board of appeals, the board shall inform in writing the parties involved of its decisions and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-248) 
Chapter 90 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-11 , § 1, adopted October 7, 2014, amended chapter 90 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, chapter 90 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from the Code of 1981, §§ 8-4-1-8-4-6, and Ord. No. 2013-08, §§ 2, 3, adopted July 16, 2003. 
State Law reference- Authority of municipality to adopt and enforce subdivision regulations, Ga. Code Ann., Sec. 69-1214 et seq. 

Sec. 90-1-1. - Purpose, authority and jurisdiction. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  Land subdivision is the first step in the process of community development. Once land has been cut up into streets, lots and blocks and publicly recorded, the correction of defects is costly and difficult. Subdivision of land sooner or later becomes a public responsibility, in that roads and streets must be maintained and various public services customary to urban areas must be provided. The welfare of the entire community is thereby affected in many important respects. It is therefore to the interest of the public, the developer and the future owners that subdivisions be conceived, designed and developed in accordance with sound rules and proper minimum standards. 
(2)  The major street plan, of which certified copies were filed in the office of the city clerk and the following standards guiding the planning commission are designed to provide for the harmonious development of the area; to secure a coordinated layout and adequate provisions for traffic; and also to secure adequate provision for light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewer and other sanitary facilities. 
(b)  Authority. These subdivision regulations are adopted under the authority granted by the laws of the state. The planning commission has fulfilled the requirements set forth in state law as prerequisites to the adoption of these regulations. 
(c)  Jurisdiction. These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city as now or hereafter established. Within these regulations, the term "subdivision" shall mean the division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, sites or divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or building development, and includes resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. Any owner of land within this area wishing to subdivide land shall submit to the planning commission a plat of the subdivision according to the procedures outlined in section 90-1-2, which plat shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in section 90-1-3. Improvements shall be installed as required by section 90-1-4 of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11 , § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 90-1-2. - Procedure for plat approval. 
(a)  Preliminary plat preparation and submission. The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consists of the preparation and submittal of a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision to planning commission. 
(b)  Final plat preparation and submission. A final plat, including the required certificates, may be submitted to planning commission following approval of a preliminary plat. The final plat becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the clerk of superior court when duly signed by the secretary of the planning commission. 
(c)  Consultation/technical advisory. The subdivider should consult city staff for advice and assistance before preparing the preliminary plat and its formal application for approval. This will enable the subdivider to become thoroughly familiar with these regulations, the major street plan and other official plans for public improvements which might affect the area. Such informal review should minimize unnecessary delays and costly revisions. 
(d)  General. 
(1)  Any owner of land lying within the city wishing to divide that land into two or more lots, or to resubdivide land, shall submit a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision to the planning commission for approval and shall obtain approval prior to the filing of a final subdivision plat. Any such plat of subdivision shall conform to the minimum standards of design for the subdivision of land as set forth in section 90-1-3 of these regulations and shall be presented in the manner specified in this chapter. No subdivision plat shall be filed or recorded by the clerk of the superior court of Fulton County without the approval of the planning commission as specified herein. 
(2)  In order to secure review and approval of the planning commission of a proposed subdivision, the prospective subdivider shall, prior to the making of any street improvements or installations of utilities, submit to the planning commission a preliminary plat as provided in subsection (e) below. Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may proceed with preparation of the final plat and other required documents as specified in subsection (f) and the improvements set forth in section 90-1-4. 
(e)  Preliminary plat. 
(1)  A minimum of five days prior to the meeting at which the preliminary plat is to be considered, the subdivider shall submit two copies of the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet to the planning commission. 
(2)  The preliminary plat shall meet the minimum standards of design and the general requirements for the construction of public improvements as set forth in section 90-1-3 and shall contain the following information insofar as possible: 
a.  The proposed subdivision name and location, name and address of the owner or owners, and name of the author of the plat who shall be a state-registered engineer or land surveyor. 
b.  Date, approximate north point and graphic scale. 
c.  The location of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, sewers, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, water mains and any public utility easements; the present zoning classification of the land to be subdivided and the adjoining land; and the names of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
d.  Plans of proposed underground utility layouts (including sewers, water mains and electrical service) showing feasible connections to the existing or any proposed utility systems. 
e.  The names, locations, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, easements, parks and other open spaces, reservations, lot lines and utilities. 
f.  Contours at vertical intervals of not more than five feet. 
g.  The acreage of the land to be subdivided and acreage of any lots to be created. 
h.  Location map showing the relationship of subdivision to area. 
(3)  Within 30 days after submission of the preliminary plat, the planning commission will review the plat and indicate its approval, denial or approval subject to modifications as a basis for preparation of the final plat. If a plat is denied, reasons for the denial will be indicated in writing. If approved subject to modifications, the nature of the required modifications will also be indicated in writing. 
(4)  Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission will not constitute acceptance of the final plat and will not be indicated on the preliminary plat. 
(5)  Failure of planning commission to act on the preliminary plat within 30 days of the meeting at which the preliminary plat was first considered will be deemed approval of this plat. 
(6)  One copy of the preliminary plat shall be retained by the planning commission secretary. The second copy will be returned to the subdivider with any notations at the time of approval or denial and the specific modifications, if any, required. 
(7)  Approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse and become null and void unless a final plat based thereon is submitted within one year from the date of such approval. The planning commission may grant an extension of time not to exceed 180 days upon good cause shown. 
(f)  Final plat. 
(1)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat proposed for recording and development at the time; provided, however, that any portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
(2)  a.  A minimum of five days prior to the planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered, the subdivider shall submit an electronic file and the original drawing in black ink and three copies (black and white prints), together with any street profiles or other plans that may be required by planning commission. 
b.  The plat shall be drawn to a scale of one-inch equals 100 feet on sheets not larger than 22 inches by 34 inches or an approved size to correspond to local plat book dimensions. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with the sheets lettered in alphabetical order as a key. 
c.  When the plat has been approved by the planning commission, one copy will be returned to the subdivider, with the approval of the planning commission certified thereon, for filing with the clerk of superior court as the official plat of record. One copy containing the certification of the planning commission will be returned to the subdivider and the planning commission secretary shall retain the other two copies. 
(3)  The planning commission shall approve or deny a final plat within 30 days of the date upon which the plat was first considered by the planning commission. Failure of the planning commission to act on the final plat within these 30 days shall be deemed approval. In the event a final plat is denied, the grounds for denial shall be stated in the records of the planning commission. 
(4)  Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance by the city of dedication of any streets, easements or other public way, ground or improvements. 
The final plat shall show: 
a.  The lines of all streets, roads, and allies, lot lines, building setback lines, lots numbered in numerical order, house numbers, reservations, easements and any areas to be dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and any limitations. 
b.  Sufficient data to readily determine and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line, block line and building line, whether curved or straight, and including the true north point. This shall include the radius, central angle and tangent distance for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. 
c.  All dimensions to the nearest 100th of a foot and angles to the nearest minute. 
d.  Location and description of monuments. 
e.  The names and locations of adjoining subdivisions and streets and the location and ownership of adjoining property. 
f.  Date, title, name and location of subdivision, graphic scale and true north point. 
g.  Location map showing site in relation to area. 
h.  Certification showing that the applicant is the landowner or legally authorized representative and dedicates streets, rights-of-way, improvements and any sites for public use. Certification form must comply with the following: 
Owner's Acknowledgement and Dedication: 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) 
(FULTON COUNTY) 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, and in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates by this Declaration to the use of the public forever all streets, easements, sanitary sewers and appurtenances, potable water mains and appurtenances, storm drains and appurtenances, and other public facilities and appurtenances thereon shown. 
___________       _______ 
Signature of Subdivider       Date Signed     
___________ 
Printed or Typed Name of Subdivider 
___________       _______ 
Signature of Owner       Date Signed     
___________ 
Printed or Typed Name of Owner 
i.  Certification by the landowner acknowledging that the city assumes no responsibility for overflow or erosion of natural or artificial drains beyond the extent of the street right-of-way, or for the extension of culverts beyond the point shown on the approved and recorded subdivision plat and that the city does not assume responsibility for maintenance of pipes and drainage ditches in drainage easements beyond the city right-of-way. Structures other than storm drainage structures are not permitted in drainage easements. 
j.  Certification by land surveyor or engineer to accuracy of survey and plat and placement of monuments. Certification form must comply with the following: 
Final Surveyor's Certificate: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct as to the property lines and all improvements shown thereon, and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments and markers shown thereon actually exist, and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown. The field data upon which this plat is based has a closure precision of one foot in _______ feet and an angular error of _______ per angle point, and was adjusted using the _______ rule. This plat has been calculated for closure and is found to be accurate within one foot in _______ feet and the property shown contains a total of _______ acres. The equipment used to obtain the linear and angular measurements herein was _______. 
By: ___________       _______ 
      Date    
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No. _______ 
Date of Expiration _______ 
k.  Certification of Final Plat Approval containing the following statement: 
Final Plat Approval: 
This subdivision plat has been reviewed by the Planning Commission and the City Engineer and found to be in compliance with Zoning Ordinance, Conditions of Zoning Approval, City of Hapeville Development Regulations and Subdivision Regulations, as amended, and that it has been approved by all other affected City and County Departments, as appropriate. The Mayor and City Council hereby approve this Final Plat, subject to the provisions and requirements of the City's regulations and the provisions and requirements of the Development Performance and Maintenance Agreement executed for this development between the Owner and the City of Hapeville. 
_______       _______ 
City Clerk - On Behalf of Mayor and Council       Date    
_______       _______ 
Chairman, Planning Commission       Date    
_______       _______ 
City Engineer       Date    
_____ 
l.  If final plat approval is requested before all improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of the regulations, the owner shall post a security bond in an amount determined by the city to be sufficient to ensure the completion of all required improvements. Security bond language and bond provider shall satisfy all requirements of the city. 
m.  All other notes or notations as may be required by the city. 
(g)  Short-cut procedure. Subdivisions that do not involve the creation of new streets or installation or dedication of infrastructure may be submitted as final plats without the necessity of preliminary plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11 , § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 90-1-3. - General requirements and minimum standards of design. 
(a)  Streets. 
(1)  Conformity to the major street plan. The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official major street plan. 
(2)  Relation to adjoining street systems. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets or projects at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width. 
(3)  Street widths. The minimum width of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the major street plan, or if not shown on that plan, shall be not less than as follows: 
a.  For major streets, 70 feet as may be required. Major streets are those regional roads to be used primarily for fast or heavy traffic and will be located on the major street plan. 
b.  For arterial streets, 60 feet. Arterial streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major streets and include the principal streets utilized for local circulation. 
c.  For minor and collector residential streets, 50 feet. Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting residential properties and designed to discourage their use by through traffic. Collector residential streets are those which carry traffic from residential streets to arterial streets. 
d.  For dead-end streets (culs-de-sac), 50 feet. Culs-de-sac are permanent dead-end streets or courts designed so that they cannot be extended in the future. "Hammerhead" turnarounds are also permitted on dead-end streets accessing low density neighborhoods. 
e.  For alleys, ten feet to 16 feet. Alleys are minor public ways used primarily for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. In cases where topography or other typical physical conditions make a street of the required minimum width impracticable, the planning commission may modify the above requirements. Through proposed business areas the street widths shall be increased ten feet on each side if needed to provide parking without interference of normal passing traffic. 
(4)  Additional width on existing streets. Subdivisions that adjoin existing streets shall dedicate additional right-of-way to meet the above minimum street width requirements. 
a.  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. 
b.  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway, shall be provided. 
(5)  Restriction of access. When a tract fronts on an arterial street or highway, the planning commission may require those lots to be provided with frontage on an access street. 
(6)  Street grades. Grades on major streets shall not exceed seven percent. Grades on other streets may exceed seven percent but not ten percent. 
(7)  Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than ten degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets 60 feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than 300 feet; on other streets not less than 100 feet. 
(8)  Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in rates of grade for major streets and one-half this minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontal, and one-inch equals 20 feet vertical, may be required by the planning commission. 
(9)  Intersections. 
a.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. 
b.  Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than 20 feet and where the angle of street intersection is less than 75 degrees, the planning commission may require a greater curb radius. Wherever necessary to permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(10)  Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(11)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited. 
(12)  Dead-end streets. 
a.  Minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 400 feet long unless necessitated by topography. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. "Hammerhead" turnarounds are also permitted on dead-end streets accessing low density neighborhoods. 
b.  Where, in the opinion of the planning commission, it is desirable to provide for street access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of the property. These dead-end streets shall be provided with a temporary turnaround having a roadway diameter of at least 80 feet. 
(13)  Private streets and reserve strips. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the community under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(14)  Street names. Proposed streets in obvious alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the name for proposed streets duplicate existing street names, irrespective of the use of the suffix street, avenue, boulevard, driveway, place or court. 
(15)  Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to the rear of lots used for business purposes, and shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(b)  Blocks. 
(1)  Length. Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet or more than 1,200 feet in length, except as the planning commission considers necessary to secure efficient use of land or desired features of street pattern. In blocks over 800 feet in length, the planning commission may require one or more public cross walks of not less than ten feet in width to extend entirely across the block and at locations deemed necessary. 
(2)  Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission will approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(c)  Lots. 
(1)  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot shall have frontage on a public street. 
(2)  Minimum size. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be such as the planning commission deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Remnant lots, that is, parcels of land that would not comply with the minimum lot area or width following subdividing shall be prohibited. Such remnant parcels shall be added to adjacent lots rather than be platted as unusable parcels. 
a.  The size and widths of lots shall in no case be less than the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance. No lot shall have a width greater than six times the lot depth at the building setback line without specific approval by the planning commission. 
b.  Size of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial properties shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Platting of individual lots should be avoided in favor of an overall design of the land to be used for such purposes. 
(3)  Minimum depth. The minimum depth of building setback lines from the right-of-way shall not be less than 30 feet and in the case of corner lots 15 feet from the side street right-of-way unless a lower standard is allowed by an existing zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Corner lot dimension. Corner lots shall be sufficiently wider and larger to permit the additional side yard requirements of the zoning ordinance or building setback lines outlined above. 
(5)  Lots on a curved street or cul-de-sac. All such lots shall comply with the minimum lot frontage at the building setback line. No lot shall have a lot width less than 35 feet at the street right-of-way. 
(6)  Lots in more than one municipality. No new lot created subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall be divided by a city boundary line. 
(7)  Double frontage lots. No lot, other than a corner lot, shall have frontage on more than one street unless a reserve strip that would prohibit vehicle access is created. 
(d)  Public use and service areas. Due consideration shall be given to the allocation of areas suitably located and of adequate size for playgrounds and parks for local or neighborhood use as well as public service areas. Plats indicating dedication of park and playground areas to the city shall be approved conditionally subject to the written acceptance of the land by mayor and council. 
(1)  Public open spaces. Where a school, neighborhood park or recreation area or public access to water frontage, shown on an official map or in a plan made and adopted by the planning commission, is located in whole or in part in the applicant's subdivision, the planning commission may require the dedication or reservation of such open space within the subdivision up to a total of ten percent of the gross area or water frontage of the lot, for park, school or recreation purposes. 
(2)  Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are permitted for the purpose, the planning commission may require easements, not less than ten feet in width, for wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and heat mains or other utility lines, along all rear lot lines, along side lot lines if necessary, or if, in the opinion of the planning commission, advisable. Easements of the same or greater width may be required along the lines of or across lots, where necessary for the extension of existing or planned utilities. Easements greater than ten feet in width may be required where additional utilities, utilities larger in size or utilities greater than five feet in depth below grade are proposed in the easement. 
(3)  Community assets. In all subdivisions, due regard shall be shown for all natural features such as large trees, watercourses, historical resources and similar community assets which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the property. 
(e)  Suitability of the land. 
(1)  The planning commission shall not approve the subdivision of land if, from adequate investigations conducted by all public agencies concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for platting and development purposes of the kind proposed. 
(2)  Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, or for any other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the plat shall be set aside for those uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(f)  Large tracts or parcels. When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, those parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision. 
(g)  Group housing developments. A comprehensive group housing development, including single-family attached developments and the large-scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access, may be approved by the planning commission although the design of the project does not include standard street, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the foregoing standards can be made without destroying their intent. 
(h)  Variances. Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission, a departure may be made without destroying the intent of these provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. 
(i)  Zoning or other regulations. 
(1)  No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning ordinance will be approved unless it conforms to that ordinance. 
(2)  Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning regulations, the building code or other official regulations, the highest standard shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11 , § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 90-1-4. - Development prerequisite to final approval. 
(a)  Required improvements. Every subdivision developer shall be required to grade and improve streets and alleys, install curbs and sidewalks, monuments, sewers, stormwater inlets and water mains in accordance with specifications established by the city. 
(1)  Monuments. 
a.  Concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, three feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners, at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade. 
b.  All other lot corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than three-fourths inch in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(2)  Grading. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so that pavements and sidewalks can be constructed on the same level plane. Due to special topographical conditions, deviation to the above will be allowed only with special approval of planning commission. 
a.  Preparation. Before grading is started, the entire right-of-way area shall be first cleared of all stumps, roots, brush and other objectionable materials and all trees not intended for preservation. 
b.  Cuts. All tree stumps, boulders and other obstructions shall be removed to a depth of two feet below the subgrade. Rock, when encountered, shall be scarified to a depth of 12 inches below the subgrade. 
c.  Fill. All suitable material from roadway cuts may be used in the construction of fills, approaches, or at other places as needed. Excess materials, including organic materials, soft clays, etc., shall be removed from the development site. The fill shall be spread in layers not to exceed 12 inches loose and compacted by a sheep's foot roller. The filling of utility trenches and other places not accessible to a roller shall be mechanically tamped, but where water is used to assist compaction the water content shall not exceed the optimum of moisture. 
(3)  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary open ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. Cross drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural water flow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full width roadway and the required slopes. The size openings to be provided shall be determined by Talbot's formula, but in no case shall the pipe be less than 12 inches. Cross drains shall be built on straight lines and grade, and shall be laid on a firm base but not on rock. Pipes shall be laid with the spigot end pointing in the direction of the flow and with the ends fitted and matched to provide tight joints and a smooth uniform invert. They shall be placed at a sufficient depth below the roadbed to avoid dangerous pressure of impact, and in no case shall the top of the pipe be less than one foot below the roadbed. In all cases, drainage improvement plans and the improvements themselves shall be approved by the city engineer. 
Drainage system design shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual published by ARC, latest update, unless approved otherwise. Drainage systems shall also comply with all other applicable city ordinances and regulations, including the floodplain management ordinance, post development stormwater management regulations and the erosion and sediment control ordinance. Drainage construction shall comply with the state department of transportation standard specifications unless approved otherwise. Storm drain pipe material within city street rights-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe in accordance with state department of transportation specifications. 
(4)  Roadway surfacing. After preparation of the subgrade, the roadbed shall be surfaced with material required by local standards, but of no lower classification than crushed rock, stone or gravel. The size of the crushed rock or stone shall be that generally known as crushed rock stone from two and one-half inches down including dust. Spreading of the stone shall be done uniformly over the area to be covered by means of appropriate spreading devices and shall not be dumped in piles. After spreading, the stone shall be rolled until thoroughly compacted. The compacted thickness of the stone roadway shall be no less than six inches. 
Following application of a crushed stone base having a minimum thickness of six inches, contractor shall provide surface paving of local and minor residential streets consisting of two inches of 19 mm Superpave asphalt. Upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy for 90 percent of the dwellings served by the street have been built, or prior to the end of the one-year maintenance period (but after the 11th month), whichever occurs first, contractor shall provide a final wearing course of one and one-half inch of 12.5 mm Superpave asphalt paving. All paving materials shall meet the requirements of the state department of transportation standard specifications. 
(5)  Minimum pavement widths. Due to the diversity of development in the city, required pavement widths will necessarily vary with the character of building development and the amount of traffic encountered. Minimum pavement widths between curbs shall be as follows: 
a.  For minor residential streets, 30 feet. Most minor streets in residential developments. 
b.  For collector streets, 36 feet. Including minor streets which in the opinion of the planning commission will involve sufficient traffic and/or parking to justify the width. 
c.  For arterial streets and highways, as may be required. 
(6)  Curbs and gutters. Except on rural streets, the subdivider shall provide permanent six-inch concrete curbs with 24-inch integral concrete gutters or standard rolled curb and gutters. 
(7)  Sidewalks. 
a.  For the safety of pedestrians and of children at play, installation by the developer of sidewalks on both sides of streets will normally be required. The commission may waive the requirements of sidewalks along streets where a park, railroad or other use on one side of a street makes a sidewalk nonessential. 
b.  Sidewalks shall be located not less than one foot from the property line to prevent interference or encroachment by fencing, walls, hedges or other planting or structures placed on the property line at a later date. In single-family residential areas and multifamily or group housing developments, concrete sidewalks shall be five feet wide and four inches thick. Sidewalks in commercial areas shall be five feet wide and ten feet wide as dictated by adjoining sidewalk widths. 
(8)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied, all of the work for underground utilities including water mains, gas mains, electrical lines, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. 
(9)  Water supply system. 
a.  Water mains properly connected with the city water supply system shall be constructed in such a manner as to adequately serve all lots shown on the subdivision plat for both domestic use and fire protection. Water mains shall be located on public property and not private property. 
b.  The sizes of water mains, the location and types of valves and hydrants, the amount of soil cover over the pipes and other features of the installation shall be approved by the city engineer and fire chief. 
(10)  Sanitary sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system, according to plans approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Recommended improvements. The planting of street trees and installation of street name signs is considered a duty of the subdivider as well as good business practice. 
(1)  Street trees. 
a.  Street trees are a protection against excessive heat and glare and enhance the attractiveness and value of abutting property. The planning commission will assist the subdivider in location of trees and species to use under varying conditions. 
b.  It is recommended that trees be planted inside the property lines where they are less subject to injury, decrease the chance of motor accidents and enjoy more favorable conditions for growth. If trees are to be planted within a planting strip in the right-of-way, their proposed locations and species to be used must be submitted for the planning commission's approval since the public inherits the care and maintenance of such trees. 
(c)  Guarantees in lieu of completed improvements. No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for record by the clerk of the superior court until the improvements listed shall be constructed in satisfactory manner and approved by the city engineer, or in lieu of such prior construction, the planning commission may accept a security bond in an amount equal to the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and utilities installed without cost to the city in the event of default by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11 , § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 90-1-5. - Enforcement and penalties for violations. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in the City Charter. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of these regulations shall be placed or shall exist, or any builder, contractor or agent of the owner who may have assisted in the commission of any violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
(b)  In any violation in which any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of these regulations or amendment thereto adopted by the mayor and council, the legal counsel of the city or any owner of real estate therein may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement or any appropriate action or actions, proceeding or proceedings to prevent, enjoin or abate such unlawful use. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11 , § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 90-1-6. - Adoption and effective date. 
(a)  Before adoption of these subdivision regulations or any amendment thereof, a public hearing thereon shall be held by the mayor and council; 15 days notice of the time and place of which shall be given by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(b)  These rules and regulations shall be in full force and effect from and after their adoption and effective date. 
(Ord. No. 2014-11 , § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Chapter 93 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Constitution reference- Authority to adopt zoning regulations, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, DEFINITIONS AND APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 93-1-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Hapeville, Georgia." 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-1) 
Sec. 93-1-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  Words given customary meanings. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words or terms are herein defined. All other words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meaning. 
(b)  Interpretation of certain terms and words. 
(1)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(2)  Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
(3)  The word "person" includes a firm, copartnership or corporation. 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." 
(5)  The word "building" includes the word "structure." 
(6)  The word "shall" is always mandatory, and not merely directory. 
(7)  The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied. 
(c)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult daycare facility. A facility in which for pay more than three but less than 48 persons 18 years of age or older, who have difficulty in functioning independently, receive care for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody. 
    Airport parking facility. Any commercial property approved for the storage of vehicles for greater than 24 hours where patrons are transported between the facility and the airport for compensation. Establishment and operation of such facilities is subject to approval of a special use permit by mayor and council as set forth in sections 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6. 
    Antique shop. Any business that sells, at retail, merchandise which is at least 50 years old where such merchandise reflects the architectural, design, or construction aesthetic of a particular historical period, person, or geographical area as distinguished from used retail merchandise, used automobiles, junk or other articles that would otherwise be sold at specialty shops, flea markets, bazaars or variety shops as defined herein. In any antique shop as defined herein, new or reproduction goods, which have been made to resemble antiques, shall not make up more than 25 percent of the business' inventory. 
    Apartment. A dwelling unit that is physically attached to at least two other dwelling units, either directly or through an intervening unit, and that is not titled as a condominium. 
    Basement. A story partly underground but having at least one-half of its height above the average level of the adjoining ground. 
    Bazaars. Any meeting place, either temporary or permanent, where retail or wholesale business is conducted in junk as defined herein, used merchandise, used merchandise or junk sold on consignment, and/or new merchandise. 
    Billiards. Any of the several games played on a table surrounded by an elastic ledge of cushions with balls which are impelled by a cue and shall include all forms of the game known as "carom billiards," "pocket billiards," and "English billiards." 
    Billiard room. Any public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which more than six billiard tables are made available for use. 
    Boardinghouse. Any dwelling in which more than two persons are lodged on a continuous basis and served meals for compensation. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
    Building, accessory. A building subordinate in nature, extent or purposes to the principal building on a lot, and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal building. 
    Building, alteration of. Any change or rearrangement in the supporting members (such as bearing walls, beams, columns or girders) of a building, any addition to a building, or movement of a building from one location to another. 
    Building, front line of. A line parallel to the street, intersecting the foremost point of the building, excluding steps. 
    Building, principal. A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which the building is located. 
    Building, residential accessory. A building customarily incidental and subordinate in nature, extent or purpose to the principal dwelling on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to those of the principal dwelling. 
    Car rental agency. Any commercial operation approved for the leasing of automobiles to the public where patrons may or may not be transported between the facility and the airport. Establishment and operation of such facilities is subject to approval of a special use permit by mayor and council as set forth in sections 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6. 
    Cellar. A story partly underground and having more than one-half of its height below the average level of the adjoining ground. 
    City council. The mayor and council of the city. 
    Climate-controlled storage facility. A building or portion thereof used for dead storage, mainly of the excess personal property of an individual or family, but also of small amounts of goods or merchandise for businesses or individuals. Such storage facilities shall not include retail sale on the premises, commercial repair, manufacturing or any other commercial use. 
    Clinic. A building used by a group of doctors or dentists for the medical examination or treatment of persons on an outpatient, or nonboarding basis only. 
    Club. A building owned, leased or hired by a nonprofit association of persons, who are bona fide members paying dues, the use of which is restricted to those members and their guests. The serving and selling of food and alcoholic beverages may be permitted, providing that adequate kitchen facilities are available and that any sales are in accordance with federal, state and municipal laws. 
    Commercial parking lot. Any commercial property which provides locations for the storage of automobiles for a period of less than 24 hours and does not provide a shuttle service for customers. Such lots are intended to serve customers of surrounding businesses and area office workers. 
    Condominium. A type of joint ownership applying to buildings (usually apartment buildings) in which dwelling units or enclosed spaces are individually owned, each owner receiving a recordable deed enabling him to sell, mortgage, exchange, etc., his enclosed area or apartment independently of owners of other areas or apartments; and further applying to an undivided interest in common areas and facilities. 
    Cooking facilities. As applied only to hotels and extended-stay hotels, "cooking facilities" means a stove top burner, a hotplate that does not serve as an integral part of an appliance designed solely to produce coffee or tea; a conventional oven; a convection oven; or any device producing heat using resistance heating elements or infrared heating sources for the purpose of preparing food. Microwaves and coffee makers shall not be considered cooking facilities for purposes of this definition. 
    Curb break. Any interruption, or break, in the line of a street curb in order to connect a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
    Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used mainly for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, mobile homes or recreation vehicles. 
    Dwelling, one-family. A building designed, arranged or used exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
    Dwelling, one-family attached. Any dwelling in a structure which consists entirely of dwellings each of which is attached to one or more other dwellings, has its own separate entrance from the exterior of the building, and has an adjacent ground level outdoor area for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A residential building designed, arranged or used for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, two-family. A building designed, arranged or used for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling unit. A dwelling, or portion thereof, providing complete living facilities for one family. 
    Family. One or more persons related by blood, adoption or marriage, living and cooking together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, exclusive of household servants. A number of persons but not exceeding three living and cooking together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit though not related by blood, adoption, or marriage shall be deemed to constitute a family. 
    Flea market. Any retail or wholesale business which buys, sells, exchanges, or accepts for sale on consignment junk, as defined herein, or used merchandise less than 50 years old. 
    Floodplain. An area identified by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other surveying agencies as subject to flooding once every 100 years and necessary for the flow of floodwaters. 
    Floor area. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a dwelling unit, exclusive of porches and balconies, garages, basements and cellars, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls or partitions separating dwelling units. For uses other than residential, the floor area shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerlines of walls or partitions separating those uses, and shall include all floors, lofts, balconies, mezzanines, cellars, basements and similar areas devoted to those uses. 
    Frontage. The length of the front lot line. 
    Garage. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used for vehicular storage only, and having a capacity adequate to accommodate the automobiles or light trucks owned and registered in the name of the occupants of the principal building. 
    Gasoline service station. Any area of land, including structures thereon, that is used or designed to be used for the supply of gasoline or oil or other fuel for the propulsion of motor vehicles and which may include facilities used or designed to be used for polishing, greasing, washing, dry cleaning or otherwise serving motor vehicles. However, major mechanical or body repair, customarily known as a repair garage, shall not be included in this definition. 
    Group home. Any dwelling unit designed for single-family occupancy and occupied by no more than six disabled individuals. The term "group home" shall not include the business of operating a boarding house, rooming house, halfway house, homeless shelter, or other similar enterprise, nor shall the term "group home" include any releases of any penal institution or place for persons convicted of a crime, persons found to be juvenile delinquents, or juveniles found to be persons to be in need of supervision. In addition to disabled persons, up to two additional persons acting as house parents or guardians may reside in a group home. 
    Home occupation. Any accessory use of a commercial service character customarily conducted within a dwelling by a resident thereof, which use is secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not change the character thereof. The types of businesses meeting the definition of a home occupation include, but are not limited to, the office of a physician, surgeon, dentist, chiropractor, lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant or other professional person, within a dwelling occupied by the same for consultation or emergency treatment, but not for the general practice of his profession and where no assistants are employed. 
    Height. The distance between the eaves of a building and the average ground line across the front of the building. 
    Hotel or motel. A building designed for occupancy for a fee as the temporary abiding place of individuals who are lodged within. 
    Hotel, extended-stay. A building that otherwise meets the definition of "hotel," but in which cooking facilities are included in more than 20 percent of its total guest rooms. 
    Junk. Items including, but not limited to, waste, secondhand materials and merchandise less than 50 years old, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rugs, tires, bottles, broken items, and items in disrepair which are unserviceable for their originally intended purpose. 
    Junkyard. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junkyard" also includes an auto wrecking yard, but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Kennel. Any building or land used, designed or arranged for the boarding, breeding or care of dogs for a fee. 
    Kindergarten school. Any building used routinely for the daytime care or education of preschool age children, and including all accessory and play areas. 
    Labor pools. 
(1)  Labor pool means a business entity which operates by: 
a.  Contracting with other entities or persons to supply them with temporary employees for shortterm assignments of casual labor; 
b.  Hiring persons to fulfill these contracts for shortterm assignments of casual labor; and 
c.  Employing each individual employee no longer than the time period required to complete the assignment for which that individual employee was hired, although an individual may be eligible for rehire when additional temporary assignments are available. 
(2)  A business entity which fulfills any contracts in accordance with this subsection is a labor pool, even if the entity also conducts other business. 
(3)  Labor pool does not include a temporary help service that requires advanced applications, job interviews and references. 
(4)  Short term assignment of casual labor means a work assignment for a term of 40 hours or less involving work for which neither the entity nor the person contracting or arranging for temporary employees requires any of the following from any such employees: 
a.  A professional or occupational license which requires for its issuance a demonstration of knowledge or proficiency and which is issued by the state or a political subdivision of the state; 
b.  A high school diploma or its equivalent; 
c.  Education beyond high school; 
d.  Vocational education; 
e.  Demonstrated proficiency with a specified type of machinery; or 
f.  Training before the assignment or on the job which exceeds one hour. 
    This subsection shall not be construed as prohibiting or limiting the placement of a skilled employee on a short-term assignment of casual labor as long as such skill or education is not a requirement of the assignment. 
    Lodge. See "Club." 
    Lot. A portion or parcel of land devoted to a single principal use, or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
    Lot, corner. A lot fronting on two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot coverage. The total horizontal ground area of a lot covered by all buildings on the lot and which is not open to the sky. 
    Lot coverage, maximum. The maximum permitted ratio of lot coverage to usable area of the lot. Usable area shall not include floodplains or slopes in excess of 30 percent grade. 
    Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured perpendicular to the front lot line. 
    Lot, double frontage. An interior lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets not intersecting at a point common with the boundary lines of lot. 
    Lot, interior. A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot line, front. The lot line coincident with a street right-of-way line. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the county superior court, or a parcel of land, the deed to which has been recorded in the same offices as of the effective date of this chapter. 
    Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the depth. 
    Mayor and council. The mayor and council of the city. 
    Nursery. Any building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the cultivation or growing of plants, and including all accessory buildings. 
    Nursing home. Any facility for the aged, recuperating, or chronically ill persons who need medical care or medical monitoring in which three or more persons not related to the operator are kept or provided with food and shelter or care for compensation for 24 hours per day; but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of the sick or injured. 
    Patio houses. A type of single-family attached dwelling unit which covers the entire lot by combining front, side and rear yards into one "landscaped patio" bordered on two sides by the house, and on the other two sides by ornamental brick or stone walls at least seven feet in height. Windows are located at the front of the house and usually glass walls are adjacent to the patio. Units are built abutting each other, making common use of three of the enclosure walls. 
    Personal care home. Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage. The term "personal services" includes but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, assistance with ambulation and transfer, and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing, and toileting. 
    Planned unit development (PUD). A PUD is a land development project which is planned as one entity, grouping dwelling units into clusters providing an appropriate amount of land for open space, mixed housing types and densities. Many development and dimensional requirements are generally waived and land use intensity and design criteria are applied through a site plan review process. 
    Residential infill. Residential infill is small scale single-family residential development (up to 12 units) in developed neighborhoods. It is characterized by such elements as subdivisions of established residential parcels and reduced lot size and frontage. 
    Restaurants. Any establishment that prepares and sells food and/or beverages intended for consumption on premises is a restaurant. A restaurant does not have a drive-through, does not provide drive-in service, or is not primarily a carry-out. 
    Restaurants, carry-out. Any restaurant that prepares and sells food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state, intended for consumption off-premises. A carry-out restaurant does not include a drive-through. A carry-out restaurant may include up to six seats for waiting purposes. An establishment with more than six seats would be classified as a restaurant. The number of designated spaces for carry-out is limited to two spaces per 1,000 feet. 
    Restaurants, drive-in. Any restaurant that prepares and sells food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state, that is served to parked vehicles for immediate consumption. 
    Restaurants, drive-through. Any restaurant that prepares and sells food and/or beverages in a ready-to-consume state with a drive-through window or service that includes circulation and stacking for ordering and pick-up services to customers in vehicles. Restaurants that offer curb-side pick-up in designated spaces and/or carry-out, would not necessarily constitute a drive-through. The number of designated spaces for pick-up or carry-out is limited to two spaces per 1,000 feet. 
    Setback. The distance from the centerline of a street to the nearest point of a building. 
    Single-family attached dwelling. A type of residential development which includes a dwelling unit on a subdivided lot usually individually owned, though attached by a common party wall to another dwelling unit on an adjoining lot. 
    Specially shops. Any business that sells, at retail, merchandise that has been previously used or is sold on consignment and has been previously used that sells junk, sells new or reproduction goods which have been made to resemble antiques that make up at least 25 percent of the business's inventory, operates a flea market or bazaar all as defined in this article, or does not sell antiques as defined in this article. 
    Street. A public way for vehicular traffic which affords primary means of access to abutting property. 
    Street centerline. A line surveyed at the direction of the mayor and council and designated as an official street centerline, or in the absence of such line, a line drawn parallel to and midway between the right-of-way lines of any mapped street. 
    Story. The portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it. A basement shall be counted as a story for height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet. A cellar shall not be counted as a story for height measurement. 
    Story, half. A story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not more than two feet above the floor of that story. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on or in the ground, or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Structures include, but are not limited to, the following: site-built buildings, industrialized buildings, modular homes, manufactured homes, mobile homes, billboards, swimming pools, advertising signs, satellite dishes, fallout shelters, telecommunications towers and facilities, and satellite communication facilities. 
    Use, accessory. A use subordinate in nature, extent or purpose to the principal use of a building or lot, and customarily incidental thereto. 
    Use, conditional. A use of a building or lot that is permitted only if and when the planning commission, and mayor and council specifically approve that use, and all plans, specifications, written conditions or written restrictions are complied with on a continuing basis. 
    Used car lot. Any lot or tract used for the storage, display or sale of used automobiles, trucks or other motorized vehicular equipment, including the sales and maintenance buildings incidental thereto. 
    Use, nonconforming. Any lawful use of a building or lot which does not comply with all of the regulations of this chapter governing the use at that particular location. 
    Use, principal. The main use of a building or lot. 
    Variety shops. Any business that sells, at retail, new merchandise except that such a business may have up to 25 percent used merchandise other than antiques, as defined in this chapter, as part of the business's inventory. 
    Yard. An unoccupied space, open to the sky, on the same lot with a building. 
    Yard, front. A yard measured at right angles from the front lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear. A yard measured at right angles from a rear lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side. A yard measured at right angles from a side lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-2; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 80-8, 9-2-1980; Ord. No. 81-4, § 1, 8-4-1981; Ord. No. 82-11, 9-7-1982; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 95-10, 11-7-1995; Ord. No. 96-08, § 2, 10-1-1996; Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 2013-02, § 1, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 2014-10 , § 1, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-14 , § 1, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 1, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 2, 3-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-18 , §§ 1-3, 8-16-2016; Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 1, 1-9-2018; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 1, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 93-1-3. - Application of regulations. 
(a)  Use. Except as hereinafter provided, no building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved or altered except in conformity with the use regulations herein specified for the zone in which it is located. 
(1)  Where a use is applied for in a zone and such use is not listed in the list of specifically permitted uses allowed per zone, the building official may exercise his/her discretion to: 
a.  Deny the use as unpermitted in accordance with subsection (a)(1) above and the list of permitted uses per zone; or 
b.  Allow the use if such use is substantially like a use which is already listed in the permitted use section per zone. 
(2)  The building official shall consider the following factors to determine substantial similarities between the nonpermitted uses and permitted uses in occupations, residences, types of businesses, and other uses by applying the following standard, based upon the following considerations: 
a.  The proposed use generates the same or similar amounts in type of vehicular and pedestrian traffic as permitted uses in the desired zone; 
b.  The proposed use is aesthetically similar in design, construction, and street facade presentation as permitted uses in the desired zone; 
c.  The proposed use is no more taxing on city services and infrastructure than permitted uses in the desired zone; 
d.  The proposed use provides the same or similar activity, work, or business as permitted uses in the desired zone; 
e.  The proposed use comports with the listed purposes in the intent section of the desired zone; 
f.  The proposed use will not introduce activity at times of the day or week that are incompatible with normal hours associated with permitted uses in the desired zone; and 
g.  The proposed use is consistent with the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  The applicant is responsible for submitting evidence and information establishing the comparative similarities set forth above upon application for the desired zoning or use approval. 
(4)  A decision of the building official to deny a previously nonlisted use is appealable to the board of appeals pursuant to subsection 87-3-3(a)(1). The standard of review used by the board of appeals shall be a determination of whether or not the building official erred in his decision based upon the purposes of the zone as stated in the ordinance and the consistency of the proposed use as compared to other allowed uses. 
(b)  Height and density. Except as hereinafter provided, no building shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to exceed the height limit, nor shall any building or land be used or occupied hereafter in excess of the maximum density requirements of article 22.1 of this chapter for the zone in which it is located. 
(c)  Lot occupancy. Except as hereinafter provided, no buildings shall hereafter be erected or altered so as to occupy a greater percentage of the lot area, nor shall any side, rear or front yard be narrower or smaller than is required for the zone in which it is located. 
(d)  Yard use limitation. Except as hereinafter provided, no yard or other open space provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this chapter shall be included or construed to be a part of a yard or other open space for any other building for the purpose of allowing the second building to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-3; Ord. No. 2002-07, § 1, 3-5-2002) 
ARTICLE 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 93-2-1. - One principal building per lot. 
    Within single-family residential zones, no more than one principal building with its customary accessory buildings may occupy, or be constructed upon, any lot of record. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-11) 
Sec. 93-2-2. - Reduction in lot area. 
    No lot may be reduced in area below the minimum lot areas as specified herein for the zone within which that lot is located. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-12) 
Sec. 93-2-3. - Street access. 
    No building shall hereafter be constructed on a lot which does not have frontage on a publicly dedicated and maintained street. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-13) 
Sec. 93-2-4. - Major street plan. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, all streets in the city are hereby divided into four classes: 
(1)  Major streets, 50 to 90 feet of right-of-way minimum. 
(2)  Arterial streets, 40 to 70 feet of right-of-way minimum. 
(3)  Minor and collector streets, 40 to 50 feet of right-of-way minimum. 
(4)  Alleys, ten to 20 feet of right-of-way minimum. 
(b)  The classification of each street in the city is as shown on a map entitled "Official Major Street Plan of Hapeville, Georgia," adopted by the planning commission and the mayor and council and certified by the city clerk. This map is hereby made a part of this chapter and shall be retained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-14; Ord. No. 2005-10, § 1(8-5-14), 10-4-2005) 
Sec. 93-2-5. - Accessory uses, accessory buildings, yard requirements of accessory buildings, outbuildings and fences. 
(1)  An accessory building or structure is an uninhabited building detached from the principal dwelling on a lot of record, the use of which is incidental and subordinate to the primary use of the property. Accessory buildings shall comply with the following standards and all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance and the architectural design standards. Where a conflict exists, the standards of this section shall control. 
    Accessory uses and structures on a residential lot shall comply with the following standards and all other applicable regulations of this zoning ordinance: 
(a)  The accessory use or structure shall be subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the primary use or structure served. No accessory structure shall have a ground floor area greater than that of the principal dwelling. The floor area of an accessory structure shall include all floor area, that is, each floor of a one and one-half or two story accessory building shall be counted toward the maximum floor area. When more than one accessory building is erected, the "maximum accessory building size" controls the sum of the floor areas of those buildings. 
(b)  The accessory use or structure shall contribute to the comfort, convenience or necessity of the occupants of the principal use or structure served. 
(c)  The accessory use or structure shall not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(d)  No accessory building shall be erected or placed on a lot that does not contain a principal dwelling. Building permits may be issued for the principal dwelling and an accessory structure; however, a certificate of occupancy must be issued for the principal dwelling prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for an accessory structure. 
Special requirements for accessory buildings are as follows: 
(a)  In residentially zoned areas, no space in an accessory structure can be rented or leased unless the primary structure and accessory structure are rented or leased in their entirety to the same individual. 
(b)  A building permit shall be required for the construction, erection or set-up of any accessory building in excess of 144 square feet. A separate certificate of occupancy shall be required for the construction, erection or set up of any accessory building in excess of 200 square feet. Accessory structures less than 200 square feet, without HVAC, shall be exempt from obtaining a separate certificate of occupancy, but shall not be exempt from all necessary inspections during the construction process. 
(c)  Accessory building or outbuilding shall be permitted at the owner's option according to the schedule presented in Table A-Accessory building allowance based on dwelling unit size, or Table B-Accessory building allowance based on lot size. 
(d)  Outdoor cooking facilities, gazebos, arbors, pool equipment shelters, arbors, fireplaces, and waste receptacle enclosures shall be exempt in calculating the maximum number of accessory structures on a lot. However, such structures shall be subject to the accessory building setback standards and shall not exceed 144 square feet in area. 
(e)  Exterior materials, roof pitches, and other design elements must comply with the city architectural design standards. 
(f)  Except as herein provided, the minimum yard requirements of section 93-22.1-1 of this chapter also apply to accessory buildings. However, accessory buildings may be located in rear yards within five feet of a rear or side lot line. In addition to these yard requirements, the horizontal separation of accessory buildings from the dwelling on the same lot and the horizontal separation of accessory buildings from dwelling on adjacent lots shall comply with standards in Table C-Distance from Dwelling for Very Large Accessory Buildings. All distances shall be measured from outside wall to outside wall. 
(g)  The number of accessory building may vary depending on the size of the lot. Table D-Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings establishes the schedule for number of accessory buildings allowed on a building lot. 
(h)  Accessory buildings, including detached garages, shall be permitted in an R-0, R-AD, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-I, R-SF, V, U-V, RMU or C-R Zone, subject to the following limitations: 
Placement. 
(a)  Located on a lot with a principal dwelling. An accessory building shall be located on the same lot as the principal dwelling to which it is accessory. 
(b)  Setback dependent on distance from dwelling. Accessory buildings shall be allowed in rear yards only, provided that garages may be allowed in front and side yards. An accessory building located within 20 feet of the principal dwelling shall comply with the setback requirements of the principal dwelling to which it is accessory. Accessory buildings located more than 20 feet from the principal dwelling may be placed five feet from a side or rear lot line. Garages may be located in the front or side yard subject to the setback standards for the principal dwelling. 
(c)  Setback on corner lot. Accessory buildings on a corner lot shall comply with the setback for the principal dwelling. No accessory building on a corner lot that adjoins a residentially used or zoned lot to the rear shall be located within 25 feet of the rear property line. This 25-foot setback will not be required when the adjoining yard is a rear yard. 
(d)  Distance from dwelling and other accessory buildings. All accessory buildings must be located a minimum of ten feet from the principal dwelling and all other accessory buildings on the lot or on neighboring lots. This distance shall be measured from outside wall to outside wall. 
(e)  Ordinance setbacks otherwise remain in effect. Except as herein provided, the minimum setback requirements of section 93-22.1-1 of this chapter also apply to accessory buildings. 
(f)  Non-complying accessory buildings. Notwithstanding standards of this chapter to the contrary, nothing shall prohibit the re-construction of accessory buildings that are legal, nonconforming structures that have been in existence for a minimum of 20 years along that established building line. That building line shall be the minimum setback for re-building of the accessory building on the lot. All other standards of the chapter shall remain in effect. 
Height. 
(a)  Scale of accessory buildings. The height of an accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet or the height of the principal dwelling measured from the average adjacent grade to the peak or ridgeline of the roof, whichever is less. 
Architectural style and exterior finish. 
(a)  Compatibility with principal dwelling. Accessory buildings shall be architecturally compatible with the principal dwelling on the lot. The exterior finish of all accessory buildings shall be identical to the exterior finish of the principal dwelling on the lot. In the case of brick dwellings, the exterior finish of the accessory building may be similar to the trim work or other siding materials of the dwelling. Exterior materials, roof pitches and other design elements shall comply with the architectural design standards. 
(b)  Roof design. Flat or shed roofs shall be prohibited on accessory buildings. Accessory buildings shall have a gable or hip roof design. 
Utility services. 
(a)  Water supply or discharge prohibited. No accessory building shall have any plumbing of any kind, including, but not limited to, running water or drainage into any sewer or septic system. Electrical service is permitted provided the accessory building is served by the same electrical meter that serves the principal dwelling. No separate metering shall be allowed. 
Use. 
(a)  Residential occupancy of any kind prohibited. No accessory building shall be used for human habitation, including, but not limited to, overnight accommodations for any person. Accessory buildings may be used as home offices, recreation rooms or non-commercial storage. No accessory building shall be used for the operation of any business, except as permitted under section 93-1-2, home occupation that allows home offices. No commercial or industrial use shall be permitted in a residential accessory building. 
(b)  Evidence of separate dwelling unit. The presence of such facilities or equipment as utility services, utility meters, mailboxes or kitchen equipment such as a sink, stove, oven or cabinets in an accessory building or a portion of a principal dwelling shall be considered prima facie evidence that such accessory building or such portion of a principal dwelling is a separate and distinct dwelling unit and is subject to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(c)  Temporary buildings. Temporary buildings may only be used in conjunction with permitted construction work in any zoning district and shall be removed immediately upon the completion of construction. 
Permitting schedule. 
(a)  Construction or occupancy of an accessory building to follow principal dwelling. No permit for an accessory building shall be issued until a permit for construction of the principal dwelling has been issued and construction of such dwelling commenced. No certificate of occupancy for an accessory building shall be issued prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the principal dwelling. 
Construction standards. 
(a)  Building anchoring. Any accessory building having a floor area greater than 144 square feet shall be secured to the ground with a full perimeter foundation to prevent the structure from being moved or damaged by high winds. 
(b)  Life safety codes apply. Accessory buildings must comply with adopted fire safety and building code regulations. 
(c)  Standards for "attached" accessory building. When an accessory building is attached to the principal dwelling by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, the accessory building shall comply with the setback requirements of the principal dwelling to which it is accessory. In order to qualify as an attached garage or accessory building, therefore eliminating the need for compliance with these accessory building standards, the attached accessory building must share a common wall with the principal dwelling that is a minimum of 80 percent of the wall length of the accessory building or 20 feet, whichever is greater. Such common wall must be an integral part of the principal dwelling. An attached garage or accessory building shall comply in all respects with the standards applicable to the principal dwelling. 
(d)  Second story access. Where applicable, access to the second story of an accessory building must be located within the interior of the ground floor space. 
(e)  Prohibited accessory and temporary buildings or structures. Manufactured homes, mobile homes, shipping containers, freight trailers, box cars, trailers or any other structure or vehicle that was not originally fabricated for use as an accessory building shall be prohibited." 
Table A-Accessory Building Allowance based on Dwelling Unit Size 
Dwelling Unit Ground Floor Area in Square Feet Accessory Building Size based on 40 Percent of Dwelling Unit Ground Floor Area 800 320 1,000 400 1,200 480 1,400 560 1,600 640 2,000 800 2,400 960 3,000 1,200 3,600 1,440 4,000 1,600  
  
Table B-Accessory Building Allowance based on Lot Size 
Lot Size in Square Feet Accessory Building Size based on Variable Percentage of Lot Size 2,400 240 4,000 360 6,750 540 7,000 560 8,500 595 10,000 650 21,780 1,089 32,670 1,307 43,560 1,525 54,450 1,634  
  
Table C-Distance from Dwelling for Very Large Accessory Buildings 
Percent of Dwelling Unit Ground Floor Area Distance from Dwelling 40 Percent 10 feet 50 Percent 30 feet 60 Percent 50 feet 70 Percent 70 feet 80 Percent 80 feet 90 Percent 90 feet 100 Percent 100 feet  
  
Table D-Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings 
Lot Size Maximum Number of Accessory Buildings Up to one-half acre 1 Up to one acre 2 Over one acre 3  
(2)  Fences and freestanding walls. Height limitations for fences and freestanding walls: 
1.  Fences and freestanding walls (other than retaining walls) cannot be located within any public right-of-way, and must comply with the following height restrictions: 
In the R-SF, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-O zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
a.  A fence in any front yard area shall not exceed four feet in height. 
b.  A fence in any side or rear yard area shall not exceed 6 feet in height, or eight feet in height on the property line that abuts an I-1, I-2, C-1, C-2 or C-T zoning district. 
2.  In the C-R, V, and UV zoning districts, the following shall apply: 
a.  A fence in any front yard area shall not exceed four feet in height. 
b.  A fence in any side or rear yard area shall not exceed 6 feet in height, or eight feet in height on the property line that abuts a residential or C-T zoning district. 
3.  In the C-1 and C-2, zoning districts, a fence in any yard area shall not exceed six feet in height, or eight feet in height on the property line that abuts a residential or C-T zoning district. 
4.  In the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, a fence in any yard area shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
5.  In all zoning districts, fences or freestanding walls shall not obstruct visibility at street intersections (see section 93-2-7 and vision triangle diagram). 

(3)  Materials and landscaping. 
a.  Fences in the front yards of R-SF, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, and R-O zoning districts must be constructed of ornamental metal, masonry, wood, vinyl, or other ornamental material specifically made for fence construction. 
b.  Fences in the C-R, V, and UV zoning districts must be constructed of ornamental metal, masonry, wood, or other ornamental material specifically made for fence construction. 
c.  Fences in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts must be constructed of ornamental metal, masonry, wood, or other ornamental material specifically made for fence construction. The erection of any fence over four feet in height in these districts shall include a landscaped strip between the fence and the street right-of-way. The landscaped strip shall be a minimum of three feet wide and contain specimen trees with a minimum three-inch caliper and set no less than 35 feet on center. Such landscaping shall be approved by the department of community services prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
d.  Fences in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts must be constructed of ornamental metal, masonry, wood, or other ornamental material specifically made for fence construction. The erection of any fence over four feet in height in these districts shall include a landscaped strip between the fence and the street right-of-way. The landscaped strip shall be a minimum of three feet wide and contain specimen trees with a minimum three-inch caliper and set no less than 35 feet on center. Such landscaping shall be approved by the department of community services prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
(4)  General fence regulations. 
a.  Reserved. 
b.  The use of chain-link material is permitted only in rear yard areas on interior lots not adjacent to public right-of-ways. Fences along public right-of-ways must be constructed from ornamental metal, ornamental masonry, wood, or other ornamental material specially made for fence construction. 
c.  On corner lots, chain-link fences are not permitted along the property line where it abuts a neighbor's front property line or along the frontage adjacent to the public right-of-way. 
d.  It shall be unlawful to erect a fence of materials not specifically designed for fence construction. Materials prohibited for fence construction include, but are not limited to, tin roofing material, plastic roofing material, doors, or automobile parts. 
e.  All fences shall be lawfully constructed, kept in good repair, and maintained in sound condition. 
f.  Fences required for swimming pools shall comply with Georgia State Minimum Standards Swimming Pool Code, 1994 Edition, Georgia Swimming Code Amendments, 2000. 
g.  Portions of fences with separations between slats of less than 50%, easily visible from a public right-of-way, shall be constructed with the framing supports fronting the interior of the lot along those sections. 

(5)  Specific regulations for temporary uses and structures. Factory-fabricated, transportable buildings that are designed to arrive at the site ready for occupancy, except for minor unpacking and connection to utilities, and designed for removal to and installation at other sites, may be placed on a property to serve as the following: 
(a)  Temporary offices used for on-site apartment leasing, real estate sales office, and model sales home; 
(b)  Temporary offices used during the expansion or rehabilitation of an existing non-residential use; 
(c)  Temporary offices for construction and security personnel during the construction of a development for which the city has issued a grading permit or building permit; 
(6)  Standards and requirements for approval. All temporary structures approved pursuant to this section shall meet the following standards and requirements: 
a)  Location. 
1)  Temporary structures allowed under Section 93-2-5(5) may be located anywhere on site, except within the following areas: 
(a)  Existing vegetated buffers or within the buffer setbacks. 
(b)  Areas designated for future vegetated buffers whether or not vegetation currently exists. 
(c)  Other areas designated on the site and/or subdivision plan for open space, vehicular use, or ingress/egress. 
b)  Other requirements. 
1)  The temporary structure shall be factory-fabricated and transportable. 
2)  Underskirting shall be installed around all temporary structures requiring site plan approval. 
3)  In addition to any other off-street parking required on the site, off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set forth in article 22.1. 
4)  All permits required by applicable building, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes shall be obtained from the community services department prior to installation of the temporary structure. 
5)  Foundation plantings installed in accordance with section 93-23-18 shall be required for temporary structures intended for use as temporary offices, except when located on a paved surface or parking lot. 
6)  A sketch plan containing sufficient information to show compliance with the above standards shall be submitted to and approved by the community services department prior to installation of the temporary structure. 
7)  Temporary structures used during renovation of legally conforming or nonconforming structure shall be permitted so long as there is an active construction permit on file with the department of community services, not to exceed time limits established in the applicable code sections below. 
8)  Temporary structures are not to include retail sales of new or used merchandise, or other uses not permitted within the zoning district where the structure is located. 
c)  Duration. 
1)  Temporary offices used for on-site apartment leasing, real estate sales office, and model sales home are permitted until construction allows for a model/sales office to be opened onsite as determined by the community services director, at which time the temporary office shall be removed. 
2)  All other temporary structures under this section may remain on the site for no more than 12 months. This period may be renewed for up to two 12-month periods, for good cause shown, upon approval of a written request submitted to the community services director 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit. In no event, however, shall such extensions allow the temporary structure to remain on the site for more than three years. 
(7)  Temporary storage structures and uses. Enclosed portable storage units and structures intended only for temporary storage may be used following the receipt of a building permit, payment of the required fee, where applicable, and subject to the following provisions: 
a)  The building permit submittal package must contain a site plan designating the proposed location of the temporary storage structure on the lot. 
b)  Temporary storage structures and portable storage units shall not be placed on any street or alley right-of-way or public property. These structures must be placed on the lot in which the use is intended. 
1)  Duration. 
(a)  Within all zoning districts, enclosed portable storage units and structures intended only for storage may be used for temporary storage of items related to the primary use located on the property for a period not to exceed 30 days. This period of time may be extended to 45 days upon request to and written approval of the community services director. Registration shall be required for each such use of any temporary storage structures. 
(b)  Where practical, such structures shall not be located within front yard areas. 
(c)  No portable storage units shall be used to store any chemical, hazardous, flammable or combustible materials. 
(8)  All temporary structures or uses. All temporary and portable storage units and structures, construction trailers and the like, shall be constructed, altered, repaired, enlarged, placed, moved or demolished in accordance with applicable City building codes. The issuance of building permits, where required, verifying such compliance shall be administered by the community services director. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-15; Ord. No. 2001-02, § 1, 2-6-2001; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 1(8-5-15), 12-7-2004; Ord. No. 2008-03, § 1, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 2008-08, § 1, 6-3-2008; Ord. No. 2008-09, § 1, 7-1-2008; Ord. No. 2014-10 , § 2, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 2015-05 , § 1, 5-19-2015) 
Sec. 93-2-6. - Distance between buildings. 
    All accessory buildings shall be at least 15 feet from principal buildings. All multifamily buildings shall be at least 15 feet apart. All single-family attached buildings shall be at least ten feet from any other principal building. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-16) 
Sec. 93-2-7. - Vision clearance at corners. 
    Within the city, no fence, building, sign, planting or other obstruction above a height of four feet shall be maintained within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way of two streets or railroads, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way, or of a private driveway intersection with the right-of-way of a street. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-17; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 86-1, 1-7-1986) 
Sec. 93-2-8. - Frontage on corner lots and double frontage lots. 
    On lots having frontage on more than one street, the minimum front yard shall be provided for each street in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; except, however, on residentially zoned corner lots, the height limitation shall apply to the yard area of such lot which is defined as "rear yard" in section 93-1-2. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-18; Ord. No. 91-7, 4-2-1991) 
Sec. 93-2-9. - Utilities location. 
    Electrical transformer stations, telephone exchanges, gas regulator stations, sewage and water treatment plants and pumping stations, and standpipes for public water supply may be located in any zone subject to the approval of the board of appeals as a special exception. In such cases, the following requirements shall be complied with: 
(1)  Those facilities shall be essential for the immediate area or for the proper functioning of the total utility system of which the same is a part. 
(2)  Any building or structure, except an enclosing fence, shall be set back at least 30 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Those facilities shall be enclosed by a permanent solid wall or by a woven wire fence of the type commonly known as a cyclone fence. 
(4)  Open spaces on the premises shall be suitably landscaped and maintained. 
(5)  When those facilities are located within any residential zone, the storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(6)  The surrounding area shall not be adversely affected by, and shall be protected from noise, odor, glare, dust, fumes, gas, smoke and vibration by suitable means and conditions. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-19) 
Sec. 93-2-10. - Single-family attached developments (SFA), special provisions. 
(a)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for single-family attached units unless: 
(1)  The regulations and procedures of the city's subdivision regulations have been met including final approval of the subdivision plat. 
(2)  The book and page in which any covenants and restrictions are recorded shall be shown on the final plat of the subdivision. 
(3)  The construction plans and completed units provide: 
a.  An enclosure wall six feet in height of suitable materials for visual and acoustical privacy, which shall completely enclose all rear and side yard areas of each unit; 
b.  A masonry firewall (as described in the city building code, sections 602-607) with a minimum of a four-hour rating shall be constructed between each individual unit. No opening shall be permitted in firewalls. These walls shall be self-supporting and continuous, extending through all floors, and three feet above the roof if roof covering is of combustible material. If roof covering is noncombustible, the wall may be carried up to and tightly against the undersides of the noncombustible roof deck or sheathing. Combustible framing members shall not extend through these walls. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-21) 
Sec. 93-2-11. - Condominium developments; special provisions. 
(a)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for condominiums unless proof of adoption of the provisions of the Georgia Condominium Act has been presented to and approved in writing by the city attorney. 
(b)  Covenants for SFA condominiums and multifamily condominiums. 
(1)  The developer of a condominium, or a homeowners association created by the developer, by record covenants and restrictions, shall preserve and maintain for the owners and occupants of the development the lands set aside for open spaces, parks or recreation use, the common off-street parking spaces established for the development, and garbage and trash disposal. The book and page in which such covenants and restrictions are recorded shall be shown on a final plat of the development and on each deed transferring property within the development. The developer shall show proof of adoption and registration of articles and bylaws under the Georgia Condominium Act (GCA), with mandatory membership in the association before any individual properties are sold. 
(2)  In the event that the homeowners association fails to maintain the common property in a reasonable condition, the mayor and council shall serve written notice upon the association and upon the individual property owner setting forth the manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the common open space in reasonable condition. This notice shall include a demand that the deficiencies of maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof. If the deficiencies are not corrected within the 30 days, the city, in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within the development and to prevent the common open space from becoming a public nuisance, may enter upon the common open space and maintain the same until the association is prepared to provide maintenance. The cost of the maintenance by the city shall be assessed against the property within the development that has a right of enjoyment of the common open space, and shall become a lien upon the property. 
(c)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a condominium project unless: 
(1)  An enclosure wall six feet in height of suitable materials for visual and acoustical privacy shall enclose all side and rear yards of the SFA unit, or shall enclose a patio of 150 square feet minimum for each condominium unit (not including buildings in excess of two stories). 
(2)  A masonry firewall (as described in the city building code, section 602-607) with a minimum of a four-hour fire rating shall be constructed between each individual unit. No opening shall be permitted in firewalls. These walls shall be self-supporting and continuous extending through all floors, and three feet above roof if roof covering is of combustible material. If roof covering is noncombustible, the wall may be carried up to and tightly against the undersides of the noncombustible roof deck or sheathing. Combustible framing members shall not extend through these walls. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a condominium development, the developer of such project shall file with the building inspector a statement of his plan, with supporting documentation, for the sale, operations and management of the development. Based upon the information and documentation submitted, the building inspector shall cause to be prepared a written review of the plan for the benefit and guidance of prospective purchasers of units within the development. The review comments shall become a part of the sales agreement between the purchaser and the developer. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-22) 
Editor's note- Condominiums can no longer be established under the Apartment Ownership Act. 
State Law reference- Ownership Act, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 85-16B; Condominium Act, Ga. Code Ann., Ch. 85-16E. 
Sec. 93-2-12. - Multifamily units; special provisions. 
    All multifamily housing developments, which are not SFA and/or condominium projects and do not include units for individual sale, all units in which are or will remain in one ownership by an individual, partnership or corporation, shall have a masonry or concrete firewall and/or floors (as described in the city building code, sections 602-607) with a four-hour fire rating. These walls shall be constructed between every ten units. Combustible members shall not extend through these walls and/or floors. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-23) 
Sec. 93-2-13. - Drainage improvements; special provisions. 
    In all zoning districts, a grading and drainage plan shall be submitted along with an application for a building permit for the proposed construction of a structure and the pavement of driveways and parking which will cover an excess of 35 percent of the lot area with impervious materials. The plans shall include an analysis of stormwater runoff under existing site conditions and under proposed developed site conditions. If the city engineer determines an increase in the stormwater runoff would create flooding of public and/or private property during a ten-year frequency storm, those plans shall include the details of providing and maintaining a flow and storage capacity sufficient to avoid potential flooding identified. The issuance of an occupancy permit shall not be granted until required drainage improvements are completed and approved by the city engineer. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-25) 
Sec. 93-2-14. - Tree conservation. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  This section shall be known as the Hapeville Tree Conservation Ordinance. The overall purposes of this section are to promote tree conservation, the increase of tree canopy, and the protection of existing trees in the city. General provisions and regulations contained herein, along with the attached administrative standards and best management practices for Hapeville's urban forest, will guide practices to accomplish this purpose. It is the intent of this section to regulate tree conservation activities as part of the building construction, and land development process, protect landmark trees, and provide public safety within the city. 
(2)  Benefits derived from the conservation of trees and increased canopy include: 
a.  Improved air quality; 
b.  Energy conservation; 
c.  Reduced flooding and reduced storm water runoff; 
d.  Reduced soil erosion and improved water quality; 
e.  Improved habitat for desirable wildlife; 
f.  Reduced health risks; 
g.  Community aesthetics and improved quality of life; 
h.  Added economic value. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The terms, provisions and regulations of this section and the administrative standards and best management practices for Hapeville urban forest, Appendix A hereto, shall apply to any real property, public or private, within the corporate limits of the city: 
a.  For all activities which require a land disturbance, building construction, or demolition permit; 
b.  For external renovations of all properties resulting in the increase of total square footage, or the construction of accessory structures, which may impact landmark trees; 
c.  For the purpose of permitting the removal of landmark trees. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless specifically stated otherwise, the following terms shall be defined as indicated and where any definition herein conflicts with another definition in this chapter, the more restrictive definition shall prevail. 
    Boundary tree. A tree on a property adjacent to a permitting property whose critical root zone or canopy extends into the permitting property. 
    Buildable area. The area of a lot within a given zoning district, located within the required setbacks. 
    Building permit. A permit issued by the city department of community services that authorizes the commencement of construction and building construction activity. 
    Caliper. The trunk diameter measurement of nursery stock trees measured at six inches above the ground for trees up to and including four inches caliper size, and measured at 12 inches above the ground for trees larger than four inches caliper size. 
    Canopy tree. A large or medium tree with a crown size and shape that will typically provide significant shade and beneficial effects on temperature, air quality, water quality, and other environmental conditions, at maturity. A canopy tree is also referred to as a shade tree. 
    Certified arborist. An arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture as possessing a minimum level of competency required to practice arboriculture. 
    Critical root zone. The minimum rooting volume of a tree necessary to sustain the tree's life, generally defined by the tree's drip line or a radius of one and one-fourth feet for every one inch dbh, whichever is greater, and from the surface to a depth of three feet. 
    Damaged tree. A harmful injury to a tree or any of its parts, including its roots, the root buttress area, the trunk and branches. 
    Destroyed tree. When any part of a tree is damaged to the point where that tree's survival beyond three full growing seasons is questionable, as determined by the city arborist. 
    Diameter at breast height (DBH). The diameter of a tree's trunk measured at four and one-half feet above the ground. For multi-trunk trees, the diameter is measured at the narrowest point beneath the point of attachment of the multiple trunks. 
    Ecological compatibility. The suitability and functionality of a given tree species for its intended growing site, based on its potential size, structural characteristics, growth rate, and growing site attributes such as slope, exposure, soil type, and drainage. 
    City arborist. The individual authorized by the mayor and council of the City of Hapeville to advise the city on the administration of the requirements and standards as established in this section. The city arborist shall have the following minimum qualifications: A BS degree in urban forestry, horticulture or arboriculture with five years experience in development related tree conservation, or a MS degree in urban forestry, arboriculture or horticulture with three years experience in development related tree conservation. 
    Hazardous tree or portion of tree. A tree or part of a tree that is at risk for failure because it is dead or structurally defective, and where that failure could result in personal injury or property damage. 
    Land disturbance permit. A permit issued by the city community services department that authorizes the commencement of alteration of development of a given tract of land or the commencement of any land disturbing activity. 
    Landmark tree. Any canopy tree 30 inch dbh or larger, or otherwise designated by the mayor and council as having significance to the community, or any understory tree eight inches dbh or larger, in fair or better condition, having a life expectation of greater than five years. 
    Site tree conservation plan (STCP). A plan documenting the location of all trees, boundary trees, structures, proposed utility locations, site grading and construction proposals, methods of tree protection, proposed tree planting, existing and proposed tree canopy, and associated details, as required in subsection 93-2-14(e). 
    Tree. A self-supporting wood plant capable of reaching a minimum height of 15 feet. 
    Tree protection zone. The area of a lot defined by the minimum required setbacks and the critical root zone of any protected tree. 
    Landmark tree removal permit. A permit issued by the city for the removal of a landmark tree. 
    Understory tree. Smaller growing and shade tolerant tree species which typically grow on sites trees underneath canopy trees. 
    Qualified professional. An individual possessing a degree in forestry, urban forestry, landscape architecture or horticulture, having been qualified by the city to submit plans in the implementation of this section and for tree protection in building construction. The city shall maintain a list of qualified professionals. 
(d)  General requirements. 
(1)  Tree removal. 
a.  No trees shall be removed or destroyed prior to issuance of a building construction or land disturbance permit. The issuance of a building construction or land disturbance permit shall constitute compliance with the tree conservation provisions of this section. 
b.  No landmark tree shall be removed from any real property within the corporate limits of the city without the issuance of a landmark tree removal permit. 
(2)  Protected trees. 
a.  All trees outside the footprint of a proposed building construction or land development project, eight inches dbh or larger, shall be considered protected trees. 
b.  No protected trees shall be damaged or destroyed. 
(3)  Conditions for removal or destruction of trees. 
a.  The removal or destruction of trees is subject to approval of the city arborist, only if all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  Unavoidable site modifications resulting from grading, utility work, and construction activities will result in destroying the tree; 
2.  Site plan modifications to prevent irreparable damage to the tree are impossible or not practical, based on cost benefit analysis; 
3.  Actions are taken to mitigate the removal of trees by way of replacing by meeting overall site canopy requirements. 
b.  Approval of the STCP by the city arborist shall constitute approval to remove protected trees. 
c.  Any decision of the city arborist relating to the removal or destruction of protected trees may be appealed as provided in subsection 93-2-14(i). 
(4)  Trees that present a dangerous condition. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to allow to remain on their property any tree which presents a dangerous condition. Dangerous trees include: 
1.  A tree or any part of a tree that is likely to fail (fall) as a result of structural defects, root damage, disease, decay, decline or death; and where failure of a tree or any part of a tree would result in potential property damage or injury. 
2.  A tree that by its proximity interferes with traffic or pedestrian sight distance, drainage or utility lines and easements so as to create an unsafe condition on or off the site or easement. 
3.  A tree of any species or variety which, because of any other circumstances, poses a danger to public health or safety. 
b.  The city's department of community services (or agent of the department of community services) is authorized and empowered to enter upon any lot or parcel of land in the city for the purpose of inspecting and evaluating any tree which is suspected to present a dangerous condition. It shall be unlawful for any property owner to take any action to prevent or interfere with the inspection and evaluation of potentially dangerous trees. 
c.  The department of community services shall obtain the services of the city arborist for the purpose of inspecting and evaluating suspected dangerous trees. 
d.  If it is determined by the city's department of community services that a tree presents a dangerous condition, the city's department of community services shall serve the owner of record of the lot or parcel of land on which said tree is located, a written notice requiring such owner to take corrective action to remove the tree or its dangerous part(s) to eliminate the dangerous condition. This written notice shall include a time frame to complete the corrective action. When the corrective action includes tree removal, the tree shall be replaced. Replacement shall be based on a canopy replace for canopy lost basis. 
e.  Any notice by the city's department of community services to correct a dangerous condition or remove a tree which presents a dangerous condition may be appealed to the city's planning commission, provided a written notice is submitted no later than five days following receipt of the notice appealed from. 
f.  If a property owner fails, neglects, or refuses to trim or remove such tree within the stated time frame or following an adverse decision on appeal, the city's department of community services may proceed to take the corrective action and assess the resulting costs to the property owner. The amount of costs shall be paid by the owner to the city. 
g.  The assessment of the costs of work done by the city against the property owner shall include the actual cost of work performed, including tree replacement, in addition to the penalties imposed for any violation or noncompliance with any provision of this section, plus administrative fees. 
h.  If the property owner fails to pay the costs assessed by the department of community services, a lien shall be placed on the subject property for the cost of the work performed, penalties, and fees. 
(5)  The removal or destruction of landmark trees. 
a.  The removal or destruction of landmark trees from any property in the city is subject to the approval of the city arborist, and approval may only be granted if one of the following two conditions is met: 
1.  The tree threatens the property, safety or health of the property owner or the public. 
2.  Actions are taken to mitigate the tree's removal by way of planting a new tree of a comparable species and canopy. Payment may be made into the city tree bank in lieu of planting, calculated on a tree lost/replaced basis. 
b.  The issuance of a tree removal permit constitutes approval to remove a landmark tree. 
c.  Any decision of city arborist relating to the removal or destruction of landmark trees may be appealed as a provided in subsection 93-2-14(g). 
(6)  The removal or destruction of boundary trees. No boundary trees shall be damaged, destroyed, or removed. Procedures for the protection of boundary trees are provided in subsection 93-2-14(e)(4). 
(7)  Canopy requirements. 
a.  All properties requiring the issuance of a demolition, building construction, remodeling or land disturbance permit shall meet the minimum canopy requirements as established in the administrative standards and best management practices for Hapeville's urban forest. 
b.  All new parking lots shall meet the minimum canopy requirements as established in the administrative standards and best management practices for Hapeville's urban forest. 
c.  Trees planted to meet canopy requirements shall be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. 
(8)  Establishment of the city tree bank. 
a.  Where it is determined by the city arborist that it is impractical or impossible to fully meet the canopy requirements on a specific site, the cost for the balance (unmet portion) of the requirement will be paid into the city tree bank, prior to issuance of a demolition, building construction, or land disturbance permit. Calculation of costs shall be established in the administrative standards and best management practices for Hapeville's urban forest. 
b.  Funds in the city tree bank shall be administered by the mayor and council or their designee and shall be used exclusively for increasing, managing, maintaining tree canopy and tree safety in public space, the purchase of open space, and seasonal landscaping in the city. The mayor and council will establish a planned program for administration of these funds. 
(e)  Procedures. 
(1)  Tree removal permits. 
a.  All properties applying for a permit to remove landmark trees shall submit a permit application to the department of community services, indicating how the tree(s) present a dangerous condition pursuant to subsection 93-2-14(d)(4)a. 
1.  For properties requiring the issuance of demolition, building construction, or land disturbance permits, the removal of landmark trees is permitted under the procedures in subsection 93-2-14(e)(3). 
2.  The required STCP shall indicate how the how the tree(s) present a dangerous condition pursuant to subsection 93-2-14(d)(4)a. 
(2)  Permits to remodel. 
a.  Permits to remodel owner occupied single family houses shall have tree protection and replacement prescriptions prepared by the city arborist when both the following conditions are met: 
1.  The proposed remodeling alters the existing footprint of the house. 
2.  The proposed remodeling or construction related activities will encroach upon a landmark tree. 
b.  Replacement prescriptions shall be based on a canopy replace for canopy lost basis, for the loss of landmark trees. Payment may be made into the city tree bank when the city arborist determines that site constraints preclude the replacement of trees. 
(3)  Demolition, building construction, land disturbance permits. 
a.  A site/tree conservation plan (STCP) shall be submitted by a qualified professional for review by the city arborist and approval by the city development department prior to issuance of demolition, building construction or land disturbance permits. (Except for permits to remodel, see subsection 93-2-14(e)(2).) 
1.  The SCTP shall document tree species eight inches dbh or greater, including size, dbh, critical root zone and location, the species and caliper size of proposed trees, the location of all proposed site building construction and land development activities, including grading, drainage, proposed utility locations, and all proposed tree protection measures. 
2.  All proposed trees for removal must be indicated. 
3.  The exact location of any tree must be provided if encroachment is proposed with that tree's critical root zone. 
4.  Standard details for tree protection and tree planting shall conform to the administrative standards and best management practices for Hapeville's urban forest. 
5.  The following note shall be provided on the STCP in large letters: TREE PROTECTION FENCING SHALL BE MAINTAINED DURING THE ENTIRE PROJECT PERIOD. 
6.  The STCP shall include emergency 24-hour contact information. 
7.  The STCP shall document compliance with the canopy, parking, and landscape requirements established in the administrative standards and best management practices for Hapeville's urban forest, in addition to the city landscape requirements for vehicular use areas. 
b.  The STCP shall also include the location of landmark trees. 
1.  The removal or destruction of landmark trees will be permitted only if the city arborist determines that no alternative construction or mitigating site or cultural practices will prevent destruction of the tree. 
2.  Replacement of landmark trees shall be of comparable species with the size potential of the landmark tree, and shall be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site. 
3.  Trees planted to replace a landmark tree shall have the grow out potential to fully mitigate loss of the entire measured canopy of the landmark tree. 
4.  Canopy mitigation for loss of a landmark tree shall be in addition to the overall site canopy requirements. 
(4)  Boundary trees. 
a.  The STCP shall provide for the protection of boundary trees. 
b.  When building construction or land disturbance activities occur within the critical root zone of boundary tree(s) and the city arborist determines that the survival of the tree(s) is/are doubtful as a result of the proposed disturbance activities, a performance bond shall be established regarding the subject boundary tree(s). The bond amount shall cover the removal and replacement costs of the subject boundary tree(s) and the arborist fee for determination of the trees' survival at the end of the escrow period, and shall be approved by the city arborist. 
1.  In establishing the bond amount, replacement trees specified shall be of comparable species and size potential to the subject boundary tree, shall be ecologically compatible with the intended growing site at maturity, and shall fully mitigate the lost canopy area of the subject boundary tree. 
2.  Canopy credit will be granted to a permittee for the entire canopy area of successfully protected boundary trees, except for those trees located on public rights-of-way. 
3.  The department of community services will administer the bonding of boundary trees through the department of finance. 
c.  Prior to a determination authorizing the return of the performance bond to the permittee, any property owner whose property contains an at risk boundary tree(s) for which the bond was held, may petition the department of community services for payment for the removal and replacement of the subject boundary tree(s), should any of the subject boundary tree(s) fail to survive or is determined to be in an irreversible decline as a result of the permitted disturbance activities, as determined by the city arborist. 
1.  The permittee shall have the right to petition the mayor and council or their designee for the return of all escrow funds should the subject trees survive for a period of three full growing seasons, as determined by the city arborist. If the subject tree(s) has/have failed to survive or is in a reversible or irreversible decline as a result of the permitted disturbances, the escrow funds shall be paid pursuant to subsection 93-2-14(e)(4)b., for removal and replacement of the subject tree(s), or for arboricultural practices to reverse the decline as determined and prescribed by the city arborist. 
2.  Any funds not collected by either an affected property owner or the permittee within a period of five years, or any interest accrued therein, shall be deposited in the city tree bank. 
(5)  Field verification. 
a.  The qualified professional preparing the STCP shall verify its accuracy with the city arborist prior to submittal. 
b.  The city arborist shall verify successful compliance to the STCP prior to issuance of a permit, and shall verify final field compliance prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Performance bonds may be accepted by the department of community services in lieu of required tree planting and landscaping if seasonal and weather conditions are inappropriate for the establishment and survival of plant material. 
1.  The bond amount shall be one and one-fourth times the amount of the documented landscape cost, including plant materials and installation. 
2.  The period of the bond shall be mutually agreed upon by the permittee and the department of community services. 
3.  The bond shall be returned when all of the landscape requirements are met, or cashed by the city when the bond period expired. The bond period may be extended if determined appropriate by the department of community services. 
(f)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Authority. The department of communities services or their designee has the responsibility to issue permits in conformance with and enforce compliance with this section. 
(2)  Responsibility and inspection. 
a.  Neither the issuance of a tree permit nor compliance with the conditions thereof, nor with the provisions of this section shall relieve any person from any responsibility otherwise imposed by law for damage to persons or property; nor shall the issuance of any permit hereunder serve to impose any liability upon city, its officers or employees, for injury or damage to persons or property. 
b.  The department of community services may cause periodic inspections of the work under permit in accordance with this section and shall make a final inspection following completion of the work. The permittee shall assist the city arborist or his designee in making such inspections. Agents of the permitting authority shall have the authority to conduct such investigations as he/she may reasonably deem necessary to carry-out his/her duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land development activities within the protection area. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the department of community services who requests entry for purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his/her official duties. 
c.  Where it is deemed necessary, the department of community services or their designee shall require performance bonds to assure compliance to the terms, conditions, and standards of this section. 
(3)  Violations and penalties. 
a.  Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this section or the requirements of an approved site plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
1.  Notice of violation. If the director community services determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved site plan or the provisions of this section, a written notice of violation shall be issued by code enforcement to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this section without having first secured the appropriate permit, code enforcement shall be serve a notice of violation on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
A.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
B.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
C.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
D.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the approved site plan or this section and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
E.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
F.  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within 15 days after the notice of violation (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient). 
2.  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the director community services shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten days (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, as determined by the director of community services, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city arborist may take any one or more of the following actions or impose any one or more of the following penalties. 
A.  Stop work order. The director of community services may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
B.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The director of community services may refuse to authorize a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
C.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The director of community services works may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the director of community services may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
D.  Penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten days (or such greater period as the city arborist shall deem appropriate) (except that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24 hours notice shall be sufficient) after the city arborist has taken one or more of the actions described above, the city's designated code enforcement agent may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Any violation of this article is punishable, upon conviction, according to the provisions the City Code. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(g)  Administrative appeal and judicial review. 
(1)  Administrative appeal. 
a.  Administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city arborist may appeal in writing within 15 days after the issuance of such decision or order to the board of zoning appeals of the city and shall be entitled to a hearing before the board of zoning appeals of the city within 60 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
1.  The board of zoning appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, interpretation, decision, or determination is made by the city arborist in the enforcement or administration of this section. 
2.  The board of zoning appeals shall consider the testimony of the city arborist, who shall be present at such hearings, and may consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, field conditions, and all standards specified in this and other relevant sections of this section. 
3.  The board of zoning appeals after conducting a public hearing may affirm or reverse the decision or order by the city arborist. 
(2)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city arborist after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Fulton County. 
(Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, 7-20-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2010-08, § 1, adopted July 20, 2010, amended section 93-2-14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, section 93-2-14 pertained to tree preservation and derived from Ord. No. 2001-04, § 1(8-5-27), adopted April 3, 2001. 
 The administrative standards and best management practices (Appendix A) referenced in this section are not set out at length herein, but are on file in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 93-2-15. - Nursery schools and kindergartens. 
(a)  Nursery schools and kindergartens are permitted in any district when operated in conjunction with an existing church, provided all other applicable city, state and county regulations have been complied with, and provided further that at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child and that the play area is enclosed by a permanent solid wall or by a woven fence of the type commonly known as a "cyclone fence" having a height of at least four feet. 
(b)  Nursery schools and kindergartens not operated in conjunction with an existing church are permitted only in C-R and C-2 districts, subject to the further stipulations that all other applicable city, state and county regulations have been complied with, and provided further that at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is provided for each child and that the play area is enclosed by a permanent solid wall or by a woven wire fence of the type commonly known as a "cyclone fence" having a height of at least four feet. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-28; Ord. No. 79-11, 11-6-1979) 
Sec. 93-2-16. - Site plan review. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The site plan review procedures are intended to ensure adequate review and consideration of potential impacts of proposed development upon surrounding uses and activities, and to encourage a high standard of side planning and design resulting in quality development in the city. 
(b)  Application. An application for site plan review may be filed by the owner, or agent for the owner, of any property to be developed according to the plan. All applications for site plan review shall be filed with the building official for transmission to the planning commission. Site plan review requirements are applicable for all proposed development in all zones within the city and all property submitted for annexation. 
(c)  Submission requirements. Applications for site plan review shall contain the following information and any additional information the planning commission may prescribe by officially adopted administrative regulations; ten copies of the application shall be submitted: 
(1)  Site and landscape plan. Maps and site plans shall be submitted (minimum scale of 1" = 50' or larger, e.g., 1" = 40', 1" = 30', etc.) indicating project name, applicant's name, adjoining streets, scale, north arrow and date drawn, showing: 
a.  The locations, size and height of all existing and proposed structures on the site. 
b.  The location and general design cross section characteristics of all driveways, curb cuts and sidewalks including connections to building entrances. 
c.  The locations, area and number of proposed parking spaces. 
d.  Existing and proposed grades at an interval of five feet or less. 
e.  The location and general type of all existing trees over six-inch caliper and, in addition, an identification of those to be retained. 
f.  The location and approximate size of all proposed plant material to be used in landscaping, by type such as hardwood deciduous trees, evergreen trees, flowering trees and shrub masses, and types of ground cover (grass, ivies, etc.). Planting in parking areas should be included, as required in section 93-23-18. 
g.  The proposed general use and development of the site, including all recreational and open space areas, plazas and major landscape areas by function, and the general location and description of all proposed outdoor furniture (seating, lighting, telephones, etc.). 
h.  The location of all retaining walls, fences (including privacy fences around patios, etc.) and earth berms. 
i.  The identification and location of all refuse collection facilities, including screening to be provided. 
j.  Provisions for both on-site and off-site stormwater drainage and detention related to the proposed development. 
k.  Location and size of all signs. 
(2)  Site and building sections. Schematic or illustrative sections shall be drawn to scale of 1" = 8' or larger, necessary to understand the relationship of internal building elevations to adjacent site elevations. 
(3)  Typical elevations. Typical elevations of proposed building shall be provided at a reasonable scale ( 1/8 " = 1'0"), and shall include the identification of proposed exterior building materials. 
(4)  Project data. 
a.  Site area (square feet and acres). 
b.  Allocation of site area by building coverage, parking, loading and driveways, and open space areas, including total open space, recreation areas, landscaped areas and others. 
c.  Total dwelling units and floor area distributed generally by dwelling unit type (one-bedroom, two-bedroom, etc.) where applicable. 
d.  Floor area in nonresidential use by category. 
e.  Total floor area ratio and/or residential density distribution. 
f.  Number of parking spaces and area of paved surface for parking and circulation. 
(5)  Project report. A brief project report shall be provided to include an explanation of the character of the proposed development, verification of the applicant's ownership and/or contractual interest in the subject site, and the anticipated development schedule. At the discretion of the planning commission, analyses by qualified technical personnel or consultants may be required as to the market and financial feasibility, traffic impact, environmental impact, stormwater and erosion control, etc. of the proposed development. 
(d)  Review procedure. 
(1)  All applications for site plan review shall be submitted at least ten working days in advance of the planning commission meeting at which it is considered. 
(2)  Upon receipt, the building official shall place the application on the appropriate planning commission agenda. The planning commission shall consider the merits of the application at one or more public meetings. 
(3)  The building official and/or city planner may submit written reports to the planning commission containing recommendations regarding the application. 
(4)  The planning commission shall have 60 days after its initial consideration of the site plan to make a decision regarding the application, unless the matter is continued with the consent of the applicant. All conditions of approval or denial shall be clearly defined in the motion of approval or denial, and duly and precisely recorded in the minutes of the meeting. A failure to act on an application within the period specified above shall constitute approval of the application. 
(5)  The planning commission shall evaluate the site plan application, and approve the application provided the commission determines that the proposed development will be of high quality and of such design that the development will not adversely impact the city or the immediately-surrounding area. In the absence of such determination, the planning commission shall conditionally approve or disapprove the application. 
(6)  The application shall revise any conditionally approved site plan as necessary to address any and all conditions placed on it by the planning commission to the satisfaction of the chairman of the planning commission and the building official. Upon approval and verification by the dated signatures of the chairman of the planning commission and the building official, a site plan shall be accepted and filed by the building official. 
(7)  A building permit will be issued, subject to development being carried out in full accord with the approved site plan. In the event that any of the features, terms or conditions of the approved site plan are not complied with, the building official shall suspend or revoke any permits which have been issued pursuant to said site plan or take such other action as necessary to insure compliance. 
(e)  Period of validity for site plan. No site plan shall be valid for a period longer than 12 months from the date it is approved by the fixing of the signature of the chairman of the planning commission and the building official, unless within such period a building permit is obtained and construction commenced. The planning commission may grant extensions not exceeding 12 months each upon written request of the original applicant and resubmission of the application, if the application as submitted is substantially the same as the initially approved application. However, the planning commission has the power in such cases to attach new conditions to its reapproval, or to disapprove the request for an extension. Where an application for extension contains changes which the planning commission concludes materially alter the initial application, it shall refer the application to the building official, who shall initiate a new site plan review procedure. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-29; Ord. No. 87-14, 5-5-1987; Ord. No. 99-09, § 1, 8-3-1999) 
Sec. 93-2-17. - Churches; special provisions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all churches and other places of worship shall comply with the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  Churches and places of worship shall be permitted only in zones where public assemblies are allowed as a permitted use. 
(2)  One parking space shall be provided for the larger of: 
a.  Every three fixed seats, with every 18 inches of bench length to count as one seat; or 
b.  Each 35 square feet of enclosed floor area of the largest assembly room accommodating moveable seats. 
(3)  No permanent parking for churches or other places of worship shall be permitted within 20 feet of the property boundary of any adjoining residential use. 
(4)  Development standards shall be as follows: 
Minimum lot size 20,000 square Minimum lot width 100 feet Minimum front yard:  Major street 75 feet  Arterial street 60 feet  Collector 50 feet Minimum side yard 15 feet Abutting residential use 30 feet Minimum rear yard 20 feet Abutting residential use 40 feet  
(5)  Each lot shall have frontage on a major, arterial or collector street. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-31; Ord. No. 98-05, § 1, 3-3-1998) 
Sec. 93-2-18. - Laundromats; special provisions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all laundromats shall comply with the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  All laundromats shall be conditional uses. 
(2)  One parking space shall be provided for the larger of: 
a.  Every three washing machines located within the facility; or 
b.  Per 180 square feet of enclosed floor area. 
(3)  No laundromat may occupy more than 3,000 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  No parking for laundromats shall be permitted within 20 feet of the property boundary of any adjoining residential use. 
(5)  No laundromat shall be established maintained or operated that does not comply with the following standards: 
a.  The premises shall be kept rodent-proof and free of vermin; 
b.  The premises shall be sanitary; 
c.  Trash receptacles shall be located on the premises and shall be emptied at the least daily. The premises shall be free of any accumulation of loose or unstored refuse, waste, dirt, trash, or garbage; 
d.  Every window and door shall be kept in good repair; 
e.  All floors shall be impervious to water; 
f.  Ventilation shall be maintained at the following minimum level for each room four air changes per hour during business hours of which 25 percent of each air change of the fresh air; 
g.  The back of each coin-operated laundry machine shall not be accessible to public; 
h.  Each washing machine should be equipped with a door opening which will not open while machine is in operation; water and heating equipment shall not be accessible to the public; 
i.  Dryers shall be equipped so that the door can be opened from the inside. Dryers shall also be equipped with automatic switch off devices that automatically switch off when the door opens; 
j.  Artificial lighting at least of 30 foot candles intense illumination shall be maintained during business hours in the room in which coin-operated machines are located; 
k.  In the event there is no full-time attendant on the premises a telephone shall be maintained for public use on inside the premises with the following telephone numbers from the prominently posted nearby: those of the fire department, police department and those of persons connected with the coin- operated laundry to be notify the event of service failure or emergency; 
l.  The permittee shall have the premises coin-operated laundry machines and equipment inspected and cleaned at least once each business day; 
m.  Lint shall be cleaned at least once each business day; 
n.  Washers and dryers having capacity of 20 pounds or more shall be anchored to the floor; 
o.  Where the water pressure on the premises exceeds 80 psi an approved pressure reducing value shall be required; 
p.  Each coin-operated laundry shall have at least one floor drain in the area of washing machines which drain shall be at least three inches in width providing that a coin-operated laundry in existence on the effective date of this chapter do not to comply with this subsection; if alternative drainage arrangements satisfactory to the community services director are provided; 
q.  Each coin-operated laundry that is connected to a sewer must be designed to discharge sanitary sewer comply with all local and state laws regulations relating to acceptance of waste at the sewage treatment plant; 
r.  Wastewater shall not be discharged into storm sewers or open streams when discharged wastewater cannot be made to a sewer designed to discharge sanitary sewage, waste discharge tanks of sufficient size to be installed from which waste accumulation shall be transported to improve disposal area or wastewater treatment plant are required; 
s.  Each coin-operated laundry shall comply with all other applicable provisions of the City Code. 
(5)  Development standards shall be as follows: minimum lot size 20,000 square feet; minimum lot with 100 feet; minimum front yard/major streets 75 feet or to a street 60 feet; collector 50 feet; minimum side yard 15 feet abutting residential use 30 feet; minimum rear yard 20 feet abutting residential use 40 feet; 
(6)  Each lot shall have frontage on a major arterial or collecting street; and 
(7)  Compliance with subsections (2) through (6) and whether or not the conditional use is in the best interest of the health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the city shall be the standards used by mayor and council to issue the conditional use permit. 
(Ord. No. 2007-03, § 1, 2-20-2007) 
Sec. 93-2-19. - Vehicle sales accessory to lending institutions; special provisions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision contained within this chapter, vehicle sales may be conducted by the owner of property on which the principal use is established and shall comply with the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  All vehicle sales accessory to lending institutions shall be deemed customary accessory uses in any commercial zone. For purposes of this section, the term lending institution shall be defined as an entity that conforms to one of the following classifications found in the North American Industrial Classification System manual published in 2002 by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget: 
(a)  522110 Commercial banking. This industry comprises establishments primarily engaged in accepting demand and other deposits and making commercial, industrial and consumer loans. Commercial banks and branches of foreign banks are included in this industry. 
(b)  522120 Savings institutions. This U.S. industry comprises establishments primarily engaged in accepting time deposits, making mortgage and real estate loans and investing in high grade securities. Savings and loan associations and savings banks are included in this industry. 
(c)  522130 Credit unions. This industry comprises establishments primarily engaged in accepting members' share deposits in cooperatives that are organized to offer consumer loans to their members. 
(2)  Such sales shall not be conducted more often than two times per calendar year and shall be limited to four days per sale. 
(3)  All vehicles displayed shall be operable and free of major body damage. 
(4)  Vehicles shall be stored in lawful parking spaces and not in any driveways or aisles. 
(5)  The number of vehicles displayed shall not exceed fifty percent of the available parking spaces on the premises. 
(6)  Signs associated with such sales shall be limited to one banner sign having a maximum area of 32 square feet which shall be unaffected by other provisions of the sign ordinance as to sign area. Such advertising shall be limited to the period of the actual sale and one week prior to the sale. 
(Ord. No. 2014-09 , § 1, 10-7-2014) 
Sec. 93-2-20. - Use regulations regarding group homes. 
    In addition to the other requirements set forth in this section, group homes may be permitted in the following zones: R-O, R-AD, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-I, R-SF, R-5, V, U-V, RMU, N-C and C-R, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  No additional parking beyond the existing driveway and garage areas is allowed on the property where the group home is located, and vehicles may only be parked on such areas. In the event that additional parking is required, the operator of the group home may apply for a variance from the board of appeals to increase the existing parking area, such increase to be confined to the rear of the lot; 
(2)  The group home provides a current list of residents living in the facility who have disabilities, and information concerning special needs to the Hapeville fire and police departments to ensure resident safety and evacuation from the premises in the event of a fire or other emergency within the home; 
(3)  The governing body for the facility provides the city with the names and telephone numbers of two persons who can be contacted in the event of an emergency; 
(4)  As used herein "governing body for the facility" shall mean the board of trustees, the partnership, the corporation, the association, or the person or group of persons who maintain and control the facility and which is legally responsible for operation of the facility; 
(5)  The existing dwelling is upgraded and inspected by the city with respect to the accommodation and accessibility of the dwelling by disabled persons; 
(6)  No controlled substances are stored, served, sold, consumed, or in the possession of any person on the premises; 
(7)  An operable telephone is maintained and readily available in the facility; provided further that the city shall be contacted immediately in the event that a physical altercation or any violation of state or federal law or local ordinances occurs on the premises; 
(8)  The facility at all times of operation adheres to the guidelines and procedures as provided by the state department of human resources, office of regulatory services; 
(9)  Unless more stringent restrictions apply, every room in all group homes and similar facilities, occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 80 square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof; 
(10)  The facility is rendered compliance with all applicable life safety codes including but not limited to federal, state and local fire and building codes; 
(11)  Any exterior modifications to the existing structure will be consistent with the residential character of the surrounding neighborhood; 
(12)  The group home has obtained all federal and/or state permits or licenses required for its operation; 
(13)  The group home must register with the city community services department and provide a copy of all State licenses and documentation to the city's building official and code enforcement officer; 
(14)  The group home shall meet all parking regulations as identified in this Code; 
(15)  The group shall apply for and receive a city business license prior to operation; and 
(16)  The group home is not located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of an existing group home. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 2, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-15 , §§ 2, 3, adopted August 4, 2015, enacted provisions intended for use as sections 93-2-19 and 93-2-20. Inasmuch as there are already provisions designated as section 93-2-19, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as sections 93-2-20 and 93-2-21. 
Sec. 93-2-21. - Use regulations regarding personal care homes. 
(a)  Personal care homes, as defined herein, may be permitted in any RMU, V, U-V, C-R, N-C, C-1 and C-R zone, subject to special use permit and the following conditions: 
(1)  Any exterior modifications to an existing structure or construction of a new structure shall be consistent with the character of the surrounding area; 
(2)  The personal care home provides on-site parking and/or drop-off space adequate to meet the needs of the proposed facility; 
(3)  The personal care home provides to the Hapeville fire and police departments a current list of residents living in the facility who have disabilities, and information concerning special needs, so as to ensure each resident's safety and evacuation from the premises in the event of a fire or other emergency within the home; and 
(4)  The personal care home has obtained all federal and/or state permits or licenses required for its operation. 
Table 1. Community Residences by Zone 
Use R-O, R-AD, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-I, R-SF & R-5 RMU V U-V C-R N-C C-1 C-2 Group Home P P P P P P X X Adult Day Care Facility X P P P P P P S Nursing Home X S S X S S S X Personal Care Home X S S X S S S X P-Permitted X-Nonpermitted S-Special Use"  
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 3, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-2-20. 
Sec. 93-2-22. - Billiard rooms and billiard tables. 
(a)  Billiard rooms, as defined in this chapter, are prohibited in every zoning district of the city. 
(b)  No facility shall offer to the public more than one freestanding billiard table, unless such billiard tables are operated as permitted within this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 3, 3-1-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 3, adopted March 1, 2016, enacted provisions intended for use as section 93-2-21. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as section 93-2-22. 
Sec. 93-2-23. - Extended-stay hotels. 
    No extended-stay hotel shall be initially constructed or thereafter operated, and no hotel may be converted to be, and operated as an extended-stay hotel unless in full compliance with each of the following provisions: 
(a)  Extended stay hotel standards. 
(1)  The minimum number of guest rooms shall be 100. 
(2)  Public access to the interior of the premises shall be by means of a single, main entrance within view of a registration desk that is staffed by at least one person at all times. 
(3)  A manager and a minimum of one additional employee shall be on duty on the premises at all times. 
(4)  The minimum number of floors shall be four. 
(5)  A minimum lighting intensity of two and one-half foot-candles shall be maintained in all motor vehicle drives and parking areas and all pedestrian areas. 
(6)  A minimum lighting intensity of five foot-candles shall be maintained at each public entrance and exit. 
(7)  A flat roof is allowed; sloped roofs shall have a minimum roof pitch of a six-to-twelve ratio (6:12). 
(8)  All construction shall comply with the architectural design standards that allow brick, concrete stucco, stone and wood. In addition, glass in combination with metal and approved synthetic finishes complying with the "Dryvit" standards acceptable to the city shall be allowed. 
(9)  Management must provide without additional charge guest room cleaning on a minimum schedule of once weekly. 
(10)  Outside storage, long term parking of heavy equipment, and parking of construction or related equipment shall be prohibited. 
(11)  Any pay phone on the premises shall only be located in the lobby of the building. 
(12)  A minimum of two of the following amenities shall be offered for the use of all guests: 
a.  Fitness room. 
i.  The fitness room of an extended-stay hotel with between 100 and 200 guest rooms shall be no less than 275 square feet. Further, the fitness room must contain a minimum of four pieces of exercise equipment. Four required pieces must include the following: One treadmill, one upright or recumbent cycle, one elliptical cross trainer or stair climber and a two strength station gym or two independent strength pieces. 
ii.  The fitness room of an extended-stay hotel with over 200 guest rooms shall be no less than 350 square feet. Further, the fitness room must contain a minimum of six pieces of exercise equipment. Six required pieces must include the following: Two treadmills, two upright or recumbent cycles, one elliptical cross trainer or stair climber and a two-station gym or two independent strength pieces. 
b.  Swimming pool, with dimensions of no less than 30 square feet by 60 square feet. 
c.  A minimum of two meeting rooms, each having, dimensions of no less than 1,200 square feet. 
(13)  A daily hot breakfast shall be made available on the premises, by the hotel, for consumption by guests. 
(14)  Affiliation of the hotel with a national chain shall be required. 
(15)  A minimum of a three-star rating from the Smith Travel Accommodations Report, or its successor(s)-in-interest, shall be required. 
(b)  Hotel guest room standards. 
(1)  Access to guest rooms shall be via an interior corridor, only, with guest room doors opening only onto such corridors. 
(2)  No guest room shall be directly accessible from the exterior of the building. 
(3)  Access to individual guest rooms shall be by magnetic card access or as otherwise required by fire or life safety regulations. 
(4)  Room furnishings shall be subject to inspection by the city police chief who shall evaluate the furnishings for "wear and tear" on a seven-year cycle and shall be authorized to require replacement of any furnishings deemed to be in disrepair or otherwise in need of replacement. 
(5)  All guest rooms shall be protected with a smoke detector and sprinkler system approved by the city fire department. 
(6)  All guest rooms shall provide an automatic power shut off timer for each stove top unit or other type burner. 
(7)  No guest room permitted under this section shall be converted to or used as an apartment or condominium. 
(8)  Guest room amenities shall be consistent with or exceeding an upscale market class as defined by the Smith Travel Accommodations Report or its successor(s)-in-interest. 
(c)  Maximum number of certificates of occupancy available. The number of certificates of occupancy allowed, at one time, for the operation of an extended-stay hotel within the city shall not exceed four. The lots of the holders of certificates of occupancy, existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, for extended-stay hotels in the city bear the Fulton County Parcel Identification numbers of 14 0127 LL0356, 14 0127 LL1107, and 14 0098 00090476. 
(d)  Zoning districts. Extended-stay hotels shall be located only within the areas designated as "high intensity mixed use" or "commercial", on the "City of Hapeville Future Development Map", dated October 21, 2014, and as may be amended from time to time. The city future development map is available for inspection during normal business hours in the office of the city clerk. Further, no extended-stay hotel shall be developed on a lot abutting any area occupied, planned (as so designated on the city future development map) or zoned for residential use, only. 
(e)  Penalties for noncompliance. An extended-stay hotel that fails to meet the requirements of the above subsections (a) through (d) is prohibited from offering cooking facilities in more than 20 percent of its total units. Further, any extended-stay hotel that fails to meet the requirements of this section shall be subject to citation imposing the maximum penalty allowed under the charter and ordinances of the city for each day of noncompliance. Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense punishable by a separate citation. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18 , § 4, 8-16-2016) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-18 , § 4, adopted August 16, 2016, enacted provisions intended for use as sections 93-2-22 and 93-2-23. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated as section 93-2-22, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as sections 93-2-23 and 93-2-24. 
Sec. 93-2-24. - Hotels or motels with cooking facilities. 
    Any hotel guest room that includes cooking facilities shall have a total floor area of not less than 400 square feet for an efficiency or one bedroom unit, a total floor area of not less than 600 square feet for a two bedroom unit, and not less than an additional 150 square feet of floor area for each additional bedroom; and provided further that all proposed hotel and motel developments shall be subject to the site plan review requirements of section 93-2-16. 
(Ord. No. 2016-18 , § 5, 8-16-2016) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-2-23. 
Sec. 93-2-25. - Home occupations; special provisions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, all home occupations shall comply with the following restrictions and limitations: 
(1)  No home occupation shall be established, maintained or operated that provides or offers any group instruction, any group assembly or any group activity. The offering of individual lessons (including, but limited to, art, music, dance, language or cultural lessons) is permitted where each session is limited to no more than two pupils. 
(2)  No home occupation shall be established, maintained or operated which has a separate source of, or separate account for, electrical power other than that provided to the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted. 
(3)  Except as may be allowed by section 93-3.3-13 or section 93-3.3-17, there shall be no evidence of a home occupation on the exterior of the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted. 
(4)  No merchandise or equipment used in the operation of a home occupation may be stored on the exterior of the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted or stored in an accessory building located on the same lot as the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted. 
(5)  No merchandise or goods sold in the operation of a home occupation may be displayed or offered for sale in a manner that is visible from the exterior of the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted. 
(6)  No home occupation shall employ any person other than an immediate or extended family member of a resident of the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted. 
(7)  The operation of a home occupation shall not use more than 25 percent of the ground floor area of the dwelling in which the home occupation is conducted. 
(8)  The operation of a home occupation shall not involve the use of chemicals, machinery or electrical power that creates noise, noxious odors or hazards that endanger the health, safety or welfare of residents of the city or that are otherwise disruptive to the residents of the city. 
(9)  Only motor vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles may be used in connection with the operation of a home occupation. On-street parking of such motor vehicles is permitted. The use of other types of motor vehicles (included, but not limited to, trucks) in connection with the operation of a home occupation and on-street parking of such motor vehicles is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2018-01 , § 2, 1-9-2018) 
ARTICLE 3. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 93-3-1. - Purpose and applicability. 
    In order to avoid individual hardship whenever reasonable and not in conflict with the general welfare of the city and for purposes herein outlined, the following provisions apply to all zones. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-41) 
Sec. 93-3-1.2. - Reserved. 
Note- Ord. No. 2016-19 , § 2, adopted August 2, 2016, relocated the provisions of the former section 93-3-1.2, which pertained to the zoning map and derived from Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, adopted July 3, 2007 and Ord. No. 2016-12 , § 2, adopted April 5, 2016, to section 93-3.1-2. 
Sec. 93-3-2. - Nonconforming uses permitted. 
    Except as herein specified in section 93-3-11, the lawful use of any building or land existing at the time of the enactment of the chapter may be continued, although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. Provided that properties that have been developed for a minimum of 20 years may be used in the manner as originally developed or used within a minimum of 20 years, provided that no expansion on the building footprint or floor area may be made and that the use is permitted in the zone assigned to the property with regards to the area of parking, floor area and sidewalk width requirements. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-42; Ord. No. 2013-05, § 1, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 93-3-3. - Unsafe structures. 
    Any nonconforming structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority may be restored to a safe condition unless otherwise prevented by law. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-43) 
Sec. 93-3-4. - Construction approved prior to chapter. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in plans, construction or designated use of a building for which a building permit has been heretofore issued and the construction of which has begun. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-44) 
Sec. 93-3-5. - Restoration. 
    Any nonconforming building or use which is damaged or destroyed, by fire or other such causes, may be restored or replaced to the extent of its existence immediately prior to such damage or destruction, provided that required permits for such restoration or replacement are secured, work on restoration or replacement is initiated within a period of one year from the date of the damage or destruction, and such restoration or replacement complies with any nuisance abatement requirements. In addition, with the exception of single-family detached dwellings, such restoration or replacement shall comply with current building, architectural, and zoning code structural and dimensional requirements. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-45; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 86-5, 7-1-1986; Ord. No. 87-20, 7-7-1987; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 1, 4-2-2013; Ord. No. 2014-05, § 1, 5-6-2014) 
Sec. 93-3-6. - Abandonment. 
    Whenever a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of six months, that use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The following factors shall be utilized in determining whether a nonconforming use has been discontinued: 
(1)  Dilapidation or significant disrepair such as broken windows, peeling paint, roof deterioration, or other conditions or deficiencies that constitute a code violation; 
(2)  Unkempt lawn or poor maintenance of plants, trees, or other landscape materials; 
(3)  Poorly maintained parking surfaces or driveways; 
(4)  Inoperable or unregistered vehicles or vehicles otherwise in disrepair; 
(5)  Disconnection of electrical power or public water service at the request of the owner; 
(6)  Failure of the owner to maintain an occupational tax permit, as applicable; 
(7)  Revocation of a certificate of occupancy for a period of six months. 
    Notwithstanding any such abandonment, a property that has been developed for a minimum of twenty years at the time of abandonment may conform to the parking, floor width area, and sidewalk width requirements as originally developed upon its re-use. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-46; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 2, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 93-3-7. - Change to another nonconforming use not allowed. 
    No nonconforming use may be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-47) 
Sec. 93-3-8. - Changes. 
    Once changed to a conforming use, no building or land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-48) 
Sec. 93-3-9. - Enlargement. 
    No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in any way. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-49) 
Sec. 93-3-10. - Zone changes. 
    Approval of a rezoning by the mayor and council shall automatically adjust the minimum and maximum setbacks to the extent necessary to render such existing structures conforming. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-50; Ord. No. 2013-04, § 3, 4-2-2013) 
Sec. 93-3-11. - Notice to owners of nonconforming property. 
    Upon a determination by the city planner that use or structure was rendered nonconforming by rezoning of a property or adoption of an ordinance or any amendment thereto, the city shall notify the owner, in writing, of the legal, nonconforming status of the use or structure. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 4, 4-2-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-04, § 4, adopted April 2, 2013, amended the Code by repealing former § 93-3-11, and adding a new § 93-3-11. Former § 93-3-11 pertained to discontinuance of a nonconforming use, and derived from the Code of 1981, § 8-5-51. 
Sec. 93-3-12. - Demolition of nonconforming structures initiated by the owner. 
    Destruction or removal of buildings which preexisted rezoning shall reinstate the development standards of the then applicable zoning regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2013-04, § 5, 4-2-2013) 
ARTICLE 3.1. - ZONES 

Sec. 93-3.1-1. - Zones created. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the total area of the city is hereby divided into the following zones: 
(1)  R-0 zone, one-family detached; 
(2)  R-1 zone, one-family detached; 
(3)  N-C zone, neighborhood commercial; 
(4)  R-2 zone, two-family residential; 
(5)  R-3 zone, single-family attached; 
(6)  R-4 zone, multifamily residential; 
(7)  R-I zone, residential infill overlay; 
(8)  R-AD zone, residential architectural design; 
(9)  C-R zone, commercial-residential; 
(10)  C-1 zone, retail commercial; 
(11)  C-2 zone, general commercial; 
(12)  I-1 zone, light industrial; 
(13)  I-2 zone, heavy industrial; 
(14)  B-P zone, business park; 
(15)  D-D zone, downtown development; 
(16)  C-T zone, commercial transportation; 
(17)  P-D zone, planned unit development; 
(18)  R-5 zone, single-family attached and detached; 
(19)  V zone, village; 
(20)  R-SF Zone, residential single-family; 
(21)  U-V Zone, urban village; and 
(22)  A-D Zone, arts district overlay. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-61; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 1, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 2004-25, § 1(8-5-61), 12-21-2004; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 1(8-5-61), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 2, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-3.1-2. - Zoning map. 
    The above zones are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled "City of Hapeville Official Zoning Map" adopted April 5, 2016, as amended from prior maps, this map and all explanatory matters thereon is hereby made a part of this chapter, and will hereafter be referred to as "zoning map." This map shall be a public record. This map shall be retained in the office of city clerk and shall be made accessible to all affected through that office. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-62; Ord. No. 2003-10, § 1, 7-01-2003; Ord. No. 2004-20, § 1(8-5-62), 11-2-2004; Ord. No. 2005-11, § 2(8-5-62), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2006-03, § 1, 3-7-2006; Ord. No. 2006-11, § 1, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2007-09, § 1, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 2008-22, § 1, 1-6-2009; Ord. No. 2016-19 , §§ 1, 4, 8-2-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.1-3. - Rules for determining boundaries of zones. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid zones as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where zone boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, or street lines, those centerlines or street lines shall be construed to be those boundaries. 
(2)  Where zone boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, those lot lines shall be construed to be those boundaries. 
(3)  Where the zone boundaries are neither lot lines nor centerlines of streets, nor street lines, unless dimensioned or otherwise clearly indicated on the zoning map, they shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-63) 
ARTICLE 3.2. - CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 93-3.2-1. - Permit required. 
    Zoning districts established herein permit certain uses which are allowable therein provided they meet specified conditions, as set forth therein and here. No such use shall be permitted until a conditional use permit has been issued authorizing such use. The procedures for granting such permits shall be the same as for amendments to the zoning ordinance or zoning map. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-251; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 93-3.2-2. - Review of applications. 
    Those conditions specified in the zoning district regulations shall be considered to be the minimum standards which must be met before the conditional use application may be considered by the planning commission for review and recommendation and the mayor and council for decision. In deciding upon whether or not a conditional use meets the minimum standards and promotes the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city, the mayor and council shall utilize the applicable standards of review of section 93-25-6. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-252; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 93-3.2-3. - Issuance of permit. 
    If the mayor and council, after applying the evidence to the standards of review, have been convinced that the allowance of the conditional use will promote the health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the city, a conditional use permit may be granted, subject to those provisions that may be imposed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-253; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 93-3.2-4. - Procedures regarding delays in use of condition. 
    If a building permit, grading permit or occupation tax permit has not issued and construction (if any is necessary) begun within a 12-month period after such conditional use is approved, the conditional use may be withdrawn at a meeting of the mayor and council. The mayor and council may then reinstate the prior zoning district and regulations. In the alternative, the mayor and council may extend the conditional use for 12 months and any number of subsequent 12-month periods by only one such period at a time. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-254; Ord. No. 2002-05, § 1, 3-5-2002) 
Sec. 93-3.2-5. - Special use permit procedures. 
    Mayor and council may in considering a special use permit following a public hearing impose reasonable conditions deemed necessary to the protection or benefit of owners of adjacent and nearby properties to ensure compatibility of the proposed development or use with surrounding uses. The decision of mayor and council concerning consideration of a special use shall be given to the applicant in writing, by certified U.S. mail to the address indicated in the application. Aggrieved applicants shall have 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the notice in which to petition the superior court of Fulton County for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 2, 3-19-2013; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 4, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-3.2-6. - Special use permit criteria and standards. 
(a)  Special use permit criteria. Special uses are compatible uses of land or the improvement of structures within a zoning district that reasonably require special consideration and therefore, are not allowed "by right." The following standards shall be considered in evaluating the appropriateness of all proposed special uses of property: 
(1)  Impact on the use or development of adjacent properties, or the surrounding area, as concerns public health, safety or general welfare; 
(2)  Capacity of the lot to accommodate the use and satisfy the dimensional requirements of the ordinance; 
(3)  Compatibility with adjacent properties and other land uses in the vicinity; 
(4)  Potential nuisance or hazardous characteristics, specifically as concerns the number of individuals projected to use such facility or nature of the activity; 
(5)  Impact on traffic movement, availability of off-street parking, options for buffering or protective screening, hours and manner of operation, lighting, signs and access to the property; and 
(6)  Conformance of the special use to other requirements of the ordinance. 
The following additional standards are to be applied to applications for airport parking facilities, car rental agencies and commercial parking lots: 
(b)  Airport parking facility standards. 
(1)  No property which is dedicated exclusively to airport parking shall be considered for a special use permit. 
(2)  Only properties zoned as C-2 or U-V shall be considered for a special use permit. 
(3)  Applicants must document compliance with the current parking requirements for the permitted use and excess parking in an amount equal to the number of spaces proposed for airport parking. The number of airport parking spaces shall not exceed 10 percent of the parking requirement for the development. 
(4)  New office or hotel developments may allocate up to 20 percent of the ordinance required parking for airport parking. 
(5)  All properties on which airport parking is operated shall fully comply with the perimeter landscaping requirement of the ordinance. This standard shall apply to all new construction and existing development which shall be retrofit to achieve compliance. 
(c)  Car rental agency standards. 
(1)  Car rental agencies may only be established on properties zoned C-2. 
(2)  Only minor mechanical repairs shall be conducted on-site; no body work shall be performed in association with a car rental agency. 
(3)  Perimeter landscaped areas abutting a public right of way shall be the lesser of ten percent of the linear feet of road frontage or 30 horizontal feet. Perimeter landscaping along the common boundary of any residential use shall have a minimum horizontal dimension of 30 feet. All perimeter landscaping shall conform to the landscaping requirements of the ordinance and evergreen tree and shrub species shall comprise one-half or more of the planting requirement. 
(d)  Commercial parking lots. 
(1)  Commercial parking shall be permitted as a customary accessory use or a principal use in the V, U-V, D-D, C-1 and C-2 zones. 
(2)  Commercial parking lots established following the date of adoption of this ordinance shall be subject to all provisions of section 93-23-18, landscape requirements for vehicular use areas. 
(3)  Any commercial parking lot that abuts a residential use or zoning district shall provide a landscaped buffer in compliance with section 93-3.2-6(c)3. 
(Ord. No. 2013-02, § 2, 3-19-2013) 
ARTICLE 3.3. - SIGNS AND MURALS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), adopted April 5, 2016, repealed and reenacted article 3.3 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, article 3.3, divisions 1 and 2, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 2014-07 , §§ 1-3, adopted August 19, 2004, and Ord. No. 2014-12 , § 1, adopted October 21, 2014. 

DIVISION 1. - SIGNS 

Sec. 93-3.3-1. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
(a)  This division seeks to create the legal framework necessary to ensure a comprehensive and balanced system of signs within the city. A comprehensive regulation is necessary to ensure that signs installed in the city are compatible with the unique nature and character of the community. The purpose of this division is to preserve the right of free speech and expression, facilitate appropriate communication between people and their environment, promote the public health, safety and welfare, and avoid the visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. 
    With these concepts in mind, the provisions in this division, which regulate signs by such factors as design, size, height, spacing and location, but not on the basis of any message conveyed by such signs, and also regulate the maintenance of signs, are hereby established to achieve the following purposes: 
(1)  To protect the health, safety, general welfare and property values of residents and property owners of the city. 
(2)  To promote and implement the goals, objectives and policies adopted in the comprehensive plan. 
(3)  To effectively balance public and private objectives by allowing adequate signs for the needs of business and developers. 
(4)  To regulate the installation and placement of signs in order to provide safe operating conditions for pedestrians and motorists by eliminating unsafe, cluttered, distracting, or illegal signs. 
(5)  To promote the use of signs that are aesthetically pleasing, of appropriate scale, integrated with surrounding buildings and landscape, and compatible with the character of the surrounding area. 
(6)  To ensure the protection of free speech rights provided by the United States Constitution and the Georgia Constitution. 
(b)  It is the intent of this division to: 
(1)  Enable the public to locate and design sign facilities without difficulty or confusion. 
(2)  Provide functional flexibility, encourage variety and relate signing to basic principles of good design. 
(3)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs by regulating signs on the basis of such factors as design, height, spacing, and location, but not on the basis of the content of any message conveyed thereby. 
(4)  Provide an enhanced visual environment for residents and visitors and protect existing view sheds in the community. 
(5)  Promote economic development. 
(6)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless specifically stated otherwise: 
    Aerial view sign. This includes, but is not limited to, any sign horizontally affixed to a roof or attached to a roof such that the sign is not readily viewable from the surrounding ground. 
    Aggregate sign area. The total area of all signs on a lot. Entrance signs and subdivision signs shall not be considered in the calculation of aggregate sign area in the R-0, R-SF, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-AD, C-R and V zones, or in the U-V zone when a lot is developed for residential use. Street numbers assigned by the United States Postal Service shall not be considered in calculating the aggregate sign area. See definition of "Sign area." 
    Animated sign. A sign that features movement or a change of lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. This includes signs that rotate or revolve to display a message. 
    Awning sign. Any sign applied directly to or attached directly to an awning. 
    Billboard sign. Any ground sign having an area of 300 square feet or greater. Billboards may display a traditional static image, a "multiple message sign" accomplished by a mechanical transition to a second or third image or a "large screen video display" utilizing full motion video technology and commonly referred to as digital or LED billboards. 
    Canopy sign. See "Awning sign." 
    Changeable copy sign. Any sign that incorporates changing lettering or images to form a message or messages, whether such changes are accomplished electronically or manually. 
    Decision date. The date upon which the city planner makes a final decision on the approval or denial of a building permit application. 
    Entrance sign. Any ground sign placed at the intersection of a public street and a private entryway into a neighborhood or subdivision, apartment community, condominium complex, office park, industrial park or other building with multiple dwelling units or commercial units. 
    Erect. To build, paint, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix. 
    Externally illuminated signs. Any sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
    Feather flag sign. A temporary banner sign installed on a single post and manufactured of lightweight material designed to move with the wind. 
    Festoon. A decorative chain, strip or ornamentation hanging between two points. 
    Flag. A sign consisting of fabric or other similar material attached at one end to a pole or building and hanging freely such that it may flutter or move in the wind. 
    Flashing sign. Any sign the illumination of which changes in intensity, scrolls, flashes or changes message or appearance more often than once every ten seconds. 
    Ground sign. Any sign supported by uprights or braces permanently placed in the ground and not supported by or suspended from any building. 
    Handheld signs. Any sign larger than six inches by six inches carried by a person including but not limited to picket signs, shields or sandwich boards. 
    Internally illuminated signs. Any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines illuminated by electric lights, LEDs or luminous tubes located within the interior of the sign. 
    Median. A paved or planted strip dividing any public or private right-of-way, road or highway into lanes parallel to the direction of travel. 
    Monument sign. A ground sign mounted directly upon the ground and not raised by vertical braces or supports. 
    Noncombustible material. Any material that will not ignite at or below a temperature of 1,200 degrees Fahrenheit and will not continue to burn or glow at that temperature. 
    Nonconforming sign. Any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this article at the date of adoption. 
    Person. Any individual, entity, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Primary facade. The exterior wall of the building most nearly parallel to widest street on which the building fronts. 
    Projecting sign. Any sign which is perpendicular to a building or other structure and extends more than 12 inches horizontally from the plane of the building wall. 
    Road frontage. The distance measured in linear feet of a lot that abuts any public street. 
    Roofline. The highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof, the roofline is the principal ridgeline, or the highest line common to one or more principal slopes of roof. On a flat roof, the roofline is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is the higher. 
    Roof sign. Any sign attached to a building or structure and displayed above the lowest horizontal line of the building roof. 
    Sandwich board sign. A movable A-frame sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface on which it is located. 
    Secondary facade. Any exterior wall of a building that is most nearly parallel to an adjoining street that is not the primary facade. A secondary facade may also be to the rear of the primary facade and may adjoin a parking lot rather than a street. The end elevation of a building shall also be considered a secondary facade. 
    Sign. Every device, item, product, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, or reading matter used or intended to be used to attract the attention of or convey information to the general public. For purposes of determining number of signs, a single display surface or a single display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit shall be considered a single sign. Where information is displayed in a random manner without an organized relationship to other elements, or where there is reasonable doubt as to the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered a single sign. 
    Sign area. The total area on which a message is displayed on any sign. For double-faced signs, the side with the largest sign area shall be used in computing sign area. The sign area of a double-faced sign having unequal faces shall be the area of the larger face. The sign area of wall signs shall be the net geometric area measured by the smallest possible rectangle or combination of rectangles enclosing the display surface of the sign, including the outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations. Double-faced signs having an interior angle formed by the faces greater than 45 degrees shall be considered individual sign faces and the area of each face shall be used in computing sign area. Window sign area shall be measured in the same manner as wall signs. 
    Sign district. A portion of the city believed to share a common character and identified on the city "Sign District Map," Figure 1.1. Sign districts or character areas establish sign standards for properties located in these districts. See section 93-3.3-2-1. 
    Sign face. The part or parts of a sign that is/are used or can be used to convey information visually. 
    Sign structure. All members of a sign (including braces, posts and supports) except the sign face itself. 
    Stake sign. Any temporary sign supported by uprights placed in the ground and not supported by or suspended from any building with a maximum sign area of three square feet. 
    Storefront. The primary facade of a commercial building or a single, undivided tenant space that may be located in a multi-tenant commercial building. 
    Structural change or repair. Any reinforcement, replacement, bolstering, augmenting or substitution of a support element of a sign structure, including but not limited to alteration or replacement of the foundation, support structures, columns or beams, sign frame or sign head for any purpose other than to render the sign structure safe. 
    Structural trim. The molding, battens, cappings, nailing strips, latticing, and platforms which are attached to a sign structure, but which do not contribute to the conveying of a message. 
    Subdivision sign. Any sign placed at the intersection of two public roads, or at the intersection of a public and private road, where one of the roads is the main thoroughfare accessing a commercial or residential subdivision. 
    Submission date. The date stamped on a sign application indicating the date the application was actually received in the community services department. 
    Temporary sign. Any sign or device which is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, which is designed to be mobile or is designed to remain in place for a limited time. This includes, but is not limited to, signs designed to be transported regularly from one location to another, signs designed with wheels, regardless of whether the wheels remain attached to the sign, or signs tethered to an existing structure. Banners are considered "temporary signs." 
    Wall sign. Any sign which is attached parallel to or painted on an exterior building wall. 
    Weekend sign. A temporary sign that is not illuminated, internally or externally, and is erected between the time frame spanning 5:00 p.m. on any Friday and 8:00 a.m. on the subsequent Monday. 
    Window sign. Any sign displayed to an outside observer on or through a window or covering a window clearly visible from the right-of-way. Any sign that conveys a message at a scale as to font size or graphics or the use of such components as neon or LED lighting clearly intended to advertise to pedestrians or motorists in the right-of-way, despite the location in a store, shall be considered window signs. Window sign shall include signs posted on or otherwise affixed to a glass door. 
    Zoning district. The classification of parcels of land as defined under the city zoning chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-2-1. - Sign district map. 
Figure 1.1 Sign District Map 

(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-3. - Permit required. 
    Except where specifically excluded by a provision in this division, it shall be unlawful for any person to place, erect, repair, alter, relocate, change, modify or maintain any sign or any sign face without first obtaining a permit from the city planner in the manner set forth in this chapter and otherwise complying with the terms herein. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-4. - Permit application submission, requirements, decision, and appeal. 
(a)  Submission of sign permit applications. Sign permit applications must be delivered to the department of community services. All permit applications must be stamped by planning and zoning department personnel indicating the submission date. 
(b)  An application for a permit to erect a sign shall be made on a form or forms provided by the community services department and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name, mailing address, email address, if any, and phone number of the property owner and the applicant; 
(2)  Address of building, structure or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, property lines and other signs located on the lot; 
(4)  Three sets of accurately scaled drawings of the plans, contents, specifications, and method of construction and attachment to the building or the ground for the sign as well as a scaled drawing of the site showing drives, structures and any other limiting site features; 
(5)  Name of person erecting the sign; 
(6)  Written consent of the property owner, or the property owner's agent, granting permission for the placement of the sign on the property and permission to enter the property to maintain said sign; 
(7)  A written list describing all other signs located on the lot indicating the sign type, size, height and placement; and 
(8)  Complete calculations establishing the size and area of the sign. 
(c)  Approval of the community services department. The community services department shall review all sign applications that require a permit for compliance with the building codes and indicate such compliance in a written report attached to the application. After completing any such report, the community services department shall forward the application, including any other documents submitted by the applicant, and the report to the city planner. 
(d)  Decision of the city planner. 
(1)  Provided that the application is complete, all permit fees have been paid, and the proposed sign and the lot on which the sign is to be placed are in compliance with all requirements of this division and all other ordinances and laws of the city, the city planner shall render a determination and shall inform the applicant of his or her decision within 45 calendar days of the submission date. The city planner shall give notice to the applicant of his or her decision on such application by hand delivery or by mailing such notice, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before the 45th day. 
Upon the expiration of the 45-day period without a decision being made on the application, the applicant shall be permitted to erect and maintain the sign under this statutory provision unless and until the city planner notifies the applicant of a denial of the application and states the reasons for the denial. No person erecting a sign under this provision shall acquire any vested rights to continued maintenance of such signs, and following a subsequent denial of a sign application by the city planner, the sign must be brought into compliance with this division. 
(2)  The city planner shall reject any application that is incomplete or contains false material information or omissions within 45 calendar days of the submission date. Applications subsequently submitted in conformity with this section shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission rather than the original submission date. 
(3)  If the city planner determines that a previously issued sign permit was issued pursuant to an application that contained false material information or omissions, he or she shall promptly revoke such permit and the sign shall be immediately removed. 
(e)  Appeal. An applicant who is dissatisfied by a decision of the city planner on the application for a sign permit has the right to appeal that decision. Any such appeal shall occur under the following procedures: 
(1)  The applicant shall deliver a written notice of appeal to the city planner within 14 calendar days of his or her receipt of the notice of the decision. In the event that that no appeal is made within the 14-day period, the decision of the city planner shall become final. In the event that an appeal is filed, the city planner shall promptly transmit to the board of appeals all documents constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was made. 
(2)  The board of appeals shall (a) hold a hearing on any timely filed appeal no more than 30 days after the notice of appeal was received; and (b) make its final determination of the appeal not more than 30 days after the date of such hearing. The review by the board of appeals shall be limited to a determination of whether or not the decision of the city planner was clearly erroneous. 
(3)  Any appeal of the decision of the board of appeals shall be taken to the superior court of Fulton County by a petition for a writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-5. - Permit expiration date. 
    If work authorized under a permit has not been completed to the satisfaction of the code enforcement officer using common industry standards within six months after the date of issuance, the permit shall become null and void. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-6. - Permit fees. 
    Each application for a sign permit must be accompanied by a payment for the permit fee. The fee for a sign permit shall be as established by mayor and council from time to time. A copy of the fee schedule shall be available electronically on the city website or as hard copy in the community services department. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-7. - Identification labels. 
(a)  Every sign placed, constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this division, shall be plainly marked with the permit number issued for the structure firmly affixed on the sign in such a manner that the permit number shall be readily accessible and durable. 
(b)  Displaying a permit that has been tampered with, altered or mutilated, or displaying a sign without a permit, shall be a misdemeanor offense punishable in municipal court as set out in section 93-3.3-25. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-8. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  The city finds that nonconforming signs may adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare. Such signs may adversely affect the aesthetic character of the city and may adversely affect public safety due to the visual impact and structural characteristics of such signs on motorists. Accordingly, the following registration requirements are found to be necessary to minimize these possible adverse effects through annual inspections essential to enabling the city to remain aware of the location and maintenance of nonconforming signs. 
(b)  The owner(s) or authorized agent(s) of each nonconforming sign located within the city shall register such nonconforming sign with the city planner no later than six months after the effective date of this division and shall thereafter renew this registration, annually. Any nonconforming sign that does not comply with these registration requirements shall be deemed an illegal sign and shall be subject to the regulations applicable to illegal signs and all other enforcement provisions. The city planner shall provide a form for registering a nonconforming sign and shall annually inspect such sign to ensure continued conformity in all other respects with all other provisions of this division and any other applicable city ordinances or regulations. The initial registration fee shall be $50.00. Each subsequent renewal fee shall be $25.00. These fees are intended to offset administrative costs associated with monitoring compliance with this division. 
(c)  Signs which on the effective date of this division were approved and legally erected under previous sign regulations and which became nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this division may continue in existence subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No change shall be made in the size of any nonconforming sign, nor shall any structural change be made to any such sign, unless the sign is brought into compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Any nonconforming sign declared to be unsafe by the code enforcement officer shall be removed or rendered safe and brought into compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(3)  No nonconforming sign damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than 50 percent of its assessed value shall be repaired or rebuilt except in compliance with this division. Repair work shall take place within six months of the incident that caused the damage. 
(4)  Any sign erected on public property or in a public right-of-way in violation of this division may be removed by duly authorized employees of the city and the responsible party may be cited for such violation. 
(d)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except the substitution or interchange of poster panels or dismountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted, provided such materials do not constitute structural elements. 
(1)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs shall be permitted. However, no structural repair or change in the size, shape or height of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to bring the sign into compliance with the requirements of this division. 
(2)  A nonconforming sign which meets all requirements of the City Code when erected may remain in place until one of the following conditions occurs: 
a.  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign renders the sign a hazard; or 
b.  The sign has been damaged to such extent that structural repairs are required to restore the sign. A structural repairs are any repair necessary to maintain the stability and structural integrity of the sign and are not merely aesthetic in nature. 
(3)  No structural repair, change in shape, size, height or design of a nonconforming sign shall be permitted except to render such sign in compliance with all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-9. - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this division shall apply to all signs erected within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-10. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Any sign that due to its color, shape, size, height, lighting, location, position and/or design appears to be in imitation of, or may be considered by motorists and pedestrians, to be an official traffic control sign or signal. 
(2)  Signs attached to telephone, electrical power or light poles. 
(3)  Roof signs. 
(4)  Sandwich board signs located in any residential zoning district. 
(5)  A vehicle sign with a total sign area in excess of ten square feet, where the vehicle upon which the sign is painted, drawn or otherwise affixed meets the following: 
a.  Any part of the vehicle is parked for more than three consecutive hours within 100 feet of any public right-of-way; 
b.  The vehicle is visible from any public right-of-way; 
c.  The vehicle is not being actively loaded or unloaded; 
d.  If parked on a non-residential lot, the vehicle is not being used for the purpose of providing transportation for the owners, employees, inventory, merchandise, supplies or materials concerning a business operating on the lot; and 
e.  There are other available and accessible locations on or about the lot where the vehicle can be parked, which are not within 100 feet of any public right-of-way and visible from such. 
(6)  Animated signs involving motion or sound. 
(7)  Flashing, blinking, or varying light intensity signs, with the exception of changeable copy signs that meet the requirements of section 93-3.3-18. 
(8)  Streamers or searchlights. 
(9)  Inflatable signs or festoons. 
(10)  Feather flag signs. 
(11)  Building, window and door lighting having an intensity greater than 0.3 foot-candles measured as prescribed in a "Recommended Night-time Brightness Levels for On-Premises Electronic Message Centers (EMC's)" document published by the International Sign Association, April 2011. 
(12)  Any sign that impedes the view of an official traffic control sign or signal. 
(13)  Any sign that obstructs the sight of motorists or pedestrians so as to create a traffic safety hazard. 
(14)  Any sign in a public right-of-way or on city property. 
(15)  Any sign that is erected or maintained in such a manner so as to interfere with safe and free ingress and egress of any door, any window, any emergency exit or any fire escape. In addition, no sign shall be attached or otherwise affixed to any standpipe, any emergency exit, or any fire escape. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-11. - Signs requiring a special use permit. 
    The following signs require a special use permit. These signs must be historic in nature and must not include sound, flashing or blinking lights or lights of varying intensity. 
(1)  An animated sign that rotates. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-12. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  Temporary signs shall be limited to a maximum of two signs allowed twice per year for a period not to exceed 30 consecutive days. 
(b)  Temporary signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in sign area. 
(c)  Free standing temporary signs shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(d)  Temporary signs shall not be placed in any public right-of-way. 
(e)  All temporary signs shall be securely installed and shall meet all applicable safety standards as prescribed by the building code, electrical code and life safety code. 
(f)  Prior to issuance of a permit for a temporary sign, as prescribed by section 93-3.3-4, the applicant must demonstrate that such sign will not adversely affect public health, safety, welfare or aesthetics of the community or create a safety hazard to motorists or pedestrians. 
(g)  The code enforcement officer may give written notice to the owner of any temporary sign erected or maintained in violation of this division or any other city ordinances or laws and to the owner of the property or premises on which the sign is located. Such notice may require that the sign be removed within three calendar days. The code enforcement officer may cause removal of any such sign and impose the cost of removal as a lien on the property. 
(h)  No fee shall be required for issuance of a permit for two or fewer temporary signs in a single calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-13. - Exempt signs. 
    The following signs are allowed and exempt from the permit regulations contained in this division but, notwithstanding, must comply with all other applicable requirements in this division and the Code: 
(1)  A wall sign that does not exceed one square foot in sign area. 
(2)  Any sign not visible from a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A handheld sign that meets the requirements of section 93-3.3-18. 
(4)  One sign per each lot that is less than 36 square inches in sign area and that must be placed in any of the following locations: 
a.  On the front of every building, or every unit in a multiple unit building, residence or structure; 
b  On the side of an authorized United States Postal Service mailbox; or 
c.  On one post, which measures no more than 48 inches in height when placed and standing in ground and no more than four inches in width and which shall not be placed in any public right-of-way. 
(5)  A temporary sign that is not internally or externally illuminated and meets any of the following criteria: 
a.  For each lot during the period in which it is listed for sale or lease, one sign per each street frontage that is no more than 16 square feet in area, is no more than six feet in height to the top of the sign component when placed and standing in ground, and is not placed in any public right-of-way. Any sign erected under this subsection shall be removed within ten days after the lot has been sold or leased. 
b.  For a period of 45 days immediately preceding or following a federal, state, Fulton County, or city election or referendum, any lot may, in addition to any other signs authorized by this division, erect a maximum of four stake signs. Any sign erected under this subsection shall be removed one day after the conclusion of the election period, which period shall include the time preceding or following any run-off election. 
(6)  A weekend sign that meets all of the following requirements: 
a.  A weekend sign shall only be erected between the time frame beginning at 5:00 p.m. on any Friday and ending at 8:00 a.m. on the following Monday. 
b.  A weekend sign shall be removed no later than 8:00 a.m. on the first Monday after it is erected. 
c.  A lot or dwelling unit shall have no more than three weekend signs at any time. 
d.  A weekend sign shall not exceed a maximum sign area of four square feet. 
e.  No weekend sign shall be located on any public right-of-way. 
f.  A weekend sign shall only be located on private property for which the property owner, or the property owner's agent, has given prior, written permission for the placement of such sign. 
(7)  Any sign that meets the requirements of this subsection: 
a.  For each lot during the period that it is (1) being developed under an active building permit for new building construction issued by the city, (2) is undergoing interior renovation of an existing building located on such lot under an active building permit issued by the city and the costs of such renovation exceed 50 percent of the assessed value of the building, (3) is proposed for development and has received site plan approval from the planning commission, or (4) is proposed for development and has received design review approval from the design review committee, one ground sign for each street frontage may be installed. 
b.  No ground sign erected under this subsection shall be more than one square foot in area per each two feet of street frontage or more than eight feet in height as measured to the top of the sign structure. The area of each ground sign shall be based on the linear feet of frontage on the street on which the ground sign is displayed and shall not be cumulative based on other street frontage on which the property is located. No ground sign erected under this subsection shall exceed 200 square feet in area. 
c.  Any ground sign allowed under this subsection may be installed on construction site fencing located on the lot limited to the area of such fencing. 
d.  Any sign erected under this subsection shall be removed within ten days after the development occurring under the building permit or other city approval is completed or upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy, whichever comes first. 
e.  No sign erected under this subsection shall be internally or externally illuminated. 
    Any sign erected under this section shall not be calculated as part of the overall sign area allowed per lot by another section in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2016-21 , § 1, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-14. - Reserved. 
Sec. 93-3.3-15. - Maintenance. 
(a)  All signs regulated by this division shall be kept clean, neatly painted, and free from all electrical and mechanical hazards, including, but not limited to, faulty wiring and loose connections. The premises surrounding all signs shall be maintained by the owner in a sanitary and inoffensive condition, free of weeds, rubbish, and debris. The code enforcement officer may cause any sign which shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or the ground area around such a sign is not well maintained to be removed after due notice. 
(b)  The code enforcement officer shall give the permittee or owner of any sign which shows gross neglect or has become dilapidated or which the ground area around the sign is not well maintained ten days written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign. Upon the failure of the permittee or the owner to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the code enforcement officer shall have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-16. - Illumination. 
(a)  Internal illumination. The illumination of internally lit signs shall not exceed 20 foot-candles of incandescent light measured at a distance of ten feet from such signs. 
(b)  External illumination. Indirectly lit signs shall be lighted so that no light source is positioned in such a manner that creates a hazardous condition for motorists or pedestrians. 
(c)  Illuminated signs shall be installed in a manner that prevents spillover on direct light on adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. No illuminated sign shall be installed within 75 feet of any single-family dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-17. - Sign standards by sign district. 
(a)  Any sign not specifically allowed in a sign district under this section shall be prohibited in that district, except as otherwise provided for under this division. Size, height, setback, quantity and type of sign shall be regulated under sections 93-3.3-17 and 93-3.3-18 of this division. 
(b)  Single-family residential. Permitted sign types and regulations for signs in the single-family residential sign district in the city: 
(1)  An entrance sign located at the entrance of a subdivision. 
(2)  Wall signs. 
(3)  All signs shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any right-of-way and all electrical transmission lines. 
(4)  Except for an entrance sign, no sign shall be illuminated, internally or externally. An entrance sign may only be illuminated externally and may only be illuminated from dusk to dawn. 
(5)  Stake signs are the only type of permitted temporary signs. For regulations regarding temporary signs, see section 93-3.3.-12. 
(6)  The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed 20 square feet, regarding of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
Single-Family Residential 
Wall Sign Subdivision Sign Temporary Sign Maximum Height 4 feet 3 feet Maximum Width 8 feet 3 feet Maximum Area 1 square feet 32 square feet 3 square feet Maximum Number 1 1 2  
(c)  Commercial mixed use. Master planned developments in this sign district that are proposed or existing developments that propose a sign package may provide a detailed sign plan to planning commission for approval. The commission shall consider the purpose and intent of this division in determining the appropriateness of the sign package. Permitted sign types and regulations for signs in the commercial mixed use sign district include: 
(1)  Monument signs. 
(2)  Billboards, subject to section 93-3.3-19, Billboards. 
(3)  Projecting Signs, not to exceed a projection of six feet from the face of the building. Signs must provide for eight feet of minimum clear space between the bottom of any Sign and the sidewalk or ground. 
(4)  Wall signs. 
(5)  Sandwich board signs, which must be removed at the end of each business day and must allow at least five feet of unobstructed passageway. No sandwich board sign shall exceed six square feet in sign area. 
(6)  Window signs. 
(7)  Temporary signs, a maximum of two signs per lot per year. 
(8)  Entrance signs. 
(9)  Flags. 
(10)  All signs shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way and any electrical transmission line and shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the I-85 and I-75 rights-of-way. 
(11)  All exterior lighting shall comply with FAA requirements related to aircraft safety, and all exterior lighting shall be maintained in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the building official. 
(12)  Any sign to be erected by any owner, any tenant, any lessee, or any sublessee of a unit in a multi-story building shall be detailed in a sign plan that is submitted to the planning commission for approval prior to the erection of such sign. 
(13)  The sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of lot frontage, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
(14)  Standards for multi-tenant, multiple phase or multiple parcel developments: 
a.  Where possible, a uniform design scheme of signs shall be established for the development as a whole and/or for each building in the development and approved by the city. 
b.  Plans for the development shall include detailed descriptions of all Signs, including but not limited to, size, height, location, type, colors and materials to be used, lighting and ownership responsibility. 
c.  Plans for signs shall undergo the same review and approval process as is required of other aspects of the development. 
d.  All signs shall be designed, erected and maintained in accordance with an approved plan. 
e.  In addition to the signs allowed in this section, each individual unit with a storefront may have one wall sign with a sign area not to exceed one square foot for each horizontal linear foot of primary storefront, plus one sign on the secondary facade not to exceed one square foot for each horizontal linear foot of secondary facade. 
Commercial Mixed Use 
Ground Sign Projecting Sign Wall Sign Entrance Sign Temporary Sign Maximum Height 10 feet 4 feet/ Not above roofline 6 feet 6 feet Maximum Width 5 feet 5 feet 50% of façade width 8 feet Maximum Area 20 square feet 20 square feet 1 SF/LF of building or tenant façade 4 square feet 32 square feet Maximum Number 1 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade 1 2/year  
(d)  Downtown district. Permitted sign types and regulations for signs in the downtown sign district include: 
(1)  Projecting signs, which shall not exceed a projection of either four feet from any building or one-third of the width of any sidewalk, whichever is less. Projecting signs must provide for a minimum of eight feet of space between the bottom of the sign and the sidewalk or ground. 
(2)  Wall signs. 
(3)  Sandwich board signs that must be removed at the end of each business day and must accommodate a minimum of five feet of unobstructed walkway. No sandwich board sign shall exceed six square feet in sign area. 
(4)  Window signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the window area and shall be a maximum of 12 square feet of sign area. A second window sign of the same dimension shall be allowed on buildings with multiple frontages fronting on a public street. Interior neon or LED signs not to exceed an aggregate maximum of six square feet in sign area shall be permitted. 
(5)  Awning signs. 
(6)  Flags. 
(7)  Temporary signs, a maximum of two signs per lot per year. 
(8)  The total number of Signs in this district shall not exceed one sign of any allowed type for the primary building or tenant facade and one sign of any allowed type for each secondary building or tenant facade. 
(9)  All signs shall be setback a minimum of six feet from any public right-of-way and any electrical transmission line. 
(10)  The aggregate sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of lot frontage, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
Downtown District 
Projecting Sign Wall Sign Window Signs Awning Sign Temporary Sign Maximum Height Not above roofline 6 feet Maximum Width 4 feet 50% of façade width 8 feet Maximum Area Primary Facade 12 square feet 1 SF/LF of building or tenant façade 50% of window area 50% of awning area 32 square feet Maximum Area Secondary Facade 12 square feet 1 SF/LF of building or tenant façade 50% of window area Maximum Number 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade No Maximum 2 1  
(e)  General commercial. Master planned developments in the general commercial sign district that are proposed or existing developments that propose a sign package may provide a detailed sign plan to planning commission for approval. The commission shall consider the purpose and intent of this division in determining the appropriateness of the sign package. 
    Permitted sign types and regulations for signs in the general commercial sign district include: 
(1)  Ground signs. 
(2)  Billboards, subject to the requirements and limitations in section 93-3.3-19. 
(3)  Projecting signs, which shall not exceed a projection of six feet from the face of any building. 
(4)  Wall signs. 
(5)  Temporary signs, a maximum of two signs per lot per year. 
(6)  Window signs. 
(7)  Awning signs. 
(8)  Flags. 
(9)  The sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of lot frontage, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
(10)  All signs in this district shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way and any electrical transmission line, and shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the I-85 and I-75 rights-of-way, including off- and on-ramps. 
(11)  Except as provided in subsection 93-3.3-20(h), no wall sign or window sign shall be permitted above the ground floor of any building. 
General Commercial 
Ground Sign Projecting Sign Wall Sign Temporary Sign Window Sign Awning Sign Maximum Height 15 feet Not above roofline Maximum Width 8 feet 6 feet 50% of façade width 8 feet Maximum Area 50 square feet 32 square feet 1 SF/LF of building or tenant façade 32 square feet 50% of window area 50% of awning area Maximum Number 2 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade 2/year No Maximum 2  
(f)  Industrial. Permitted sign types and regulations for signs in the industrial sign district in the city: 
(1)  Ground signs. The maximum number of ground signs shall be one for every 500 linear feet of frontage or fraction thereof on a single frontage. Frontage on one street shall not be allocated to sign area on another street. One entrance sign shall be permitted at each entrance with a maximum of two such signs on a single street frontage. 
(2)  Billboards, subject to the requirements and limitations in section 93-3.3-19. 
(3)  Projecting signs, which shall not exceed a projection of six feet from the face of any building. Any projecting sign must provide a minimum of eight feet of space between the bottom of such Sign and the sidewalk or ground. 
(4)  Wall signs. 
(5)  Temporary signs, a maximum of two signs per lot per year. 
(6)  Window signs. 
(7)  Awning signs. 
(8)  Flags. 
(9)  The sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of lot frontage, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
(10)  All signs shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way and any electrical transmission line, and shall be setback a minimum of 25 feet from the I-85 and I-75 rights-of-way. 
Industrial 
Ground Sign Projecting Sign Wall Sign Temporary Sign Entrance Sign Window Sign Maximum Height 15 feet Not above roofline 4 feet Maximum Width 15 feet 6 feet 50% of façade width 8 feet 8 feet Maximum Area 50 square feet 32 square feet 1 SF/LF of building or tenant façade 32 square feet 32 square feet 50% of window area Maximum Number 3 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade 1/primary facade; 1/secondary facade 1 No Maximum  
(g)  Neighborhood commercial. Permitted sign types and regulations for signs in the neighborhood commercial sign district include: 
(1)  Monument signs. 
(2)  Projecting signs, which shall not exceed a projection of either four feet from any building or one-third of the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less. Any projecting sign must provide for a minimum of eight feet of minimum space between the bottom of such sign and the sidewalk or ground. 
(3)  Wall signs. 
(4)  Sandwich board signs, which must be removed at the end of each business day and must allow at least five feet of unobstructed passageway. A sandwich board sign shall not exceed six square feet in sign area. 
(5)  Window signs. 
(6)  Awning signs. 
(7)  Temporary signs, a maximum of two signs per lot per year. 
(8)  Flag. 
(9)  Any sign to be erected by any owner, any tenant, any lessee, or any sublessee of a unit in a multi-story building shall be detailed in a sign plan that is submitted to the planning commission for approval prior to the erection of such sign. 
(10)  The total number of Signs in this district shall not exceed two signs of any allowed type for the primary facade and one sign of any allowed type for each secondary facade. 
(11)  The sign area for any lot shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of lot frontage, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
(12)  All signs in this district shall be setback a minimum of six feet from any public right-of-way and any electrical transmission line. 
Neighborhood Commercial 
Ground Sign Projecting Sign Wall Sign Window Sign Awning Sign Maximum Height 6 feet Not above roofline Maximum Width 4 feet 4 feet 50% of façade width Maximum Area 20 square feet 10 square feet 1 SF/LF of building or tenant façade 50% of window area 50% of awning area Maximum 1 1/primary 1/primary No Maximum 2 Number facade; 1/secondary facade facade; 1/secondary facade  
(h)  Multi-family residential. Master planned developments in this sign district that are proposed or existing developments that propose a sign package may provide a detailed sign plan to planning commission for approval. The commission shall consider the purpose and intent of this division in determining the appropriateness of the sign package. 
    Permitted sign types and regulations for signs in the multi-family residential sign district include: 
(1)  An entrance sign that is located at the entrance of a subdivision. 
(2)  Temporary signs in a residential development, maximum size of 16 square feet. Such signs shall be removed at the expense of the owner upon the sale of all property in a development or the lease of all dwellings. 
(3)  The sign area for any lot in this district shall not exceed one square foot for every linear foot of lot frontage, regardless of the construction, placement or type of sign or signs. 
Multi-family Residential 
Subdivision Sign Temporary Sign Maximum Height 6 feet 6 feet Maximum Width 12 feet 8 feet Maximum Area 50 square feet 32 square feet Maximum Number 1/entrance 2/year  
(i)  Public institutional. The standards for signs to be erected on those lots or upon buildings in the public institutional sign district shall be subject to the standards of the neighborhood commercial sign district. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-18. - General sign regulations. 
    In addition to the limitations set forth in the other sections of this division, the following limitations shall apply to these specific types of signs: 
(1)  Wall signs. 
a.  No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. 
b.  Wall signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the width of the building or tenant facade, provided that no wall sign shall have an area exceeding one square foot for each horizontal linear foot of building or tenant facade. 
(2)  Projecting signs. 
a.  No projecting sign may be placed over any street, any alley, or any other public right-of-way available for vehicular traffic. 
b.  Any projecting sign located at a commercial business that is illuminated, either internally or externally, shall be illuminated between sunset and the close of business, on each side thereof, by lighting of at least five watts per square foot of sign surface, but in no case lighting that is less than 60 watts for each sign surface. 
c.  All projecting signs must be installed at a 90-degree angle to the building facade. 
d.  Projecting signs shall not project above the roofline or be installed above a height of 14 feet from the ground, whichever is lower. 
e.  Projecting signs must vertically clear sidewalks by at least eight feet and may project no more than four feet from a building or one-third of the width of the sidewalk, whichever is less. 
(3)  Awning signs. 
a.  An awning sign must be painted or installed directly on the awning. 
b.  The sign area of any awning sign shall not exceed 50 percent of the surface area of the awning. 
c.  Awnings must be a maximum of eight feet above the sidewalks and may extend to within one foot of the vertical plane formed by the curb or the public right-of-way line. 
(4)  Entrance signs. All entrance signs shall be placed on private property and shall not be placed in any public right-of-way. 
(5)  Entrance signs at subdivisions. All entrance signs at subdivisions shall be placed on private property and shall not be placed in any public right-of-way. 
(6)  Handheld signs. 
a.  Handheld signs are allowed during the time period in which a parade, picket, or procession that is permitted under sections 35-3-1 et. seq. occurs. 
b.  No handheld sign shall be placed or carried that extends beyond the width of the body of the individual holding such sign or that extends more than 24 inches above that individual's head. 
c.  All individuals carrying any such signs shall remain at least ten feet apart, shall not stand or loiter in front of any doorway, driveway or street intersection and shall not interfere with the general flow of traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular. 
d.  All handheld signs are exempt from the permitting requirements of section 93-3.3-4. 
(7)  Window signs. Window signs shall not exceed 50 percent of the window area of the building in which they are displayed. Window signs may be arranged as a single sign or as multiple signs. Window signs shall be limited to ground floor windows. Interior neon or LED signs not to exceed an aggregate maximum of six square feet shall be permitted. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Canopy signs. Canopy signs having a maximum area of 50 percent of the canopy face and limited to three faces shall be permitted. 
(10)  Sandwich board signs. 
a.  The owner of a building or occupant of a tenant space in a building in the downtown district, neighborhood commercial district or commercial mixed use district may display one sandwich board sign for each business having a storefront. Such signs must be constructed of wood, metal or durable plastic. The surface of any sandwich board sign may be chalkboard, whiteboard or other durable material. 
b.  No sandwich board sign may be placed as to restrict the flow of pedestrians. A minimum sidewalk clear zone of five feet shall be maintained. Sandwich board signs shall be removed at the end of each business day. 
c.  The maximum sign area of a sandwich board sign shall be six (6) square feet. 
(11)  Changeable copy or LED signs, excluding billboards. For the purpose of this section, "LED sign" shall mean a digital sign, including but not specifically limited to light-emitting diode (LED), liquid crystal display (LCD) and other similar technology signs. LED signs shall only be permitted for signs regulated under O.C.G.A. § 10-1164 and located in the general commercial sign district. 
a.  An owner or a permittee may incorporate up to 40 percent of the allowable sign area of a sign as a changeable copy sign, which shall be physically part of that sign. The changeable copy portion of the sign may not be installed absent the remaining 60 percent of the sign that shall be non-changeable copy or static in nature, excluding framing and other structural elements. 
b.  No changeable copy sign may change more often than six times per minute and no message shall change more than often than once every ten seconds. Signs shall accomplish message transitions in three seconds or less. The brightness of such signs shall not have an illumination level of more than three-tenths of a foot-candle above the average ambient light level measured 100 feet from the face of the sign. 
c.  A maximum of two LED panels shall be allowed on any one sign face. 
d.  The area of each LED panel shall not exceed ten percent of the total sign face. 
e.  LED signs shall be equipped with an automatic dimming device that shall lower the intensity of the sign illumination to ensure that a hazardous condition for motorists or pedestrians is not created. 
f.  LED signs shall remain, and appear to be, fixed and static. In no instance shall LED lights move, change, flash, or be animated or appear to move, change, flash, or be animated in any way. 
g.  The color of any characters, symbols, text, mark or the like must contrast with the field of the sign to provide for maximum visibility and legibility, and each character, symbol, text, mark or the like on the LED panel must be the same color. The background or field of the sign shall be a solid color. 
h.  Individual LED lighting erected at fuel stations shall not exceed a size of two feet and no LED panel shall be larger than 30 square feet or face any property zoned for single-family residential use. 
i.  No LED sign shall be located within 150 feet of any single-family residence, or any property zoned for single-family residential use. 
(12)  Reserved. 
(13)  Flags, excluding feather flags. An owner or a permittee may display a flag that meets the following regulations: 
a.  The following methods of displaying a flag are allowed: 
1.  Pole flags. A flag may be flown from a metal pole permanently placed in the ground. The length of the flag shall be no greater than one-quarter of the height of the pole. This guideline applies to poles 20 feet and taller. Flags flown on single family residential properties shall not exceed three feet from top to bottom and five feet in length. Flag poles on single-family residential properties shall not exceed 20 feet in height. Flags on small commercial, industrial, institutional, and multifamily properties, defined as properties of less than two acres or having buildings with less than 10,000 square feet of floor area, shall not exceed four feet from top to bottom and six feet in length. Flag poles on such properties shall not exceed 24 feet in height. Flags on all other commercial, industrial, and institutional properties shall not exceed six feet from top to bottom and ten feet in length and flag poles on these properties shall not exceed 40 feet in height. The pole may be of varying diameters, appropriate in scale to the length of the flag being flown. 
2.  Projecting flags. Flags may be flown from a metal or wooden pole attached to a bracket projecting from the side of a building or doorframe. The pole shall not exceed six feet in length, or one inch in diameter. Any flag flying from such a pole shall not exceed three (3) feet from top to bottom and five feet in length. Additionally, no flag displayed on a projected pole shall impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
3.  Window flags. Flags may be hung in the window of any non-residential property. The area of the flag shall be used in the calculation of the allowable window sign area. 
b.  Limit on number. The number of flags (whether displayed as a pole flag, a projecting flag, a window flag, or any combination thereof) that may be displayed on each property is limited by the maximum sign area allocated to said property. However, a maximum of three flags (whether displayed as a pole flag, a projecting flag, a window flag, or any combination thereof) shall be exempt from the limitations of the ordinance. Any additional flags (ground, projecting or window) displayed shall be used in the calculation of the ground, projecting or window sign area permitted on the property. 
c.  Condition of flags. Any flag that is displayed shall be in serviceable condition and fit for use. All fabric or similar material of which the flag is constructed (including any stitching) shall remain intact. Any flag that contains tattered or faded fabric or similar material (including stitching) shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-19. - Billboard signs. 
(a)  The regulation and design of all billboard signs shall be governed by this section, subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Billboard signs are permitted on any property having frontage on an interstate and located in any of the following sign districts: the commercial mixed use sign district; the general commercial sign district; and the industrial sign district. 
(2)  A billboard sign shall not be located more than 100 feet from an interstate right-of-way. 
(3)  In addition to the other information required in section 93-3.3-4, a permit issued by the state department of transportation authorizing the installation of the proposed billboard sign shall be submitted to the city planner simultaneously with the application for a permit to erect said sign. 
(4)  No billboard sign shall be located within 300 feet of a residentially zoned property as measured from the outermost edge of the sign to the closest point of the residential property. 
(5)  A billboard sign shall meet the setback standards of the zoning district, provided the structure setback from any interstate right-of-way shall be a minimum of 25 feet. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall exceed a height of 65 feet as measured from the ground to the top of the sign. 
(7)  A billboard sign shall have a maximum width of 48 feet and a maximum sign face area of 672 square feet. 
(8)  No billboard sign shall be located within 500 linear feet of any other billboard sign on the same side of the street, road or highway, including any such sign located outside of the city limits, as measured along the right-of-way. 
(9)  The sign area of a billboard sign located adjacent to an interstate right-of-way shall not be used in calculating "aggregate sign area." 
(b)  Multiple message billboard signs shall be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Multiple message billboard signs shall not be located within 500 feet of the nearest residentially zoned property, park, playground, recreation area, scenic area or cemetery, as measured from the outermost edge of such sign to the closest point of the above-referenced property line. 
(2)  When a message is changed mechanically, the transition shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. 
(3)  No multiple message billboard sign shall be placed within 5,000 feet of another multiple message billboard sign on the same side of the street, road, or highway. 
(c)  As light-emitting diode (LED) billboard signs, also known as digital billboards, present a different set of circumstances regarding their impact on the community, such signs shall be governed by the following additional standards: 
(1)  Digital billboards shall be limited to parcels fronting on interstate highways only, and shall be positioned for viewing from such interstate highways. 
(2)  No digital billboard shall be located within 500 feet of another billboard on the same side of the interstate highway. Billboard signs located outside the city limits shall be included in determining this distance. 
(3)  No digital billboard shall be located within 5,000 feet of another multiple message billboard, including any other digital billboard, on the same side of the highway. Billboard signs located outside the city limits shall be included in determining this distance. 
(4)  Digital billboards shall not be located within 500 feet of the nearest residentially zoned property, park, playground, recreation area, scenic area or cemetery, as measured from the outermost edge of the sign to the closest point of the above-referenced property line. 
(5)  All digital billboard images must remain stationary and not contain any visible moving parts, alternating, "crawling" or other moving messages or have the appearance of having moving parts or messages. 
(6)  The display, background or other message medium on a digital billboard shall not change more often than once every ten seconds, with a transition period of one second or less. 
(7)  No digital billboard shall be placed within 5,000 feet of another digital billboard on the same side of the street, road, or highway. 
(8)  A digital billboard shall contain a default design that will freeze the sign in one position should a malfunction occurs. 
(9)  Any maximum size limitations shall apply to the side of the multiple message sign with the greater area. 
(10)  The owner of a digital billboard shall arrange for an annual certification of the foot-candle intensity measured in foot-candles by an independent contractor showing compliance and provide such certification to the code enforcement officer. 
(11)  All digital billboards shall have installed an ambient light monitor that will continuously monitor and automatically adjust the brightness of the display based on ambient light conditions. Maximum brightness levels for digital billboards shall not exceed three-tenths foot-candles over ambient light levels measured as prescribed in a "Recommended Night-time Brightness Levels for On-Premise Electronic Message Centers (EMC's)" published by the International Sign Association, April 2011. Certification that the sign has been preset to automatically adjust the brightness to this level or lower must be provided to the code enforcement officer. 
(12)  Digital billboards shall meet the same installation and permitting requirements and inspections as adopted for electrified signs and all other signs. 
(13)  The owner or permittee of a digital billboard shall coordinate with the city in displaying, when appropriate, emergency information important to the travelling public including, but not limited to, Amber Alerts or alerts concerning terrorist attacks or natural disasters. Emergency information messages shall remain in the advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency that issues such information. 
(14)  The owner of a digital billboard shall provide contact information to the code enforcement officer for an individual who is available at any time and who is capable of turning off said sign promptly following a malfunction. 
(15)  At any time more than five percent of the LED display lights on a digital billboard malfunction or are no longer working, the owner or billboard permittee shall repair said sign within 60 calendar days or the sign will be subject to removal. 
(16)  In the event the code enforcement officer finds that a digital billboard causes glare, impairs the vision of a motorist, or otherwise poses a traffic safety hazard to motorists or pedestrians, the owner of said sign shall reduce the intensity of lighting on such sign to a level acceptable to the city within 24 hours of receipt of written notice by the code enforcement officer. 
(17)  Each digital billboard must comply with all state department of transportation rules and regulations applicable to electronic changeable message signs where not in conflict with this section. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-20. - Special requirements for all signs. 
(a)  Applicability. All lots, buildings, structures or property shall be regulated under the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Placement. All signs must be placed on a lot as defined in other sections of the zoning ordinance and the subdivision regulations. No sign may be placed on any lot where such lot does not meet the minimum requirements of the zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations. No sign may be placed on any lot that has road frontage only on an interstate or intrastate highway. 
(c)  Covering architectural elements. No placement of any sign shall cover or conceal architectural fenestrations, adornments, details, doors or windows unless the design review committee determines that the placement of such sign cannot be more appropriately located and that the placement of such sign will not adversely affect access to the building, cause unnecessary glare into the building or adversely impact the historic character or architectural theme of the building. 
(d)  Posting on trees, poles, etc. No sign shall be allowed to be tacked, painted, posted, marked, or otherwise affixed on trees, utility poles, or other similar structures, or on rocks, the ground itself, or other natural features. 
(e)  No posting on supports. No message may be displayed on any portion of the structural supports of any sign. 
(f)  Special situations; buildings of three stories or more. Those developments having buildings of three or more stories may be permitted one wall sign on the primary and secondary building or tenant facade not to exceed 50 percent of the width of the building or tenant facade and not exceeding an area of one square foot for each horizontal linear foot of building or tenant facade. Such wall signs shall be limited to the ground floor wall, only. A single wall sign may be installed on each facade of the highest floor, subject to a maximum width of 20 percent of the building facade and a maximum area of ten percent of the exterior wall area of that floor; the sign area and width allowance for such wall signs apply to each individual building facade and are not cumulative. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-21. - Construction standards for all signs. 
(a)  Building code compliance. All signs shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the building code as adopted and from time to time amended (hereinafter referred to as the "city building code") except that no building permit shall be required unless the building official determines that a structure must be built to support the sign. 
(b)  Materials required. All signs for which a permit is required by this division (excluding temporary signs) shall be designed and fabricated to conform to industry performance standards as concerns UV/sunlight exposure, abrasion, extreme temperatures, weather, chemicals and solvents, cleaning processes and graffiti. All signs for which a permit is required by this division (excluding temporary signs) shall be constructed of durable, noncombustible material with the exception of chemically treated plywood, also known as medium density overlay (MDO) plywood, redwood, sand blasted or carved wood having a minimum thickness of four inches and may also consist of aluminum, anodized aluminum, stainless steel, brass, polycarbonate, acrylic, and vinyl. 
(c)  Reflectors. Gooseneck reflectors and lights shall be permitted on ground signs, projecting signs, and wall signs; provided, however, the reflectors shall be provided with proper glass lenses so that no light creates a hazardous or dangerous condition. 
(d)  Other code compliance. All building, setback, zoning, or other relevant codes excluding building permitting (other than that permitting required elsewhere herein) shall be applicable to the location, construction and siting of signs and shall be read in harmony with this division. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016; Ord. No. 2016-21 , § 2, 7-19-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-22. - Variance for signs in this division. 
    In any appeal brought under section 93-3.3-4, the board of appeals shall judge a request for a variance from the terms of this division based on the following criteria: 
(1)  All signs and structures within the business development are in conformance with this division; and 
(2)  The variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to other property owners or tenants, or to the public good, nor would it impair the purpose and intent of this division; and 
a.  The board of appeals may consider factors such as the size of the buildings constructed on the subject lot, the potential to subdivide the lot, and the number of different tenants occupying the buildings. 
b.  Financial loss to the appellant is not sufficient grounds by itself to justify a variance. 
c.  Peculiar conditions or circumstances that are the result of actions of the current or former owner of the property covered by the application cannot be considered as grounds to justify a variance. 
d.  The authority to erect and maintain additional signs as may be permitted under any such variance shall terminate upon the subdivision of the lot for which such variance was granted. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-23. - Unsafe or unlawful signs. 
    Any sign determined by the code enforcement officer to be unsafe or unstable, a menace to the public health or safety, abandoned, dilapidated, or erected or maintained in violation of this division shall cause the code enforcement officer to notify the permittee, owner, or occupant of the property on which the sign is located of such violation by certified mail. Such notice shall include a brief and complete statement of the violations to be remedied. In the event the permittee, owner, or occupant of the property on which the sign is located cannot be contacted, the code enforcement officer having affixed the notice to the sign or to the building on which the sign is erected for a period of ten days shall be deemed to have effected notice. 
    Failure of the permittee or property owner to remove or alter such sign so as to comply with the standards of this division within ten days after such notice shall cause the code enforcement officer to revoke the permit for such sign and the permittee or property owner shall be subject to the penalties set forth in section 93-3.3-25 of this division. 
    The code enforcement officer may cause any unsafe or unlawful sign that constitutes an immediate threat to the physical safety of persons or adjoining property to be removed summarily and without notice and cause the cost of removal to be placed as a lien on the property on which the sign is located. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-24. - Penalties. 
    Any person found in violation of any provision of this division shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per day. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or is permitted to continue. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this division shall be subject to removal by the city upon an order of the municipal court and all costs related to such removal shall be charged against the property and may be collected by lien or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-25. - Substitution. 
    The owner or the permittee of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this article may substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more specific provision in this article to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
DIVISION 2. - MURALS 

Sec. 93-3.3-27. - Statement of purpose and intent. 
    A mural is a work of art painted otherwise directly applied on a building or wall. The presence of works of art, including murals, can be a key element to creating a visually satisfying environment for a community. The city is likely to attract commercial enterprises, permanent residents, and visitors if it improves and maintains its overall appearance. The residents ultimately will benefit from enhanced retail and commercial environments and improvements in the quality of life if an attractive environment exists. The existence of works of art, such as murals, is an invaluable element to creating and maintain a visually appealing setting, which will promote economic development, advance the general prosperity of the community, and serve the general welfare. This is particularly true for the city, which has concentrated residential and commercial areas where murals are more readily noticed and appreciated than such works of art would be in municipalities with geographically large areas. 
    The purpose of this division is to recognize the following mural types: (1) historic murals; (2) original art murals; and (3) limited message murals. All other similar forms of outdoor visual art that do not meet the definitions of these three forms of murals set forth herein shall be regulated as wall signs under division 1 of this article pertaining to signs. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-28. - Historic murals. 
    Historic murals are original works of visual art or signs produced by hand that were tiled, painted directly on or affixed directly to a wall or building prior to the date of adoption of this division. Murals that re-create a historic image bearing a relationship to a historic Hapeville theme established after the date of adoption of this division also constitute historic murals. Original historic murals and re-creations of historic images are deemed to comply with this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-29. - Original art murals. 
    Original art murals are original works of visual art produced by hand that are tiled, painted directly on, or affixed directly to a wall or building. This section is intended to allow and encourage content neutral original art murals. Original art murals may be mechanically produced or computer generated prints or images, but shall not include the use of digitally printed vinyl. Such murals shall not contain electrical or mechanical components or feature a changing image. original art murals cannot contain text, graphics, or symbols. 
(a)  Standards for original art murals. Original art murals shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  The mural shall remain in place, without alteration, a minimum of five years. The applicant shall attest to this standard on the permit application. 
(2)  No part of any mural shall extend beyond the building wall or freestanding wall on which it is tiled, painted, or affixed. 
(3)  No part of the mural shall extend more than six inches from the plane of the wall upon which it is tiled, painted, or affixed. 
(4)  Only oil based alkyd enamel or polyurethane enamel, or newer 100 percent acrylic exterior paints shall be used to create murals. 
(5)  Murals executed using spray paint shall be limited to air brushing to ensure that high quality paint is used. 
(6)  An appropriate clear sealer or a suitable varnish or topcoat shall be applied to the finished mural. Graffiti resistant sealers should be chosen. 
(b)  Prohibited original art murals. The following forms of original art murals shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Any mural that contains an element that moves, rotates, or otherwise creates a changing image or message. 
(2)  Any mural that uses flashing or scrolling lights, an internal light source, or other light feature. 
(3)  Any mural containing electrical or mechanical components. 
(4)  Any mural that is applied to a surface as a vinyl or other non-permanent material. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-30. - Limited message murals. 
    Limited message murals are murals that are painted on or applied to and made integral with a building wall or free-standing wall that contain a graphic or written message. 
(a)  Standards for limited message murals. Limited message murals shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Limited message murals may contain a graphic or written message not exceeding 50 percent of the width of the building or tenant facade, provided that no such graphic or written message shall have an area exceeding ten percent of the building or tenant facade area as measured at the exterior dimension of the graphic or written message and framing. 
(2)  The mural shall remain in place, without alteration, a minimum of five years. The applicant shall attest to this standard on the permit application. 
(3)  No part of any mural shall extend beyond the building wall or freestanding wall on which it is tiled, painted, or affixed. 
(4)  No part of the mural shall extend more than six inches from the plane of the wall upon which it is tiled, painted, or affixed. 
(5)  Only oil based alkyd enamel or polyurethane enamel, or newer 100 percent acrylic exterior paints shall be used to create murals. 
(6)  Murals executed using spray paint shall be limited to air brushing to ensure that high quality paint is used. 
(7)  An appropriate clear sealer or a suitable varnish or topcoat shall be applied to the finished mural. Graffiti resistant sealers should be chosen. 
(b)  Prohibited limited message murals. The following forms of limited message murals shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Any mural that contains an element that moves, rotates, or otherwise creates a changing image or message. 
(2)  Any mural that uses flashing or scrolling lights, an internal light source, or other light feature. 
(3)  Any mural containing electrical or mechanical components. 
(4)  Any mural that is applied to a surface as a vinyl or other non-permanent material. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-31. - Mural permitting process. 
    This section establishes administrative permitting procedures to allow re-creation, preservation, and maintenance of historic murals, and creation of original art murals and limited message murals. The procedures set forth herein establish standards for review and approval of applications for new murals or those proposed for repainting or other maintenance to ensure the appropriateness of the mural with the context and compliance with this division. Administrative permits for such applications shall encompass review and approval by the design review committee relative to the following standards; compliance with all other aspects of this Code shall be subject to application of the Code by the city planner. 
    Standards to be used to process mural applications. 
(1)  The design review committee shall consider the size, scale, and relationship of a mural to the historic context in the case of historic murals. Original art murals and limited message murals may or may not bear any relationship to the Hapeville context. The content of a mural shall not be the focus of review. 
(2)  Repainting of historic advertising shall be guided by exacting documentation concerning the mural. 
(3)  A permanent plan for maintenance and exact repainting according to the plan of the original artist shall be submitted with the application. The exact matching of color and application technique shall be specified in the plan. 
(4)  Any mural proposed must be on a wall surface that will not mar a key historic feature and will be compatible with the streetscape. The image of any faded advertising murals shall be stabilized using appropriate preservation techniques and shall remain otherwise unchanged. 
(5)  The standards of this division applicable to each mural type shall be considered. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
Sec. 93-3.3-32. - Substitution. 
    The owner or the permittee of any mural which is otherwise allowed by this article may substitute non-commercial speech in lieu of any other commercial or non-commercial speech. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech, or favoring of any particular non-commercial speech over any other non-commercial speech. This provision prevails over any more specific provision in this article to the contrary. 
(Ord. No. 2016-08 , § 1(Exh. A), 4-5-2016) 
ARTICLE 4. - R-0 ZONE (ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 93-4-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, the R-0 zone is established in order to protect residential areas now developed with one-family detached dwellings, and adjoining areas presently undeveloped likely to be developed for those purposes. Only a few additional and compatible uses are permitted. The regulations of this zone are intended to: 
(1)  Ensure the best use of the land. 
(2)  Ensure and protect the orderly and proper future development of the land according to its best indicated potential use for single-family dwelling. 
(3)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life. 
(4)  Discourage any use which would generate other than normal residential traffic on minor streets. 
(5)  Discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create excessive requirements and costs for public service. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-71) 
Sec. 93-4-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in any R-0 zone: 
(1)  One-family dwellings. 
(2)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(3)  Public, private and parochial schools, not including nursery schools or kindergartens. 
(4)  Playgrounds, parks and buildings operated on a noncommercial basis for recreational purposes only. 
(5)  Customary home occupations as defined in section 93-1-2. 
(6)  Customary accessory uses and buildings including noncommercial gardens and greenhouses. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-72; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 5, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-4-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-0 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 5, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 5. - R-AD ZONE (RESIDENTIAL-ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN) 

Sec. 93-5-1. - Intent. 
    The R-AD zone is established to promote quality single-family residential neighborhoods emphasizing architectural character and site amenities. Development in the zone is controlled through the site plan review provisions of section 93-2-16 and application of designated architectural and design standards. The R-AD zone encourages creation of pedestrian amenities that contribute to a neighborhood scale and pedestrian environment. Standards for street construction are somewhat relaxed to produce developments in which traffic speeds are reduced and automobile features are less dominant. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-73; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 93-5-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in any R-AD zone: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(3)  Customary home occupations as defined in this chapter. 
(4)  Customary accessory uses and buildings. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-74; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-5-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-AD zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-5-4. - Lot width, size, and frontage. 
    The minimum lot shall be 65 feet at the building line as measured at the front yard setback; all building lots shall abut a public street right-of-way for a minimum dimension of 25 feet. No lot shall contain less than 7,000 square feet. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-75; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord No. 2015-15 , § 6, adopted August 4, 2015, renumbered the former sections 93-5-3-93-5-12 as sections 93-5-4-93-5-13. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 93-5-5. - Unit size. 
    The minimum floor area of the principal dwelling shall not be less than 1,400 square feet. The combined floor area of all accessory buildings on the lot shall not exceed 25 percent of the floor area of the principal dwelling, and in no case shall it exceed 600 square feet. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-75.1; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-6. - Building height. 
    The maximum building height in the R-AD zone shall be 35 feet as measured above the average adjacent grade. Accessory buildings shall not exceed the height of the principal dwelling. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-75.2; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-7. - Site development standards. 
    The following site development standards shall apply to all development in the R-AD zone: 
(1)  All front yards must be landscaped and sodded and maintained in that condition in perpetuity. 
(2)  No fence shall be permitted in the front yard; fences installed in side or rear yards shall not exceed a height of six feet. No fence shall be erected using materials other than those specifically designed and manufactured for such purpose. 
(3)  Accessory buildings are not permitted in front yard. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-76; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-8. - Architectural standards. 
    The following architectural standards shall apply: 
(1)  Each dwelling unit shall provide a front porch having a minimum area of 100 square feet and a rear or side yard deck having a minimum area of 128 feet. 
(2)  Building materials shall not include concrete block (other than foundation), T-111 siding, plywood, particle board or other "economy" materials. Siding shall be limited to aluminum, vinyl, brick, stone, architectural concrete or other acceptable materials manufactured for permanent applications. 
(3)  A roof pitch of less than one foot of rise in two feet of run is prohibited; use of tar paper roofing or other materials in lieu of shingles manufactured for use as traditional roofing shall be prohibited. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-76.1; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-9. - Development standards. 
    The following development standards shall apply: 
(1)  Sidewalks with a minimum horizontal dimension of four feet shall be installed within the right-of-way along at least one side of all public streets; all construction shall conform to ADA specifications. 
(2)  Concrete curb and gutter are required. 
(3)  Pedestrian scale lighting at a minimum height of 14 feet shall be installed at a minimum horizontal spacing 125 feet on center. 
(4)  Sidewalks shall not encroach within four feet of the back of curb; all areas between sidewalks and curbs shall be landscaped and sodded. 
(5)  The minimum street width shall be 24 feet from back of curb to back of curb. The minimum diameter of all culs-de-sac shall be 80 feet; a landscaped island with a minimum dimension of 30 feet shall be provided in the center of all culs-de-sac. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-76.2; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-10. - Required yards. 
    Dimensions provided in Table I, as measured from the right-of-way, shall be the required yard dimensions for principal and accessory buildings: 
Table I. Required Yards 
Structure Front Side Rear Dwelling 25 feet 7 feet 15 feet Accessory N/A 5 feet 10 feet  
(Code 1981, § 8-5-77; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-11. - Lot coverage. 
    Lot coverage of all impervious surfaces shall not exceed 50 percent of the lot area. For the R-AD zone, impervious surfaces shall be defined as all structures, including dwellings and accessory buildings, pavement and any other structure that prevents the movement of precipitation directly into the ground. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-78; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-12. - Vehicle access and parking. 
(a)  Parking and storage. No longterm parking shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. For the purposes of this section, "longterm parking" shall mean any continuous parking of a vehicle of any type for a period exceeding 24 hours. No parking of buses or trucks other than noncommercial vans, pickup trucks and sport utility vehicles shall be permitted. Outside storage of unlicensed vehicles is prohibited; no parking or vehicle storage on unpaved areas shall be permitted. No vehicle maintenance of any kind shall be performed in the front yard. No storage of boats, campers, camping trailers or recreational vehicles shall be permitted in the front yard. 
(b)  Driveways. Driveways accessing two road frontages shall be prohibited. In the case of a corner lot, access shall be from the street on which the lot has its least dimension, only. No driveway shall be located within 35 feet of the intersection of two public street rights-of-way or within five feet of the side lot line. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-79; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
Sec. 93-5-13. - Protective covenants or deed restrictions. 
    The provisions of section 93-18-6 shall apply to the R-AD zone. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-80; Ord. No. 97-06, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 6, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-5-4. 
ARTICLE 6. - R-1 ZONE (ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 93-6-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, the R-1 zone is established in order to protect residential areas now predominantly developed with one-family detached dwellings and a few adjoining areas likely to be developed for such purposes. Only a few additional and compatible uses are permitted. The regulations of this zone are intended to: 
(1)  Protect the present predominantly one-family use of the land. 
(2)  Encourage the discontinuance of existing incompatible uses, and insure the ultimate stabilization of the land in one-family usage. 
(3)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life. 
(4)  Discourage any use which would generate other than normal residential traffic on minor streets. 
(5)  Discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create excessive requirements and costs for public services. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-81) 
Sec. 93-6-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in any R-1 zone: 
(1)  One-family dwellings. 
(2)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(3)  Public, private and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(4)  Playgrounds, parks and buildings operated on a noncommercial basis for recreational purposes only. 
(5)  Customary home occupations as defined in section 93-1-2. 
(6)  Customary accessory uses and buildings including noncommercial gardens and greenhouses. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-82; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 7, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-6-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-1 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 7, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 7. - N-C ZONE (NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL) 

Sec. 93-7-1. - Intent. 
    Because of the recognized need to conserve and increase the city's housing stock and to encourage the development of commercial communities which integrate with and serve adjacent neighborhoods, the N-C zone is established to: 
(1)  Encourage the establishment of neighborhood-oriented retail and service facilities near established residential areas. 
(2)  Conserve the city's housing supply. 
(3)  Encourage a pedestrial and neighborhood orientation of the commercial area. 
(4)  Discourage land uses which are automobile and regional oriented. 
(5)  Encourage the development of a visually organized and unified commercial district which demonstrates a visual and functional relationship to the adjacent residential area. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-85; Ord. No. 81-4, § 3, 8-4-1981) 
Sec. 93-7-2. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted within the N-C zone: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the C-1 zone. 
(2)  Child day care facilities. 
(3)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(4)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(5)  Credit unions. 
(6)  Food stores. 
(7)  Hardware stores. 
(8)  Laundromats and dry cleaners. 
(9)  Public, private and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(10)  Real estate offices. 
(11)  Existing single-family dwellings which were originally designed for that purpose. 
(12)  Existing multifamily dwellings which were originally designed for that purpose. 
(13)  Any use existing within the N-C zone at the time the N-C zone was adopted may be extended or enlarged, provided that an application for such extension or enlargement is prepared and submitted in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) hereof, and further provided that there is a determination by the planning commission that the proposed extension or enlargement would have no material additional adverse impact on the N-C zone. 
(b)  Applicants for building permits within this zone must submit to the building official, for review and approval by the planning commission, a written application specifying the proposed use and containing a plan, drawings, information and reports as may be reasonably required to determine whether or not the proposed use and its proposed method of establishment and operation would comply with the intent provisions of section 93-7-1. 
(c)  Upon a finding by the planning commission that the proposed use and its proposed method of establishment and operation would comply with the intent provisions of the N-C zone, a building permit for such use shall be issued. In the absence of such finding by the planning commission, a building permit for the proposed new use shall not be issued. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-86; Ord. No. 81-4, § 3, 8-4-1981; Ord. No. 82-7, 5-4-1982; Ord. No. 83-5, 5-3-1983; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 8, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-7-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the N-C zone: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 8, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-7-4. - Special uses. 
    The following uses require a special use permit, in accordance with sections 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6, in any N-C zone: 
(1)  Nursing homes. 
(2)  Personal care homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-20. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 8, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 8. - R-2 ZONE (TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 93-8-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, and because of the present extensive development within this zone in both one-family and two-family usage, and because of continued demand for additional housing at a cost most citizens of the city can afford, and because of the continued demand for additional residential property which provides a living environment suitable for family life, the R-2 zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Protect the present development pattern. 
(2)  Provide adequate minimum standards under which conversion from one-family to two-family usage may take place. 
(3)  Provide additional property for residential development and redevelopment of one-family homes and two-family residences, while providing adequate minimum zoning standards for such usage. 
(4)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life and encourage the discontinuance of existing incompatible uses. 
(5)  Discourage any use which would generate other than normal residential traffic on minor streets. 
(6)  Discourage any use which would create excessive requirements and costs for public services. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-91) 
Sec. 93-8-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in any R-2 zone: 
(1)  One-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(4)  Public, private and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(5)  Playgrounds, parks and buildings operated on a noncommercial basis for purposes of recreation only. 
(6)  Customary home occupations, as defined in section 93-1-2. 
(7)  Customary accessory uses and buildings. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-92; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 9, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-8-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-2 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 9, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 9. - R-3 ZONE (TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 93-9-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, and because of the present extensive development within this zone in both one-family and two-family usage, and because of continued demand for additional housing at a cost most citizens of the city can afford, and because of the continued demand for additional residential property which provides a living environment suitable for family life, the R-3 zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Protect the present development pattern. 
(2)  Provide adequate minimum standards under which conversion from one-family to two-family usage may take place. 
(3)  Provide additional property for residential development and redevelopment of one-family homes and two-family residences, while providing adequate minimum zoning standards for such usage. 
(4)  Providing property for development of single-family attached residences, while providing adequate minimum zoning standards for such usage. 
(5)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life and encourage the discontinuance of existing incompatible uses. 
(6)  Discourage any use which would generate other than normal residential traffic on minor streets. 
(7)  Discourage any use which would create excessive requirements and costs for public services. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-101) 
Sec. 93-9-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in any R-3 zone: 
(1)  One-family dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(4)  Single-family attached and patio houses with no more than four dwelling units attached. 
(5)  Public, private, and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(6)  Playground, parks, and buildings operated on a noncommercial basis for the purposes of recreation only. 
(7)  Customary home occupations, as defined in section 93-1-2. 
(8)  Customary accessory uses and buildings. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-102; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 87-17, 5-5-1987; Ord. No. 2003-04, § 3, 2-4-2003; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 10, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-9-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-3 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 10, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 10. - R-4 ZONE (MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 93-10-1. - Intent. 
    Because of the location within the comprehensive land development plan of the city of certain areas of land, both developed and undeveloped, with particular characteristics such as high density dwelling units, unusual topographic features, proximity to commercial developments or proximity to major streets, and because of a continued demand for such dwelling accommodations which are well-designed, pleasant places to live, the R-4 zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Protect the present development pattern. 
(2)  Provide for the orderly development and redevelopment of such land according to its best usage by providing adequate minimum zoning standards for such usage. 
(3)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life and encourage the discontinuance of existing incompatible uses. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-111) 
Sec. 93-10-2. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted in any R-4 zone, subject to the general requirements of the zone: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(4)  Customary home occupations, as defined in section 93-1-2. 
(5)  Customary accessory uses and buildings. 
(6)  Playgrounds, parks and buildings operated on a noncommercial basis for purposes of recreation only. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in any R-4 zone subject to the general requirements of the zone and the site plan review requirements of section 93-2-16; provided that any unit for occupancy shall have a total floor area of not less than 480 square feet for an efficiency or one bedroom unit, a total floor area of not less than 730 square feet for a two bedroom unit and an additional 150 square feet of floor area for each additional bedroom. 
(1)  Single-family attached developments, including single-family attached patio developments, in structures with not more than four attached dwellings. 
(2)  Multifamily dwellings, in buildings containing no more than four dwelling units and having a minimum lot area of 7,200 square feet per dwelling unit, and provided that the minimum total lot area is 30,000 square feet. 
(3)  Multifamily dwelling developments having a minimum lot area of 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit, and provided that the minimum total lot area for any such development is five acres. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-112; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 87-18, 5-5-1987; Ord. No. 89-3, § 1, 3-7-1989; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 11, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-10-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-4 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 11, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 11. - R-I ZONE (RESIDENTIAL INFILL OVERLAY) 

Sec. 93-11-1. - Intent. 
    The zone is created to encourage infill of additional single-family housing units in established single-family residential areas where such infill is deemed beneficial to the city and to residents. It is applied to or overlayed on existing zoning districts and supersedes the underlying zoning regulations only in specific subject areas. The R-I zone is specifically established to: 
(1)  Increase residential density to maximum use of existing public services and facilities. 
(2)  Expand the tax base. 
(3)  Provide quality residential infill which is in harmony with adjacent residential uses. 
(4)  Ensure privacy for existing residential uses as well as for new infill through use of proper sitting of new residential structures, landscaping and screening; control of lighting to exclude direct, intense or glaring light; and architectural design which is harmonious with neighboring residences. 
(5)  Provide adequate standards and procedures for increasing residential density in single-family residential uses. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-115; Ord. No. 81-4, § 4, 8-4-1981) 
Sec. 93-11-2. - General use criteria. 
    Only the following uses may be developed under provisions of the R-1 overlay zone: 
(1)  Single-family detached residential. 
(2)  Single-family attached residential. 
(3)  Single-family attached (patio) residential. 
(4)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-116; Ord. No. 81-4, § 4, 8-4-1981; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 12, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11-3. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  All uses permitted by the existing underlying zoning are permitted on the R-I overlay zone. In addition, the residential uses listed above are permitted subject to submission by the applicant to the building official, for review and approval by the planning commission, of a written application specifying the proposed use and containing a plan drawing, information and reports as may be reasonably required to determine whether or not the proposed use and its proposed method of establishment and operation would comply with the intent provisions of the R-I overlay zone. 
(b)  The planning commission will hold a public hearing prior to issuing a building permit for any proposed development which is subject to the provisions of the R-I zone. 
(c)  Upon a finding by the planning commission that the proposed use and its proposed method of establishment and operation would comply with the intent provisions of the R-I overlay zone, a building permit for such use shall be issued. In the absence of such findings by the planning commission, a building permit for the proposed new use shall not be issued. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-117; Ord. No. 81-4, § 4, 8-4-1981) 
Sec. 93-11-4. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-1 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Nursing homes. 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 12, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 11.1. - V ZONE (VILLAGE) 

Sec. 93-11.1-1. - Intent. 
    The V district is established in order to: 
(1)  Accommodate a mixed-use, urban fabric that preserves neighborhood scale; 
(2)  Accommodate residents in the district with pedestrian access to services and employment typical of a live/work community; 
(3)  Promotes neighborhoods established near shopping and employment centers; 
(4)  Encourage pedestrian and neighborhood uses in the commercial area; 
(5)  Discourage land uses, which are automobile or transportation related; 
(6)  Exclude industrial uses such as manufacturing, processing and warehousing; 
(7)  Promote retail and related commercial uses such as business offices, florists, card shops antiques, apparel and banks; and 
(8)  Encourage mixed use with commercial uses on the first floor and residential living above. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1(8-5-120C), 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 93-11.1-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted within the V zone: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the D-D zone; 
(2)  Any use permitted in the C-1 zone subject to the requirements of this article; 
(3)  Single-family detached dwellings; 
(4)  Single-family attached dwellings with at least four units attached; 
(5)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19; 
(6)  Adult daycare facilities; 
(7)  Condominiums subject to approval as a conditional use; and 
(8)  Combination of residential and business applications within a single structure. However, each use must have a separate entrance. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1(8-5-120D), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 13, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11.1-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the V zone: 
(1)  Pawnshops and check cashing businesses excluding banks and credit unions; 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishments as defined by section 11-2-1 of this Code, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, video or DVD adult rental or purchase, adult movie or adult live theaters, or adult gifts and novelties, or viewing or listening to other adult entertainment through any other electronic or other technological medium; 
(3)  Automotive repair shops, dealerships and service stations, boat sales, auto parts stores; 
(4)  Tattoo parlors; 
(5)  Palm reading and fortunetelling including psychic and crystal ball readings; 
(6)  Reserved; 
(7)  Carnivals; 
(8)  Stables; 
(9)  Shooting galleries, firearm, and archery ranges; 
(10)  Firearms dealers; 
(11)  Modeling agencies; 
(12)  Massage parlors; 
(13)  Spas; 
(14)  Hypnotists; 
(15)  Handwriting analysis; 
(16)  Escort services; 
(17)  Bazaars; 
(18)  Specialty shops; 
(19)  Flea markets; 
(20)  Junk stores; 
(21)  Variety shops; 
(22)  Labor pools; 
(23)  Extended stay motels/hotels; 
(24)  Parking lots (except for municipal parking lots benefiting the V zone); 
(25)  Warehouses or longterm storage of material except where such storage does not constitute more than 25 percent of the business's floor space. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1(8-5-120E), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 13, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 4, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 93-11.1-4. - Conditional uses. 
    Specific uses may be permitted as conditional uses, provided conformance to the purpose and intent of this article can be demonstrated. Such uses are: 
(1)  SIC Code 5261, lawn and garden supplies: 
a.  No outdoor storage of merchandise in the front yard. 
b.  Outdoor storage in the rear yard, only, is permitted, provided storage areas are completely screened. 
(2)  SIC Code 5411, grocery stores and food stores; 
(3)  SIC Code 7011, Hotels and motels; 
(4)  SIC Code 7641, Reupholstery and furniture repair; 
(5)  Laundry and dry cleaning shops; 
(6)  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1(8-5-120F), 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 93-11.1-5. - Special uses. 
    The following uses require a special use permit, in accordance with sections 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6, in any V zone: 
(1)  Nursing homes. 
(2)  Personal care homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-20. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 13, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11.1-6. - Area, placement, and buffering requirements. 
    All buildings or structures erected, converted or structurally altered shall hereafter comply with the following lot area, yard, and building coverage requirements: 
(1)  Lot area and width. No lot shall have a minimum frontage of less than 50 feet, while the minimum area shall be established by the restriction governing lot coverage, setbacks, screening, and parking requirements. 
(2)  Front yard. All structures located along a street shall be set back, at a minimum, of 15 feet, or greater as may be determined to be necessary and advisable by the city planning commission in the course of its site plan review process. In determining such yard setbacks, the city planning commission shall consider the size and configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to the existing and proposed thoroughfares; in order to maximize all vehicular and pedestrian safety. 
(3)  Side and rear yards. The side and rear yards adjacent to, or separated by a street, alley or other right-of-way from a residential or commercial zone, shall provide a building setback of at least 15 feet. 
(4)  Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between two multiple family buildings on a single lot or on contiguous property under the same ownership shall be 20 feet, plus four additional feet for every story or fraction thereof that the building exceeds two stories, or such distance determined necessary by the planning commission to enhance the aesthetics of development. 
(5)  Height regulations. No building or structure shall exceed 21/2 stories or a 35 feet in height, provided the planning commission may allow a development with greater height, if it finds that: 
a.  The proposed height will not adversely impact adjacent properties or nearby residential neighborhoods; 
b.  The added height is necessary to support redevelopment of an area, which currently contains uses that have an adverse impact upon adjacent neighborhoods; 
c.  The proposed development is designed to facilitate the objectives and strategies of the master plan; 
d.  Meets approval from the fire department and FAA. 
(6)  Residential buffer. New development shall provide sufficient setback as well as an attractive physical barrier between the residential and nonresidential uses as necessary to minimize disruptive light, noise, odor, dust, unsightly appearances and intrusive activity relative to the residential environment. A smooth transition between residential neighbors and nonresidential uses (including all parking lots) shall be ensured by the provision of sufficient screening of more intensive uses (i.e., commercial/offices uses) from residential neighborhoods through the use of decorative landscaping and screened walls. A 15-foot landscaped buffer shall be installed between and along the residential and nonresidential sides of said buffer. The landscaped area shall be planted with trees, flowers, grasses and shrubs to visually screen non-residential areas and provide an attractive boundary that encourages continued investment in the adjacent residential property. 
(Ord. No. 2004-14, § 1(8-5-120G), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 13, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 13, adopted August 4, 2015, renumbered the former section 93-11.1-5 as section 93-11.1-6. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
ARTICLE 11.2. - U-V ZONE (URBAN VILLAGE) 

Sec. 93-11.2-1. - Intent. 
    The U-V district is established in order to: 
(1)  Accommodate a mixed-use, urban fabric that preserves neighborhood scale; 
(2)  Accommodate residents in the district with pedestrian access to services and employment typical of a live/work community; 
(3)  Promote neighborhoods established near shopping and employment centers; 
(4)  Encourage pedestrian and neighborhood uses in the commercial area; 
(5)  Discourage land uses that are automobile or transportation related; 
(6)  Exclude industrial uses such as manufacturing, processing and warehousing; 
(7)  Promote retail and related commercial uses such as business offices, florists, card shops, antique shops, new apparel shops and banks; and 
(8)  Encourage intensified mixed-use with commercial uses on the ground floor and dwellings above. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120H), 11-15-2005) 
Sec. 93-11.2-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless specifically stated otherwise, the following terms shall be defined as indicated, and where any definition herein conflicts with another definition in the zoning ordinance, the definition contained herein shall prevail: 
    Build-to line. The line generally parallel to the front lot line to which buildings shall enfront to the extent identified in this article. It is a requirement, not a permissive minimum, as is a setback, however, where a minimum and maximum build-to line exists, the building may enfront anywhere between the two lines. The line shall be measured from the back of the sidewalk clear zone along all street frontages and not from the front lot line. For the purposes of this article, the build-to line shall exist even when not enfronted by a building. 
    Dwelling, live-work. A one-family attached dwelling unit of at least two stories that contains a commercial component of not more than the lesser of 600 square feet in floor area or 40 percent of the dwelling's total floor area. Said commercial component shall be limited to the ground floor of the dwelling unit; shall be covered by separate lease; shall be adjacent to the supplemental area; shall be limited to the permitted business and professional offices/agencies, retail and restaurant uses contained in section 93-11.2-3; and shall be the place of employment for no more than two persons, one of whom shall be a resident thereof. For the purposes of this article, a live-work dwelling shall not be a single structure containing a multifamily dwelling unit and a commercial use arranged vertically unless both dwelling and commercial use share a common kitchen, utilities, and common deed or lease. 
    Enfront. To place an element such as a building along a build-to line. 
    Occupiable space. Covered floor area utilized for any principal permitted use except parking, storage, digital industry switchboards, power generators, and other relay equipment. 
    Master planned development. Any alteration of the natural environment which requires approval of a site plan, construction drawings, or issuance of a development permit in accordance with section 93-2-16. 
    Regionally significant development. A master plan development that: 
(1)  Exceeds 60 acres in size within the city, 
(2)  Lies partially within at least two other jurisdictions, 
(3)  Abuts an interstate highway within or outside of the jurisdictional limits of the city, 
(4)  Consists of contiguous parcels, which may be separated from each other by up to 200 feet of public streets or rail corridors, but not other parcels, and 
(5)  Includes a development buildout that exceeds the minimum thresholds established by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs for developments of regional impacts in metropolitan areas. 
    Supplemental area. The privately held area between the back of the required sidewalk clear zone and the build-to line. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120I), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2009-08, § 1, 6-16-2009) 
Sec. 93-11.2-3. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted within the U-V zone: 
(1)  Business and professional offices/agencies, including: 
a.  Architectural. 
b.  Dental. 
c.  Engineering. 
d.  Graphic arts. 
e.  Insurance. 
f.  Legal. 
g.  Manufacturers' representatives. 
h.  Medical. 
i.  Real estate. 
j.  Banks and other financial institutions (not including pawnshops and check cashing businesses). 
(2)  Institutional uses, including: 
a.  Art studios. 
b.  Business schools. 
c.  Colleges and universities. 
d.  Dance studios. 
e.  Libraries and other public buildings. 
f.  Professional schools (including music/dance studios). 
g.  Technical schools. 
h.  Playgrounds, parks, and buildings open on a noncommercial basis for recreation only. Uses of this nature are exempt from being within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  Retail; sales, with a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet, including: 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Apparel shops (offering new merchandise). 
c.  Appliance, radio and television sales outlets and services, including incidental repairing where all repair is conducted out of customers' view and is limited to 25 percent of the business's floor area (offering new merchandise). 
d.  Baking shops. 
e.  Book, card and stationary stores. 
f.  Computer sales and repairs (offering new or refurbished merchandise). These uses are subject to a finding by the city planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties nor negatively affect the character of the zone. For purposes of this subsection, refurbished shall mean merchandise intended for retail that has been tested and certified by an authorized service center of the manufacturer or otherwise restored to like-new working condition and appearance and then re-packaged and labeled as a refurbished product. Such merchandise shall appear new and be free from all defects such as major scratches, dents or other forms of cosmetic damage. 
g.  Florist shops. 
h.  Furniture stores (offering new merchandise). 
i.  Hobby shops (offering new merchandise). 
j.  Jewelry stores (offering new or used merchandise) 
k.  Opticians and optical stores. 
l.  Photography stores. 
m.  Printing shops. 
(4)  Retail; drugstores, pharmacies and soda shops with a maximum floor area of 15,000 square feet. 
(5)  Retail; sales, with a maximum floor area of 20,000 square feet, including: 
a.  Department stores (offering new merchandise). 
b.  General merchandise stores (selling new merchandise). 
c.  Hardware stores. 
d.  Office supply stores. 
(6)  Retail; grocery stores with a minimum floor area of 30,000 square feet. 
(7)  Personal services, with a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet, including: 
a.  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
b.  Data processing facilities. 
c.  Laundry and dry cleaning shops. 
d.  Tailor shops. 
e.  Travel agencies. 
(8)  Bed and breakfast inns without kitchens or cooking facilities in rooms used for guest occupancy. 
(9)  Restaurants or carry-out restaurants but not including drive-through/drive-in restaurants with a maximum size of 6,000 square feet. Such restaurants shall be allowed to operate no more than six billiard tables upon the premises. Drive-through or drive-in restaurants may be allowed through special permit. The desired configuration for a drive-through or drive-in restaurant in this district is not a stand-alone building but rather part of a larger development and the site plan specifically addresses pedestrian orientation and safety. 
(10)  Theaters (with a maximum size of 8,000 square feet) which do not provide entertainment as defined in section 11-2-1 of this Code, including adult films, adult stage productions, adult videos or other adult entertainment performances. 
(11)  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
(12)  Public, private and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the city planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(13)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(14)  Single-family detached dwellings, subject to the density restrictions in subsection (19) of this section. 
(15)  Single-family attached dwellings with at least two units attached, but no more than 12 and subject to the density restrictions in subsection (19) of this section. 
(16)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(17)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(18)  Combination of residential and business applications within a single structure, provided that each use must have a separate entrance directly accessible from the required sidewalk or within a jointly used lobby. 
(19)  Residential density limitations shall be as follows: 
a.  The maximum permitted residential density of a master planned development shall be 40 units per acre as calculated based on the sum of all residential uses and the total acreage of the project, including multiple parcels or city blocks, but not rail lines, public streets, or other areas not owned by the applicant; 
b.  The built residential density of individual parcels or blocks within a master planned development may be greater or less than 40 units per acre, provided the project's combined average maximum permitted residential density is not exceeded; and 
c.  Any changes to an approved site plan shall require approval of the city planning commission and shall be reviewed based on the geographic extent of the original approved site plan, shall not exceed maximum density requirements of the original application, and shall indicate all built or planned improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120J), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2007-11, § 1, 7-3-2007; Ord. No. 2011-10, § 1, 9-20-2011; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 5, 3-1-2016; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 2, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 93-11.2-4. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the U-V zone. 
(1)  Pawnshops and check cashing businesses, excluding banks and credit unions; 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishments, as defined by section 11-2-1 of this Code, including, but not limited to, adult bookstores, video or DVD adult rental or purchase, adult movie or adult live theaters, adult gifts and novelties, and other venues for viewing other adult entertainment through any other electronic or other technological medium; 
(3)  Automotive repair shops, dealerships and service stations, boat sales, auto parts stores; 
(4)  Tattoo parlors; 
(5)  Palm reading and fortunetelling, including psychic and crystal ball readings; 
(6)  Reserved; 
(7)  Carnivals; 
(8)  Stables; 
(9)  Shooting galleries, firearm, and archery ranges; 
(10)  Firearms dealers; 
(11)  Modeling agencies; 
(12)  Massage parlors; 
(13)  Bathhouses; 
(14)  Hypnotists; 
(15)  Handwriting analysis; 
(16)  Escort services; 
(17)  Bazaars; 
(18)  Specialty shops; 
(19)  Flea markets; 
(20)  Junk stores; 
(21)  Variety shops; 
(22)  Labor pools; 
(23)  Health clinics; 
(24)  Extended stay motels/hotels; 
(25)  Nursing homes; 
(26)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120K), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 6, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 93-11.2-5. - Conditional uses. 
    Specific uses may be permitted as conditional uses, provided conformance to the purpose and intent of the applicable code. Such uses are: 
(1)  SIC Code 5261, lawn and garden supplies with a maximum floor area of 20,000 square feet, provided: 
a.  No outdoor storage of merchandise in the supplemental area. 
b.  Outdoor storage in the rear yard, only, is permitted, provided storage areas are completely screened. 
(2)  SIC Code 5411, grocery stores and food stores with a floor area less than 30,000 square feet; 
(3)  SIC Code 7011, hotels and motels; 
(4)  SIC Code 7641, reupholstery and furniture repair with a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet; 
(5)  Laundry and dry cleaning shops with a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet; 
(6)  Parking lots (except for municipal parking lots benefiting the U-V zone); and 
(7)  Kindergarten schools as defined under section 93-1-2, and the following facilities as defined herein: 
a.  "Day care center" or "center" means any place operated by a person, society, agency, corporation, institution or group wherein are received for pay for a group care, for fewer than 24 hours per day without transfer of legal custody, 19 or more children under 18 years of age. 
b.  "Group day care home" means any place operated by any person, partnership, association or corporation wherein are received for pay for group care not less than seven or more than 18 children under 18 years of age for less than 24 hours without transfer of legal custody. 
c.  "School-age group day care home" means a group daycare home, or part thereof with separate facilities and a separate license, which provides daytime care exclusively to school-age children before and/or after the normal school day. Such programs may operate a full-day program solely during the regular school year during those periods when school is not in session. 
(8)  Spas. For the purpose of this section, a spa shall be defined as a business location where massages by certified masseurs, makeovers, body wrapping, hair removal, saunas, manicures, pedicures and non-surgical cosmetic procedures are performed. Any combination of at least three or more of the above listed uses shall occur in the location. 
(9)  All multifamily uses shall be conditional uses in U-V zone. In addition to meeting the conditional use provisions, all multifamily uses in U-V shall comply with [subsection] 93-11.2-3(19). 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120L), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2007-11, § 2, 7-3-2007) 
Sec. 93-11.2-6. - Special uses. 
    The following uses require a special use permit, in accordance with section 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6, in any U-V zone: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11.2-7. - Area, placement, and buffering requirements. 
    All buildings or structures erected, converted or structurally altered shall hereafter comply with the following lot area, yard, and building coverage requirements: 
(1)  Lot area and width. The minimum area shall be established by the restriction governing lot coverage, setbacks, height, and parking requirement as found in article 22.1. Generally, no lot shall have a minimum frontage of less than 20 feet; however, single-family residential lots shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. 
(2)  Front yard. See subsection (3) below. 
(3)  Build-to line. The minimum build-to line shall be zero feet and the maximum shall be 15 feet, provided that the maximum build-to line may be increased as determined to be necessary and advisable by the city planning commission in the course of its site plan review process. In determining such increase, the city planning commission shall consider the size and configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to the existing and proposed thoroughfares, the relationship to existing and proposed parks and plazas, the location of existing mature trees, and supplemental area of adjacent structures. Where the built-to line is modified to provide parks and plazas, said facilities shall be directly accessible to the public during normal city park hours. 
(4)  Side yards. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement except as required by subsection (8) of this section for residential zone buffers. 
(5)  Rear yards. There shall be no minimum rear yard requirements except as required by subsection (8) of this section for residential zone buffers. 
(6)  Distance between buildings. Section 93-2-6 notwithstanding, the minimum distance between two buildings on a single lot or on contiguous property under the same ownership shall be ten feet, plus four additional feet for every story or fraction thereof that the building exceeds three stories, or such distance determined necessary by the city planning commission to enhance the aesthetics of development. All exterior walls shall be designed per the International Residential Building Code 2003, as amended, or the International Building Code 2003, as amended. Adjoining buildings, whether commercial, residential, or mixed-use, shall have sprinkler systems and there shall be a fire resistance rating of one hour between buildings and occupancies that are side-by-side and top and bottom. However, if a building is a single-family dwelling and the adjacent building is closer than 15 feet there can be no vertical openings (windows) between the two structures of buildings that exist within 15 feet of the horizontal fire separation. 
(7)  Height regulations. No building or structure shall be less than 24 feet in height or exceed four stories or a 64 feet in height, provided the city planning commission may allow a development with greater height via site plan approval, if it finds that: 
a.  The proposed height will not adversely impact adjacent properties or nearby residential neighborhoods. 
b.  The added height is necessary to support redevelopment of an area, which currently contains uses that have an adverse impact upon adjacent neighborhoods. 
c.  The proposed development is designed to facilitate the objectives and strategies of an officially adopted master plan, an LCI Study or the current comprehensive plan. 
d.  The proposed development meets approval from the fire department and FAA. 
e.  The proposed development meets the sprinkling standards set forth by the fire department. It shall meet the requirements as set forth in NFPA (13)(D), standard for the installation of sprinkler systems in one-family or two-family dwellings and NFPA (13)(R) for residential occupancies up to and including four stories in height. All others shall be required to meet NFPA (13) standard for the installation of sprinklers. 
(8)  Residential buffer. Where this district adjoins a residential zone, new development shall provide an attractive physical barrier between different zones as necessary to minimize disruptive light, noise, odor, dust, unsightly appearances and intrusive activity relative to the residential zone. A smooth transition to adjacent residential zones shall be ensured by the provision of: 
a.  A minimum 15-foot landscaped buffer located within the U-V zone along the district line. Said buffer shall be planted with a minimum of one tree per 40 linear feet. Shrubs, flowers or grasses shall also be provided and maintained to visually screen non-residential areas and provide an attractive boundary that encourages continued investment in the adjacent residential zones. 
b.  A permanent opaque wall between six and eight feet in height and faced in wood, stacked stone, brick or hard-coat true stucco. Said wall may be located anywhere within the required landscaped buffer. 
c.  Where an alley separates this zone from a residential zone, the required landscape buffer and permanent opaque wall shall be provided on the portion of the U-V-zoned property adjacent to the alley. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120M), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, adopted August 4, 2015, renumbered the former sections 93-11.2-6-93-11.2-13 as sections 93-11.2-7-93-11.2-14. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 93-11.2-8. - Supplemental area requirements. 
    Supplemental areas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The following may not be located in the supplemental area: 
a.  Recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts; 
b.  Fences and walls; 
c.  Service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements; 
d.  Mechanical features; and 
e.  Parking. 
(2)  Adjacent to ground floor retail or restaurant uses the supplemental area: 
a.  Shall be at the same grade, slope, and cross slope as the adjacent required sidewalk; 
b.  Shall be hardscaped for a minimum of 80 percent of its horizontal area with decorative pavers, bricks, slate, or stamped or colored concrete, but not asphalt; 
c.  Shall be accessible to the general public and may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, trees, outdoor dining, merchandise display and potted plants. 
(3)  Adjacent to ground floor dwelling units, excluding live-work dwellings, the supplemental area: 
a.  Shall be landscaped, except for area uses for stoops, porches, wheelchair ramps, or walkways; 
b.  Shall be planted with one canopy tree, as established in section 93-2-14(k)(11), an average of 40 feet on-center as measured parallel to the front lot line. 
c.  Shall be differentiated from the adjacent sidewalk by a continuous wall, fence, hedge, or retaining wall between six and 30 inches in height. 
(4)  Adjacent to ground floor live-work dwellings, all other uses, or when not adjacent to a building the supplemental area shall be treated as identified in subsections (2) or (3) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120N), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.2-7. 
_____
Sec. 93-11.2-9. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    Public sidewalks shall be located along all public and private streets. Sidewalks shall be of the widths indicated below and shall consist of two areas: a landscape area and a clear area. The following regulations shall apply to all required sidewalks: 
(1)  Sidewalk landscape area requirements. 
a.  The landscape area shall have a minimum width of five feet and shall be located adjacent to the curb. 
b.  The landscape area may be primarily paved adjacent to on-street parking and shall be landscaped in all other areas. 

_____ 
c.  Street trees shall be planted a maximum of 40 feet on center, spaced equal distance between streetlights, and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of 31/2 inches measured 12 inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven feet and shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet. Trees shall have a minimum planting area of 40 square feet. The city planning commission may approve an alternate for street tree requirement subject to constraints such as overhead or underground utilities or underground utility easements. 
d.  The landscape area is also intended for the placement of street furniture, including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, newspaper vending boxes, bus shelters, bicycle racks, public kiosks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility as approved by the city. 
e.  The landscape area shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner. 
(2)  Sidewalk clear area requirements. 
a.  The clear area shall be the portion of the sidewalk reserved for pedestrian passage and unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight feet, including but not limited to steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, and utility structures. The sidewalk clear area shall have a consistent cross slope not exceeding two percent. 
b.  No awning or canopy shall extend more than five feet over the clear area. 
c.  Along the following streets, if zoned U-V: South Central Avenue, North Central Avenue, Perry Hudson Boulevard, Dogwood Drive, Sylvan Road, Virginia Avenue, International Boulevard, and Atlanta Avenue, the sidewalk clear area shall have a minimum width of ten feet. 
d.  Along all other streets zoned U-V, the sidewalk clear zone shall have a minimum width of six feet. 
e.  Where property within the district abuts a residential zone without an intervening street, the sidewalk area within 20 feet of such district shall taper when necessary to provide a smooth transition to the existing residential zone sidewalk. In the event that the abutting residential zone has no existing sidewalk, the sidewalk shall taper to a width of six feet, measured from the street curb, or as approved by the city planning commission. 
(3)  Paving materials to remain continuous. Any paving materials, including concrete, special pavers, or decorative paving within the landscape area or clear area shall continue across any intervening driveway. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120O), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.2-7. 
Sec. 93-11.2-10. - Parking and curb cut requirements. 
    In addition to the requirements of article 23, off-street parking and loading, the following requirements shall apply within the U-V district: 
(1)  See article 22.1 of this chapter for minimum parking space requirements. 
(2)  See section 93-23-7 for mixed-use developments, which may be reduced as authorized by the board of appeals subject to a shared parking arrangement under the following criteria: 
a.  The minimum number of parking spaces for a project where shared parking is proposed shall be determined by a study prepared by the applicant following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Report or Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Shared Parking Guidelines. The actual number of parking spaces required shall be based on well-recognized sources of parking data such as the ULI or ITE reports. If standard rates are not available or limited, the applicant may collect data at similar sites to establish local parking demand rates. If the shared parking plan assumes use of an existing parking facility, then field surveys shall be conducted to determine actual parking accumulation. 
b.  An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application to reduce parking requirements and avoid conflicting parking demands: 
1.  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces; 
2.  Hours of business operation of nonresidential parking users; 
3.  Copies of the legal instrument that authorizes the use of shared parking facilities; 
4.  Copies of the relevant legal instrument authorizing the shared use, shall be filed with the department of economic development. 
5.  Where authorized shared parking exists and a change affecting the shared use occurs, the applicant shall have up to 30 calendar days to provide the city director of economic development with a valid legal instrument reflecting the modified parking arrangements. 
c.  Change to any of the conditions identified in this subsection, except as identified in subsection (2)b.5 above, shall terminate authorization for shared parking. A shared parking arrangement shall be deemed a condition of the zoning and any modification will require a new site plan, parking plan, and zoning approval. 
(3)  Developments are permitted a maximum of two driveway curb cuts per block face or one. For the purposes of this section, two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall only be counted as one curb cut. 
(4)  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on South Central Avenue, Virginia Avenue or Atlanta Avenue when access can be provided from a side or rear street. Circular drives are prohibited, with the exception of hotel and hospital uses. 
(5)  Rear alleys or rear drives shall be provided to access attached single-family garages, detached single-family dwelling garages, and commercial loading and service areas. 
(6)  Carports shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Garages shall not face adjacent streets except where alley or rear drive access is not feasible, in which case such garages shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the build-to line. All garage materials shall match those of the principal structure. 
(8)  Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from view, shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels, shall be faced in brick, stacked stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stacked stone. Parking structures adjacent to the supplemental area shall also meet the requirements of section 93-11.2-10(1). 
(9)  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: All non-residential uses shall provide one such space for every 20 automobile spaces and condominium and apartment uses shall provide one such space for every five units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two such spaces or be required to exceed 30 spaces. Such spaces shall be located within the sidewalk landscape a maximum distance of 100 feet from the primary pedestrian entrance, or within the supplemental area, or at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
(10)  Dumpsters shall be entirely screened from view of any street with vertically enclosed opaque walls matching the materials of the principal structure. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120P), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.2-7. 
Sec. 93-11.2-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2009-02, § 1, adopted Feb. 17, 2009, deleted § 93-11.2-10, which pertained to general facade requirements and derived from Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120Q), adopted Nov. 15, 2005. 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.2-7. 
Sec. 93-11.2-12. - Commercial design ground floor requirements. 
    In addition to the requirements of section 93-11.2-10, the following shall apply to buildings with enfronting ground floor commercial uses; and all enfronting buildings along South Central Avenue, North Central Avenue, Virginia Avenue, International Boulevard, or Atlanta Avenue: 
(1)  Enfronting ground floor facades shall provide a display window area consisting of: 
a.  A non-glass base or knee wall beginning at grade and extending not more than 24 inches above the required sidewalk. 
b.  A glass display window beginning at the top of the bulkhead or knee wall, to a height not less than ten feet and not more than 12 feet above the adjacent required sidewalk. Such glass shall provide views into display windows that have a minimum depth of 21/2 feet into and are accessible from the building interior. 
c.  Primary pedestrian entrances to all commercial uses adjacent to the front yard shall be recessed a maximum of five feet from the exterior facade, remain unlocked during normal business hours, and have a surface area that is a minimum of 70 percent glass. 
d.  A glass transom located above the glass display window and entry door shall have a minimum height of 24 inches and a maximum height of 36 inches. 
e.  A minimum of 75 percent of the length of the enfronted portion of the build-to line shall be provided in glass, including glass doors and display windows. 
f.  No linear distance of more than ten feet without intervening glass display windows or glass doors. 
g.  A non-glass sign band located above the glass transom having a minimum height of 36 inches. 
(2)  Ground floor drop ceilings shall be recessed a minimum of 18 inches from the display window opening. 
(3)  The ground floor finished floor to ceiling slab shall be a minimum of 18 feet. Finished ceiling height shall be a minimum of 14 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2005-11, § 3(8-5-120R), 11-15-2005; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.2-7. 
Sec. 93-11.2-13. - Reserved. 
Sec. 93-11.2-14. - Regionally significant developments. 
    The following additional requirements shall apply to regionally significant developments: 
(1)  The regulations set forth herein shall only apply to portions of regionally significant developments located greater than 30) feet from any parcel zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-O, R-SF, or V. 
(2)  In addition to those uses set forth in section 93-11.2-3, the following shall also be permitted uses within regionally significant developments: 
a.  Conference/convention centers; 
b.  Hotels and motels having at least 200 guest rooms and at least one on-premises restaurant defined as a retail establishment that serves prepared food to customers, generally for eating on premises; 
c.  Telecommunications and/or data centers; 
d.  Subsection 93-11.2-5(6) notwithstanding, commercial parking lots and decks shall be a permitted use when located in an area with a day-night sound level (DNL) in excess of 75 decibels at the time of the adoption of this section, as shown in exhibit 1 of the FAA's Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport FAR 150 Study, dated January 2006. For all other areas, commercial parking lots and decks shall be permitted uses when serving retail, restaurant, conference/convention centers, hotels, or office uses within an adjoining jurisdiction, and as set forth in subsection (3) below. 
e.  Warehouse and Distribution facilities, subject to the following: 
1.  Such facilities shall be located inside the 70+ DNL area identified in the Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport FAR 150 Study, dated January 2006, and shall have their primary points of ingress/egress on North Airport Loop Road. 
2.  Manufacturing and assembly line operations shall not be permitted. 
3.  Truck loading and unloading areas shall be shielded from the main road(s) serving the facility. 
4.  All equipment, electrical substations and mechanical devices shall be shielded from view from the main road(s) servicing the facility. 
5.  The storage of goods or materials in an open area is not allowed. 
6.  Accessory buildings, when such are required for the function of the principal building/use(s), are permitted provided that all such accessory building comply with all setback and yard area requirements, screening/landscaping and any other provisions of this zoning district as are required of principal buildings. 
7.  The grade level of all proposed structured shall be oriented for safe pedestrian access. 
8.  All electric, telephone, telecommunications, and other service lines shall be installed subsurface. 
9.  A greenbelt planting screen is required between the main service road and the facility. 
10.  Landscaped islands are required in parking lots. 
11.  No land or structure in this district shall be used or occupied in any manner which creates dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable conditions which may affect any other property. 
(3)  Parking for a retail, restaurant, office, conference/convention centers, or hotel uses within an adjoining jurisdiction shall only be permitted in Hapeville when: 
a.  Such use occupies a building that is located in multiple jurisdictions, and 
b.  Such use meets or exceeds the minimum parking requirements of the city, including for the portion within the adjoining jurisdiction; and 
c.  At least 75 percent of the required parking for the proportion of the use within another jurisdiction is located within the adjoining jurisdiction. 
(4)  The minimum parking space requirements for uses not specified in Section 93-22.1-1 shall be: 
a.  Conference/conventions centers. One space per 1,500 square feet of floor area. 
b.  Hotels and motels. One space per lodging unit. 
c.  Telecommunications and/or data centers. One space per employee. 
(5)  In no case shall the number of parking spaces within a commercial parking lot(s) exceed more than 30 percent of the minimum number of parking spaces required for the regionally significant development at build-out in accordance with article 22.1 and section 3 [section 93-22.1-3] herein, which shall be calculated by applying such minimum requirements to all portions of the regionally significant development, including those portions within other jurisdictions 
(6)  Sections 93.11.2-3 and 93.11.2-5 notwithstanding, there shall be no maximum floor area limits for any use. 
(7)  Subsections 93-11.2-7(1), (2), and (3) and section 93-22.1-1 notwithstanding, there shall be no minimum lot frontage, lot area, lot coverage, setbacks, or width requirements for nonresidential uses within regionally significant developments. Furthermore, the minimum build-to line along a public street within a regionally significant development shall be zero feet and the maximum build-to-line shall be 15 feet. 
(8)  Subsection 93-11.2-7(6) notwithstanding, the minimum distance between two buildings on a single lot or on contiguous property shall only be limited by applicable public safety and fire codes. 
(9)  Subsection 93-11.2-7(7) notwithstanding, no building or structure height shall exceed the applicable flight-safety restrictions for Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport established by the FAA, not to exceed 1,176 feet above mean sea level, except where the applicable property has been encumbered, prior to adoption of this section, by a pre-existing aviation easement, the terms of which shall control over the above FAA standards. 
(10)  The prohibition against them in subsection 93-11.2-8(1) notwithstanding, fences and walls not exceeding four feet in height shall be permitted in the supplemental area when used to surround outdoor dining. 
(Ord. No. 2009-08, § 2, 6-16-2009; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 14, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.2-7. 
ARTICLE 11.3. - R-SF ZONE (RESIDENTIAL SINGLE-FAMILY) 

Sec. 93-11.3-1. - Intent. 
    The R-SF zone is established in order to protect residential areas currently developed with one-family detached dwellings, and adjoining areas undeveloped, likely to be developed for residential purposes by allowing single-family homes and prohibiting other uses. The regulations of the R-SF zone are specifically intended to: 
(1)  Ensure the best use of the land; 
(2)  Ensure and protect the orderly and proper future development of the land according to its best indicated potential use for single-family dwellings; 
(3)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life; 
(4)  Discourage any use which would generate other than usual residential traffic on minor streets; and 
(5)  Discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create excessive requirements or costs for public service. 
(Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1(8-5-120A), 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 93-11.3-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in any R-SF zone: 
(1)  One-family dwellings detached; 
(2)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19; 
(3)  Playgrounds, parks and buildings operated on a noncommercial basis, solely for recreational purposes; and 
(4)  Customary accessory uses and buildings used for utility storage not to exceed 600 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-15, § 1(8-5-120B), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 15, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11.3-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the R-SF zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Reserved; 
(3)  Nursing homes; and 
(4)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 15, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 11.4. - R-5 ZONE (ONE FAMILY ATTACHED/DETACHED RESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 93-11.4-1. - Intent. 
    The R-5 zone is established in order to protect residential areas currently developed with one-family detached dwellings, and adjoining areas undeveloped, likely to be developed for residential purposes by allowing townhouse units, patio homes, and one family detached homes. The regulations of the R-5 zone are specifically intended to: 
(1)  Ensure the best use of the land; 
(2)  Ensure and protect the orderly and proper future development of the land according to its best indicated potential use for single-family dwellings; 
(3)  Protect and promote a suitable environment for family life; 
(4)  Discourage any use which would generate other than usual residential traffic on minor streets; 
(5)  Discourage any use which, because of its character or size, would create excessive requirements or costs for public service; and 
(6)  Encourage uses related to town homes and/or patio homes. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(8-5-118), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1(8-5-118), 10-5-2004) 
Sec. 93-11.4-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted in any R-5 zone: 
(1)  One-family dwellings detached; 
(2)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19; 
(3)  Four up to eight townhouse units per lot; 
(4)  Playgrounds, parks and buildings operated on a noncommercial basis, solely for recreational purposes; and 
(5)  Customary accessory uses and buildings used for utility storage not to exceed 600 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(8-5-119), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1(8-5-119), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 16, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11.4-3. - Nonpermitted use. 
    The following uses are not permitted in any R-5 zone: 
(1)  Multifamily; 
(2)  Duplexes; 
(3)  Triplexes; 
(4)  Adult daycare facilities; 
(5)  Reserved; 
(6)  Nursing homes; 
(7)  Personal care homes; and 
(8)  Commercial uses. 
(Ord. No. 2004-16, § 1(8-5-120), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2004-17, § 1(8-5-120), 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 16, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 11.5. - RMU ZONE (RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE) 

Sec. 93-11.5-1. - Intent. 
    The RMU district is established in order to: 
(1)  Ensure development that is consistent with neo-traditional planning practices, which are often defined by pedestrian-oriented buildings, interconnected streets, a mix of uses and housing types, and a compact walkable scale. 
(2)  Help create a compact, dense, and distinguishable core area; 
(3)  Provide for an urban form allowing mid-rise structures; 
(4)  Encourage multiple uses within the same structure; and 
(5)  Include street oriented activity and pedestrian amenities at the street level of structures. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008) 
Sec. 93-11.5-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless specifically stated otherwise, the following terms shall be defined as indicated, and where any definition herein conflicts with another definition in the city zoning ordinance, the definition contained herein shall prevail: 
    Build-to line: The line generally parallel to the front lot line along an existing public street to which buildings shall enfront to the extent identified in this article. It is a requirement, not a permissive minimum, as is a setback, however, where a minimum and maximum build-to line exists, the building may enfront any where between the two lines. The line shall be measured from the back of the sidewalk clear zone along all street frontages and not from the front lot line. For the purposes of this article, the build-to line shall exist even when not enfronted by a building. 
    Day spa: A business location where massages by certified masseurs, makeovers, body wrapping, hair removal, saunas, manicures, pedicures, and nonsurgical cosmetic procedures are performed. Any combination of at least three or more of the above-listed uses shall occur at the location for said location to be considered a day spa. All such businesses shall comply with applicable state licensing regulations. 
    Dwelling, live-work: A one-family attached dwelling unit of at least two stories that contains a commercial component of not more than the lesser of 600 square feet in floor area or 40 percent of the dwelling's total floor area. Said commercial component shall be limited to the ground floor of the dwelling unit, shall be covered by separate lease; shall be adjacent to the supplemental area; shall be limited to the permitted business and professional offices/agencies, retail and restaurant uses contained in section 93-11.5-3; and shall be the place of employment for no more than two persons, one of whom shall be a resident thereof. For the purposes of this article, a live-work dwelling shall not be a single structure containing a multifamily dwelling unit and a commercial use arranged vertically unless both dwelling and commercial use share a common kitchen, utilities, and common deed or lease. 
    Enfront: To place an element such as a building along a build-to line. 
    Master planned development: Any alteration of the natural environment which requires approval of a site plan, construction drawings, or issuance of a development permit in accordance with section 93-2-16. Buildings and structures within master planned developments may be constructed in multiple phases over several years, provided they are in conformance with the intent of the approved master plan. 
    Supplemental area: The privately held area between the back of the required sidewalk clear zone and the build-to line. Supplemental zones shall only be required along existing public streets. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2015-11 , §§ 1, 2, 7-7-2015; Ord. No. 2016-18 , § 9, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 93-11.5-3. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted within the RMU zone: 
(1)  Business and professional offices/agencies, including: 
a.  Architectural. 
b.  Dental. 
c.  Engineering. 
d.  Graphic arts. 
e.  Insurance. 
f.  Legal. 
g.  Manufacturers' representatives. 
h.  Medical, including, but not limited to, private physicians, medical specialists, chiropractors, and physical therapists. 
i.  Real estate. 
j.  Banks and other financial institutions (not including pawnshops, check cashing businesses, title pawn, and payday loans). 
k.  Art studios. 
l.  Dance studios. 
(2)  Playgrounds, parks, and buildings open on a noncommercial basis for recreation only. Uses of this nature are exempt from being within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  Retail; sales, with a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet, including: 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Book stores. 
c.  Baking shops. 
d.  Florist shops. 
e.  Hobby shops (offering new merchandise). 
f.  Jewelry stores (offering new or estate merchandise). 
g.  Opticians and optical stores. 
h.  Photography stores. 
(4)  Retail; sales, with a maximum floor area of 15,000 square feet, including: 
a.  Retail; drugstores and pharmacies. 
(5)  Personal services, with a maximum floor area of 6,000 square feet, including: 
a.  Barbershops, beauty shops, and hair salons. 
b.  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments, excluding coin operated laundry, with a maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
c.  Tailor shops. 
d.  Travel agencies. 
(6)  Restaurants or carry-out restaurants but not including drive-through/drive-in restaurants with a maximum size of 6,000 square feet. Such restaurants shall be allowed to operate no more than six billiard tables upon the premises. Drive-through or drive-in restaurants may be allowed through special permit. The desired configuration for a drive-through or drive-in restaurant in this district is not a stand-alone building but rather part of a larger development and the site plan specifically addresses pedestrian orientation and safety. 
(7)  Coffee shops, cafes, pastry shops, and similar establishments, with a maximum floor area of 4,000 square feet. 
(8)  Churches and other places of worship, subject to the requirements of section 93-2-17. 
(9)  Single-family detached dwellings, subject to the density restrictions in subsection (16). 
(10)  Single-family attached dwellings with at least two units attached, but no more than 12, and subject to the density restrictions in subsection (16). 
(11)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(12)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(13)  Apartments, subject to the density restrictions in subsection (16). 
(14)  Condominiums, subject to the density restrictions in subsection (16). 
(15)  Combination of residential and business applications within a single structure provided that each use must have a separate entrance directly accessible from the required sidewalk or within a jointly used lobby. 
(16)  Residential density limitations shall be as follows: 
a.  The maximum permitted residential density of a master planned development zoned RMU shall not exceed: 
(i)  Twenty units/acre for single-family detached; 
(ii)  Thirty-six units/acre for single-family attached patio/townhomes and live-work units; 
(iii)  Fifty units/acre for multifamily. 
In no case shall the maximum combined residential density exceed 75 units per acre, calculated based on the total acreage of the project, including multiple parcels or city blocks. 
b.  The residential density of individual parcels or blocks within a master planned development may be greater or less than 75 units per acre, provided the project's combined average maximum permitted residential density shall-not exceed a combined total of 75 units per acre as calculated based on the sum of all residential uses and the total acreage of the project, including multiple parcels or city blocks, but not rail lines, public streets, or other areas not owned by the applicant; and 
c.  Any changes to an approved site plan shall require approval of the city planning commission and shall be reviewed based on the geographic extent of the original approved site plan, shall not exceed maximum density requirements of the original application, and shall indicate all built or planned improvements. 
(17)  SIC Code 5411 and 5412, grocery stores and food stores, with a maximum floor area of 2,000 square feet. 
(18)  Day spas. For the purpose of this section, a spa shall be defined as a business location where massages by certified masseurs, makeovers, body wrapping, hair removal, saunas, manicures, pedicures and nonsurgical cosmetic procedures are performed. Any combination of at least three or more of the above listed uses shall occur in the location. All business shall comply with applicable state licensing regulations. 
(19)  Extended-stay hotels, subject to the provisions of sections 93-2-22 and 93-2-23. 
(20)  Hotels and motels. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2015-11 , §§ 3, 4, 7-7-2015; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 7, 3-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-18 , §§ 8, 10, 8-16-2016; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 3, 11-6-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-18 , § 10, adopted August 16, 2016, enacted provisions intended for use as subsection (17). Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsection (20). 
Sec. 93-11.5-4. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses are not permitted in any RMU zone: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11.5-5. - Uses requiring a special use permit. 
    The following uses require a special use permit, in accordance with section 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6, in any RMU zone: 
(1)  Nursing homes. 
(2)  Personal care homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-20. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-11.5-6. - Area, placement, and buffering requirements. 
    All buildings or structures erected, converted or structurally altered shall hereafter comply with the following lot area, yard, and building coverage requirements: 
(1)  Lot area and width. The minimum area shall be established by the restriction governing lot coverage, setbacks, height, and parking requirement as found in article 22.1 and set forth herein. Generally, no lot shall have a minimum frontage of less than 20 feet; however, single-family residential lots shall have a minimum frontage of 30 feet. 
(2)  Front yard. See subsection (3) below. 
(3)  Build-to line. The minimum build-to line shall be zero feet and the maximum shall be 15 feet, provided that the maximum build-to line may be increased as determined to be necessary and advisable by the city planning commission in the course of its site plan review process. In determining such increase, the city planning commission shall consider the size and configuration of the proposed buildings, their relationship to the existing and proposed thoroughfares, their relationship to existing and proposed parks and plazas, the location of existing mature trees, and the supplemental area of adjacent structures. Where the build-to line is modified to provide parks and plazas, said facilities shall be directly accessible to the public during normal city park hours. 
(4)  Side yards. There shall be no minimum side yard requirement except as required by subsection (9) for residential zone buffers. 
(5)  Rear yards. There shall be no minimum rear yard requirements except as required by subsection (9) for residential zone buffers. 
(6)  Distance between buildings. The minimum distance between two buildings on a single lot or on contiguous property shall only be limited by applicable public safety and fire codes. 
(7)  Height regulations. For those structures zoned RMU, the maximum permitted height shall not exceed the lesser of six stories or 96 feet. 
(8)  Sprinkling standards. All proposed development shall meet applicable sprinkling standards set forth by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) and all state and city codes and ordinances. 
(9)  Residential buffer. Where this district adjoins a residential zone without an intervening street, new development shall provide an attractive physical barrier between different zones as necessary to minimize disruptive light, noise, odor, dust, unsightly appearances and intrusive activity relative to the residential zone. A smooth transition to adjacent residential zones shall be ensured by the provision of: 
a.  A minimum 15-foot landscaped buffer located within the RMU zone along the district line. Said buffer shall be planted with a minimum of one tree per 30 linear feet. Evergreen shrubs, flowers or grasses shall also be provided and maintained to visually screen nonresidential areas and provide an attractive boundary that encourages continued investment in the adjacent residential zones. 
b.  A permanent opaque wall between six and eight feet in height and faced in wood, stacked stone, brick or hard-coat true stucco. Said wall may be located anywhere within the required landscaped buffer. 
c.  The tree spacing and wall placement requirements of subsections a. and b. above may be adjusted by the planning and zoning manager where the applicant wishes to preserve existing specimen trees within the required buffer. This may include alternative arrangements that minimize the impacts of the screening requirements on the health of existing trees. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, adopted August 4, 2015, renumbered the former sections 93-11.5-4-93-11.5-8 as sections 93-11.5-6-93-11.5-10. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 93-11.5-7. - Supplemental area requirements. 
    Supplemental areas shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The following may not be located in the supplemental area: 
a.  Recreational areas and facilities such as swimming pools or tennis courts; 
b.  Fences and walls, except up to four feet in height for outdoor dining; 
c.  Service elements such as dumpsters, loading docks and similar elements; and 
d.  Mechanical features. 
(2)  Adjacent to ground floor retail or restaurant uses the supplemental area: 
a.  Shall be at the same grade, slope, and cross slope as the adjacent required sidewalk; 
b.  Shall be hardscaped for a minimum of 80 percent of its horizontal area with decorative pavers, brick, slate, or stamped or colored concrete, but not asphalt; 
c.  Shall be accessible to the general public and may be used for pedestrian amenity elements such as benches, trees, lighting, outdoor dining, merchandise display and potted plants. 
d.  Eating places shall be permitted to have an outdoor dining area subject to compliance with the following provisions: 
(i)  The outdoor dining area shall not be located in the sidewalk clear area nor shall it obstruct pedestrian movement, fire lanes, access to any business, or areas designated for access by the physically impaired. Outdoor dining within the public right-of-way may not be surrounded by fences or walls and shall utilize movable tables and chairs. 
(ii)  The number of seats in the outdoor dining area shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the number of indoor seats within the eating place. 
(iii)  Compliance with applicable state and county health regulations. 
(3)  This section shall not be deemed to permit signage or structural alterations such as canopies or walls regulated elsewhere in this chapter. 
(4)  Adjacent to ground-floor dwelling units, excluding live-work dwellings, the supplemental area: 
a.  Shall be landscaped, except for area used for stoops, porches, wheelchair ramps, or walkways; 
b.  Shall be planted with canopy trees, as established in subsection 93-2-14(k)(11), at a minimum of one tree per 30 linear feet on-center as measured parallel to the front lot line. 
c.  Shall be differentiated from the adjacent sidewalk by a continuous wall, fence, hedge, or retaining wall between six and 30 inches in height. 
(5)  The supplemental area, when adjacent to ground-floor live-work dwellings or other uses, or when not adjacent to a building, shall be subject to subsections (2) and (4). 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.5-6. 
Sec. 93-11.5-8. - Sidewalk requirements. 
    Public sidewalks shall be located along all existing and new public and private streets, excluding private alleys. Sidewalks shall be of the widths indicated below and shall consist of two areas: a landscape area and a clear area. The following regulations shall apply to all required sidewalks: 
(1)  Sidewalk landscape area requirements. 
a.  The landscape area shall have a minimum width of five feet and shall be located adjacent to the curb. 
b.  The landscape area may be paved adjacent to on-street parking when located adjacent to ground floor retail, and shall be landscaped in all other areas. 
c.  Street trees shall be planted a maximum of 40 feet on center, spaced equal distance between streetlights, and in line with stripes of parallel parking spaces. All newly planted trees shall be a minimum caliper of two and one-half inches measured 12 inches above ground, shall be limbed up to a minimum height of seven feet, and shall have a minimum mature height of 40 feet. Trees shall have a minimum planting area of 40 square feet. The city planning commission may approve an alternate street tree plan subject to constraints such as overhead or underground utilities or underground utility easements. 
d.  The landscape area is also intended for the placement of street furniture, including utility poles, waste receptacles, fire hydrants, traffic signs, bus shelters, bicycle racks, public kiosks and similar elements in a manner that does not obstruct pedestrian access or motorist visibility as determined by the city. 
e.  The landscape area shall be maintained by the adjacent property owner. 
f.  Where tree grates are provided they may encroach into the sidewalk clear area a maximum depth of two feet and the landscape area may be reduced by a corresponding depth. 
(2)  Sidewalk clear area requirements. 
a.  The clear area shall be the portion of the sidewalk reserved for pedestrian passage and unobstructed by permanent objects to a height of eight feet, including, but not limited to, steps and stoops, traffic control boxes, traffic signs, awnings, canopies, and utility structures. The sidewalk clear area shall have a consistent cross slope not exceeding two percent. 
b.  No awning or canopy shall extend more than five feet over the clear area. 
c.  The sidewalk clear area shall comply with the standards established in chapter 81 (City of Hapeville Architectural Design Standards), section 81-1-6 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. 
d.  Where property within the district abuts a residential zone without an intervening street, the sidewalk area within 20 feet of such district shall taper when necessary to provide a smooth transition to the existing residential zone sidewalk. In the event that the abutting residential zone has no existing sidewalk, the sidewalk shall taper to a width of six feet, measured from the street curb, or as approved by the city planning commission. 
(3)  Paving materials to remain continuous. Any paving materials, including concrete, special pavers, or decorative paving within the landscape area or clear area shall continue across any intervening driveway. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.5-6. 
Sec. 93-11.5-9. - Parking and curb cut requirements. 
    In addition to the requirements of article 23 of this chapter, off-street parking and loading, the following requirements shall apply within the RMU district: 
(1)  See article 22.1 for minimum parking space requirements. 
(2)  See section 93-23-7 of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances for mixed-use developments, which may be reduced as authorized by the board of appeals subject to a shared parking arrangement under the following criteria: 
a.  The minimum number of parking spaces for a project where shared parking is proposed shall be determined by a study prepared by the applicant following the procedures of the Urban Land Institute (ULI) Shared Parking Report or Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE) Shared Parking Guidelines. The actual number of parking spaces required shall be based on well-recognized sources of parking data such as the ULI or ITE reports. If standard rates are limited or not available, the applicant may collect data at similar sites to establish local parking demand rates. If the shared parking plan assumes the use of an existing parking facility, then field surveys shall be conducted to determine actual parking accumulation. 
b.  An applicant shall submit the following information as part of an application to reduce parking requirements and avoid conflicting parking demands: 
(i)  A to-scale map indicating location of proposed parking spaces; 
(ii)  Hours of business operation of nonresidential parking users; 
(iii)  Copies of the legal instrument that authorizes the use of shared parking facilities, which shall be filed with the department of economic development. 
c.  Where authorized shared parking exists, and a change affecting the shared use occurs, the applicant shall have up to 30 calendar days to provide the city planning and zoning manager with a valid legal instrument reflecting the modified parking arrangements. 
d.  A change to any of the conditions identified in this subsection, except as identified in subsection (2)c. above, shall terminate authorization for shared parking. A shared parking arrangement shall be deemed a condition of the zoning and any modification will require a new site plan, parking plan, and zoning approval. 
(3)  Developments are permitted a maximum of two driveway curb cuts per block face. For the purposes of this Section, two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall only be counted as one curb cut. 
(4)  No curb cuts, driveways or circular drives shall be permitted on South Central Avenue or Atlanta Avenue where access can be provided from a side or rear street. 
(5)  Rear alleys or rear drives shall be provided to access attached single-family garages, detached single-family dwelling garages, and commercial loading and service areas. 
(6)  Carports shall be prohibited. 
(7)  Garages shall not face adjacent streets except where alley or rear drive access is not feasible, in which case such garages shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from the build-to line. All garage materials shall match those of the principal structure. 
(8)  Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from view, shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels, shall be faced in brick, stacked stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stacked stone. Parking structures adjacent to the supplemental area shall also meet the requirements of subsection 81-1-6(e) of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances. 
(9)  Bicycle or moped parking spaces are required as follows: All nonresidential uses shall provide one such space for every 20 automobile spaces and condominium and apartment uses shall provide one such space for every five units provided that no such uses shall have fewer than two such spaces or be required to exceed 30 spaces. Such spaces shall be located within the sidewalk landscape area a maximum distance of 100 feet from the primary pedestrian entrance, or within the supplemental area and at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. Bicycle parking spaces shall include a bike rack with a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
(10)  Dumpsters shall be entirely screened from view of any street with vertically enclosed opaque walls matching the materials of the principal structure. Dumpsters shall not be permitted between a primary building and a public street. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.5-6. 
Sec. 93-11.5-10. - Greenspace and open space requirements. 
    In addition to the requirements of sections 93-2-14, Tree preservation, and 93-23-18, Landscape requirements for vehicular use areas, of the Hapeville Code of Ordinances, master planned developments in excess of two acres shall be required to provide and maintain a minimum of 20 percent greenspace/open space. Calculations for greenspace/open space shall exclude required sidewalks and landscape strips along streets, but may include the following: 
(1)  Parks; 
(2)  Playgrounds; 
(3)  Trails; 
(4)  Gardens; 
(5)  Undeveloped space designated for habitat restoration and preservation; 
(6)  Plazas improved for pedestrian use shall also be considered greenspace when finished in brick or stone pavers and planted with at least One canopy tree per 2,500 square feet of area, with a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of unpaved planting area around each tree. 
(Ord. No. 2008-13, § 1, 11-4-2008; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 17, 8-4-2015) 
Note- See editor's note at section 93-11.5-6. 
ARTICLE 12. - C-R ZONE (COMMERCIAL-RESIDENTIAL) 

Sec. 93-12-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, and because of the existing mixed development within its zone, and in recognition that limited commercial uses and residential uses can be made compatible and advantageous to the city when established in the same area, and because of the need for controlled flexibility in accommodating the future development and expansion of commercial and residential land uses within the city, the C-R zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Stabilize and protect existing development. 
(2)  Ensure that future development and redevelopment increase the housing supply and needed office, commercial services and nonintensive retail land uses which are compatible with each other and with existing land uses within the city. 
(3)  Encourage certain specific types of transitional uses, building locations and site designs between residences and businesses that locate in or adjoin this zone. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-121; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 87-15, 5-5-1987) 
Sec. 93-12-2. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  The following uses are permitted in any C-R zone, subject to the general requirements of the zone: 
(1)  Single-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Group homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-19. 
(4)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(5)  Professional and business office uses, in buildings of not more than 3,000 square feet of floor area, provided that no parking area shall be located within 20 feet of a front property line, and provided further that all buildings conform to the following: 
a.  The roofs of all buildings shall be not less than four feet in rise to ten feet in run. No roof-mounted equipment shall be allowed. 
b.  The exterior wall construction of all buildings shall be one or more of the following: 
1.  Wood; 
2.  Hard-burned clay brick; 
3.  Stone with either a weathered face or a polished, fluted or broken face. 
(b)  The following uses are permitted in any C-R zone subject to the general requirements of the zone; and subject further to the site plan review requirements of section 93-2-16: 
(1)  Single-family attached developments, in structures with not more than four dwellings attached. 
(2)  Multifamily dwelling developments, in buildings containing no more than four dwelling units. 
(3)  Offices, in buildings of not more than 6,000 square feet of floor area. 
(4)  Banks and other financial institutions, in buildings of not more than 6,000 square feet of floor area. 
(5)  Clinics, in buildings of not more than 6,000 square feet of floor area. 
(6)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(7)  Reserved. 
(8)  Public, private and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(9)  Offices, banks and other financial institutions, and clinics in buildings with more than 6,000 square feet of floor area, provided that the minimum lot area for any such development is five acres. 
(10)  Multifamily developments of high density; provided that the minimum lot area for any such development is five acres; and provided further that any unit for occupancy which includes cooking facilities shall have a total floor area of not less than 480 square feet for an efficiency or one bedroom unit, a total floor area of not less than 730 square feet for a two bedroom unit, and not less than an additional 150 square feet of floor area for each additional bedroom. 
(11)  Accessory uses to office buildings with more than 6,000 square feet of floor area, or high-density multifamily buildings are permitted, but limited to the first two floors and further limited to those retail uses permitted in the C-1 commercial district, wholly within the principal building. In no case shall accessory use activities utilize more than 25 percent of the floor area of any hotel, motel, office or multifamily building. 
(12)  Art galleries, in buildings of not more than 6,000 square feet of floor area. 
(13)  North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) Code 712110 Museums, in buildings of not more than 6,000 square feet of floor area. 
(14)  NAICS Code 711510 Independent Artists, Writers, and Performers, in buildings of not more than 6,000 square feet of floor area. 
(15)  NAICS Code 453920 Art Dealers, in buildings of not more than 6,000 square feet of floor area. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-122; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 87-15, 5-5-1987; Ord. No. 89-3, § 2, 3-7-1989; Ord. no. 2007-18, § 1, 12-4-2007; Ord. No. 2012-06, § 1, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 18, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-18 , § 11, 8-16-2016) 
Sec. 93-12-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses are not permitted in any C-R zone: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 18, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-12-4. - Special uses. 
    The following uses require a special use permit, in accordance with section 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6, in any C-R zone: 
(1)  Nursing homes. 
(2)  Personal care homes, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-20. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 18, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-12-5. - Temporary use permits. 
(a)  The mayor and council may authorize the issuance of temporary use permits in the C-R zone, for any use permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zones, upon a finding that the proposed use would not cause adverse noise, glare, parking or traffic conditions, or otherwise unduly impair the value, use or enjoyment of adjacent property. 
(b)  Temporary permits shall be for the duration of six months and may be renewed at the discretion of the mayor and council. The mayor and council may stipulate special conditions or restrictions concerning the method of operation of any use granted a six month temporary permit. 
(c)  Prior to authorizing the issuance of any six-month temporary use permit, the mayor and council may consider the planning commission recommendations concerning the potential action, including any special conditions or restrictions concerning the method of operation of the use, as may be suggested by the commission. The planning commission and the mayor and council shall use the standards of review found in section 93-25-6 to decide whether or not to recommend approval or denial and to approve or deny the permit. 
(d)  A use granted a six-month temporary use permit shall not be granted the status of a lawful nonconforming use as defined and provided for in this chapter. 
(e)  If a temporary use is granted, an occupation tax certificate may be issued. Issuance of tax a certificate shall convey no rights to continue the temporary use. 
(f)  A temporary use permit issued pursuant to this section which has been approved for use by the mayor and city council for two consecutive six-month terms may be converted upon application to a conditional use permit subject to the standards and requirements set forth above. Such application shall be subject to article 3.2 of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-124; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 87-15, 5-5-1987; Ord. No. 2002-06, § 1, 3-5-2002; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 18, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 18, adopted August 4, 2015, renumbered the former section 93-12-3 as section 93-12-5. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
ARTICLE 13. - C-1 ZONE (RETAIL COMMERCIAL) 

Sec. 93-13-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, the C-1 zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Provide and protect sufficient land for those retail goods and services appropriate for high-density development in the vicinity of mass transit stations. 
(2)  Provide transit patrons the goods and services they need. 
(3)  Protect these land uses from detrimental effects of land uses which, because of the traffic congestion, noise, odor and glare they tend to create, might hinder the growth the development around transit facilities, and reduce the access to and desirability of riding the mass transit. 
(4)  Exclude uses which might have a detrimental effect on adjoining districts and developments, including residential districts. 
(5)  Stimulate the orderly arrangement, growth and development of retail and office facilities. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-131) 
Sec. 93-13-2. - General use criteria. 
    The uses permitted in any C-1 zone shall be limited to professional and business offices, retail sales of new merchandise, personal services and other uses as specifically enumerated below. All such uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-132) 
Sec. 93-13-3. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted within any C-1 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Apparel shops. 
(3)  Art studios. 
(4)  Bakery shops. 
(5)  Banks and other financial institutions, including loan and finance companies. 
(6)  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(7)  Book, cards and stationery stores. 
(8)  Business offices and agencies. 
(9)  Clubs and lodges. 
(10)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(11)  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
(12)  Dance studios. 
(13)  Department and variety stores. 
(14)  Drugstores, pharmacies and soda shops. 
(15)  Florist shops. 
(16)  Health clinics. 
(17)  Hobby shops. 
(18)  Jewelers and jewelry stores. 
(19)  Kennels. 
(20)  Minor storage, repackaging and servicing of goods and small nonmotorized equipment, provided such use does not violate the intent provisions of this article. In addition, incidental activities associated with this use such as sales, loading, bookkeeping and administration shall also be permitted. 
(21)  Office supply stores. 
(22)  Off-street commercial automobile parking and storage only in those cases where such specific uses and buildings were in existence on lots of record at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
(23)  Opticians and optical stores. 
(24)  Photography stores. 
(25)  Professional offices. 
(26)  Public, private and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(27)  Restaurants or carry-out restaurants but not including drive-through/drive-in restaurants. Such restaurants shall be allowed to operate no more than six billiard tables upon the premises. Drive-through or drive-in restaurants may be allowed through special permit. The desired configuration for a drive-through or drive-in restaurant is not a stand-alone building in this district but rather part of a larger development. 
(28)  Theaters. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-133; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 2013-10, § 1, 9-17-2013; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 19, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 8, 3-1-2016; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 4, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 93-13-4. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses are not permitted in any C-1 zone: 
(1)  Group homes. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 19, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-13-5. - Special uses. 
    The following uses require a special use permit, in accordance with section 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6, in any C-1 zone: 
(1)  Nursing home. 
(2)  Personal care home, subject to the restrictions in section 93-2-20. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 19, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 14. - C-2 (GENERAL COMMERCIAL) 

Sec. 93-14-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, and in recognition of the present extent and concentration of business and commercial developments serving the whole city, and because of the continuous process of intensification of uses in certain areas, the C-2 zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Protect present business and commercial uses. 
(2)  Guide the further development of this zone in accordance with the design principles of modern shopping centers oriented to the extensive use of the automobile as well as public transit. 
(3)  Exclude industrial uses (such as manufacturing, processing and warehousing) and residential uses. 
(4)  Encourage the eventual elimination of uses inappropriate to the function of the central business area. 
(5)  Encourage intensive development of this zone as the shopping and business center of the city and surrounding trade areas. 
(6)  Exclude uses which would be dangerous or offensive, or detrimental to the present or intended character of this zone or vicinity or persons or property therein by reason of the emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, glare, odors, vibrations or surface water and drainage. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-141) 
Sec. 93-14-2. - General use criteria. 
    The uses permitted within the C-2 zone shall include the business, professional, retail and service uses permitted in the C-1 zones plus certain other uses appropriate to a general business area. These additional uses include wholesale and other retail activities not requiring extensive storage or warehousing, hotel and motel type uses, uses pertaining to the sale of new and used automobiles, commercial parking facilities, small fabrication and assembly plants selling at retail on the premises, entertainment facilities and other uses specifically enumerated below. All these uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, except when a use included in the following list is followed by the phrase "outside use." 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-142) 
Sec. 93-14-3. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted within any C-2 zone: 
(1)  Antique shops. 
(2)  Apparel shops, including cloth and sewing stores. 
(3)  Appliance, radio and television sales outlets and services, including incidental repairing. 
(4)  Art and photography stores and studios. 
(5)  Automobile parts sales stores. 
(6)  Bakery shops. 
(7)  Banks and other financial institutions, including loan and finance shops. 
(8)  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
(9)  Business and professional offices, including incidental warehousing of products sold. 
(10)  Churches and other places of worship. 
(11)  Clubs and lodges. 
(12)  Commercial parking lots and parking garages. 
(13)  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
(14)  Dance studios. 
(15)  Department, gift and bookstores. 
(16)  Drugstores, pharmacies and soda fountains. 
(17)  Electrical sales outlets and services. 
(18)  Florist shops. 
(19)  Food stores. 
(20)  Furniture stores. 
(21)  Hardware stores. 
(22)  Hobby shops. 
(23)  Hospitals, medical and health clinics, including chiropractic. 
(24)  Hotels and motels. 
(25)  Jewelers and jewelry stores. 
(26)  Laundries, self-service and laundry pickup stations. 
(27)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(28)  Libraries and other public buildings. 
(29)  Locksmith shops. 
(30)  Minor storage, repackaging and servicing of goods and small nonmotorized equipment, provided the use does not violate the intent provisions of this article. In addition, incidental activities associated with the use such as sales, loading, bookkeeping and administration shall also be permitted. 
(31)  Opticians and optical stores. 
(32)  Paint stores. 
(33)  Plumbing sales outlets and services. 
(34)  Printing shops. 
(35)  Public, private and parochial schools operated for the purpose of instructing in elementary and high school general education subjects. In addition, other schools are allowed subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties. 
(36)  Restaurants, carry-out restaurants, drive-in restaurants or drive-through restaurants. 
(37)  Shoe stores and repair shops. 
(38)  Tailor shops. 
(39)  Theaters and bowling alleys. 
(40)  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. 
(41)  Extended-stay hotels, subject to the provisions of sections 93-2-22 and 93-2-23. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-143; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 84-8, 11-6-1984; Ord. No. 89-3, § 3, 3-7-1989; Ord. No. 2000-10, § 1, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 20, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 9, 3-1-2016; Ord. No. 2016-18 , §§ 6, 7, 8-16-2016; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 5, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 93-14-4. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses are not permitted in any C-2 zone: 
(1)  Group homes. 
(2)  Nursing homes. 
(3)  Personal care homes. 
(Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 20, 8-4-2015) 
Sec. 93-14-5. - Conditional uses. 
    Upon application to and favorable decision thereon by the mayor and council, as provided in article 25 of this chapter, the conditional uses specified herein are permitted in this district provided that their establishment promotes the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city. Specific conditional uses which may be permitted as so specified are as follows: 
(1)  Labor pools, provided also that: 
a.  The building or structure located on the property has a sufficient amount of space or area, either inside or outside, which is configured in such a way as to prevent potential laborers who have congregated in the building or on the property from being observed from any right-of-way or any adjoining property; 
b.  The proposed site for a labor pool is not located within 1,000 feet of an existing labor pool; 
c.  No further labor pools may be established when the total number of such operating establishments would number more than one for each 5,000 persons residing in the city. It is the intent of this provision to require a population of 5,000 for each such operating establishment. 
Examples: 
1.  Population = 5,000, then one license may be issued; 
2.  Population = 9,999, then one license may be issued; 
3.  Population = 10,000, then two licenses may be issued. 
If an existing operating establishment shall go out of business and the number of such existing operating establishments shall continue to exceed the limit prescribed herein, such establishments may not be reinstated. The population shall be determined by the most recent United States decennial Census. 
d.  The labor pool has a properly configured, safe area on the property where the day laborers can be picked up and dropped off. Any such area shall not include any right-of-way immediately adjacent to the property or on any adjoining property which is not owned or leased by the labor pool. 
e.  The labor pool is located only in one of the following areas: 
1.  On properties along the north right-of-way of Willingham Drive, west of Colville Avenue to the city limits of East Point. 
2.  On South Central Avenue from its intersection with Colville Avenue to the city limits of East Point. 
3.  On Sylvan Road from its intersection with Central of Georgia Railroad to its intersection with Grimes Street. 
4.  i.  On North Central Avenue from its intersection with Sylvan Road to the city limits of East Point. 
ii.  Any labor pool in existence as of the effective date of this section which is not located in the above described areas will be considered a nonconforming use and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Automobile sales lots (new and used and showrooms (outside use), including incidental service and repairing when conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building. 
a.  All vehicles offered for sale shall: be clean in appearance, not require body repairs or painting, be in an operable condition and suitable for licensing and operation under laws applicable in the state. 
b.  All vehicle repairs shall be conducted within an enclosed building and shall be limited to those vehicles actually available for sale on the premises. Such repairs shall consist of minor auto repair operations, only; bodywork is prohibited. 
c.  A 30-foot landscaped buffer shall be maintained along the boundary of any residential property. Such buffer shall consist of species and plant sizes sufficient to yield a substantial visual screen throughout the year. Section 93-23-18 regarding landscape requirements for vehicular use areas shall be applicable to these conditional uses. 
d.  No driveway shall be located within 25 feet of any residential property. 
e.  All site lighting shall be directed inward and toward the ground to prevent glare on public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. 
(3)  Boat sales and service (outside uses). 
a.  All boats offered for sale shall be clean in appearance; not require hull or other repairs or painting; be in an operable condition; and be suitable for licensing and operation under laws applicable in the state. 
b.  Boat motor repairs shall be conducted within an enclosed building; hull repairs or other repairs utilizing fiberglass or other materials that produce fumes shall not be conducted on the premises. Provided, however, that upon presentation of evidence of on-site filtering techniques that effectively eliminate such odors or fumes, rendering them imperceptible at the property line, such repairs may be permitted. 
c.  A 30-foot landscaped buffer shall be maintained along the boundary of any residential property. Such buffer shall consist of species and plant sizes sufficient to yield a substantial visual screen throughout the year. The standards found in section 93-23-18 regarding landscape requirements for open lot sales shall be applicable to these conditional uses. 
d.  No driveway shall be located within 25 feet of any residential property. 
e.  All site lighting shall be directed inward and toward the ground to prevent glare on public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. 
(4)  Gasoline service stations (outside use), not including outside repair of automobiles or outside storage of any tires batteries, new or used automobile parts or other merchandise not necessary for the sale of gasoline and motor oil. 
a.  Access drives shall be clearly defined utilizing curbing. 
b.  Vehicle services shall be limited to oil changes, lubrication, tire repair, tune-ups and other minor services. All such operations shall be performed within an enclosed building. 
c.  Storage of vehicles which are on the premises for the above repairs shall be limited to two per service bay. 
d.  Pumps shall be setback a minimum distance of 25 feet from the street right-of-way. 
e.  Stations providing car washing as an accessory use shall ensure that all wash water is contained on the premises. 
f.  A 30-foot landscaped buffer shall be maintained along the boundary of any residential property. Such buffer shall consist of species and plant sizes sufficient to yield a substantial visual screen throughout the year. The standards found in section 93-23-18 regarding landscape requirements for vehicular use areas shall be applicable to these conditional uses. 
g.  No driveway shall be located within 25 feet of any residential property. 
h.  All site lighting shall be directed inward and toward the ground to prevent glare on public rights-of-way and adjoining properties. 
(5)  Processing, cleaning, or other servicing devices or equipment, providing that the following uses may be approved by mayor and council, based upon a finding by the mayor and council that such uses conform to adopted performance standards, and that said uses further the purpose of the zone in which they are located or in which the use would be placed. No approved use shall be expanded that is inconsistent with the criteria set fourth below. Discontinuation of an approved use for a period of 30 or more days shall result in termination of the conditional uses after notice sent registered mail to the permit holder's last known address without further process. Discontinuation of a use for a period of 30 or more days shall create a presumption and be evidence of an intent to abandon the use. 
a.  Processing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing devices or equipment. The following shall be allowed by conditional uses: 
1.  Processing, cleaning, or otherwise servicing devices or equipment. 
2.  Business offices, including incidental warehousing of products sold and minor storage, repackaging and servicing of goods. 
3.  Limited processing and fabrication of goods, or light assembly utilizing components parts manufactured elsewhere. 
b.  Applicable conditions. The following conditions must be met for conditional uses issuance: 
1.  No truck terminals shall be allowed; 
2.  Shipping shall be accomplished using local haul trucks as the term is commonly used in the trucking industry, and shall not use trucks with 18 or more wheels, also known as long haul trucks, on the permitted property; 
3.  No outdoor storage of materials, equipment or other materials shall be permitted; 
4.  All such operations shall be conducted in an enclosed building; and 
5.  The maximum lot area of such a use shall be one acre. 
c.  Performance standards. The following performance standards which shall be complied with are: 
1.  Pollution control and nuisance abatement. Each nonresidential use is required to continuously employ the best pollution control and nuisance abatement technology when reasonable and practicably available for each particular use; provided that where federal and state laws or regulations establish the appropriate level of technology to be employed, the applicable standards shall apply. 
2.  Heat, light and glare. 
i.  All operations and facilities producing heat, light or glare shall be so constructed, screened or used so as to not unreasonably infringe upon the use and enjoyment of property beyond the lot line for the use concerned. 
ii.  Outdoor lighting structures shall be located, angled, shielded and/or limited in intensity so as to cast no direct light upon adjacent property and to avoid the creation of a visual safety hazard to passing motorists. 
3.  Ground vibrations. No ground vibration other than that caused by highway vehicles, trains or construction activity shall be permitted which is discernible, without instruments, at or beyond the property line for the use concerned. 
4.  Odor, dust, dirt and smoke. No odor, dust, dirt, or smoke shall be emitted that is detectable, at or beyond the property line, for the use concerned, in such a concentration or of such duration as to cause a public nuisance, or threaten health or safety, or to unreasonably infringe upon the use and enjoyment of property beyond the property line of the use concerned. 
5.  Noise. The maximum constant sound level of 120 decibels as measured on the "A" scale of a sound meter (hereinafter dbA) and a maximum peak sound level of 150 dbA shall not be exceeded at or beyond the property line of the use emitting such sound. 
6.  Toxic gases and fumes. There shall be no emission of toxic gases or fumes in such a concentration or of such duration as to cause a public nuisance, to exceed state or federal mandated limitations, or to be injurious to the public health or general welfare. 
7.  Nuisance uses. No use or manner of operation shall be permitted which would constitute a nuisance or which is obnoxious or offensive by reason of odor, smoke, noise, glare, gas, fumes, vibration, unusual danger of fire or explosion, emission of particulate matter, or interference with radio or television communication or is otherwise incompatible with the character of the district and in relation to any adjoining district. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-144; Ord. No. 95-10, § 2, 11-7-1995; Ord. No. 98-08, § 1, 4-7-1998; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 1, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2000-11, § 1, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 20, 8-4-2015) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 20, adopted August 4, 2015, renumbered the former section 93-14-4 as section 93-14-5. The historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
Sec. 93-14-6. - Uses requiring a special use permit. 
    The following uses require a special use permit, in accordance with section 93-3.2-5 and 93-3.2-6, in any C-2 zone: 
(1)  Adult daycare facilities. 
(2)  Climate-controlled storage facilities. Climate-controlled storage facilities may be permitted in any C-2 zone, subject to special use permit and the following conditions: 
a.  Parking and loading requirements. 
1.  Parking spaces-One space for every 40 rental spaces and one space for each employee who may be working or arriving to work. 
2.  Loading spaces-One space for every 400 rental spaces or majority fraction thereof. 
3.  Customer and employee parking spaces shall be full size spaces; loading spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet by 24 feet and have 14 feet of vertical clearance. No part of any parking and loading spaces or maneuvering space shall encroach into a public right-of-way. 
b.  Minimum number of floors. For the purpose of maximizing land utilization and minimizing impervious area, all climate-controlled storage facility developments shall be a minimum of three stories. 
c.  Architectural design. 
1.  For the purpose of avoiding the industrial appearance of traditional mini-warehouses, the design and exterior finishes shall at a minimum reflect that of a typical Class B office building. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, Class B buildings are defined as follows: 
i.  These buildings are a grade below Class A. Generally, they are slightly older buildings with good management and quality tenants. 
ii.  It is not uncommon for value-added investors to target these buildings with the intention of renovating them back into Class A buildings. 
iii.  Class B buildings are well maintained overall and quite functional. 
iv.  Class B office buildings commonly have an acceptable curtain wall finish, adequate (but not state of the art) mechanical, electrical and safety and security systems, and a mid-quality level of interior finish. 
v.  Class B buildings compete for a wide range of users at average rental rates for their market area. 
vi.  The following additional criteria characterize Class B office space: fair to good building finishes; good quality systems; and average rental rates. 
2.  All features that would afford a view into a private rental storage space should be faux or "one way" windows and shall present an opaque panel on the building facade. 
3.  All storage units shall be accessed through an interior entrance. Outside access to storage units is prohibited. 
d.  Operational standards. 
1.  All climate-controlled storage facilities shall feature temperature and humidity regimens that protect personal goods stored on the premises from damaging temperature, sun and humidity extremes. 
2.  Outside storage of goods is prohibited. 
3.  Storage of recreational vehicles and dry storage of pleasure boats of any type customarily maintained by private individuals for personal use shall be prohibited. 
4.  Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals shall be prohibited. 
5.  No units within the facility shall be used for or considered to be premises for the purpose of establishing residency or for assigning a legal address in order to obtain an occupational license or any other government permit or license to conduct business. 
6.  The hours of operation during which individuals with a written contract to rent or lease one or more storage units on the property shall be between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Sunday. 
7.  No resident manager or any type of overnight accommodations for such shall be permitted. 
8.  No units shall be used to manufacture, fabricate or process goods; to service or repair vehicles, boats, small engines or electrical equipment; or to conduct similar repair activities; to conduct garage sales or retail sales of any kind; to rehearse or practice utilizing band instruments; for conversion to an apartment or dwelling unit; or to conduct any other commercial or industrial activities on the site; provided that the owner may conduct retail sales in the leasing office limited to such items as locks, boxes and other moving supplies. 
e.  Building and site plan review. Any new construction or renovation, including interior renovation, shall be subject to approval by the planning commission and the design review committee. Any conversion of a building a climate-controlled storage facility shall comply with the standards contained herein for new construction, including the minimum building height of three stories. 
(Ord. No. 2015-14 , § 2, 8-4-2015; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 20, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 15. - I-1 ZONE (LIGHT INDUSTRIAL) 

Sec. 93-15-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, and because of the existing and proposed character of development within and around the area, and because of the present or anticipated accessibility to transportation facilities, and because of availability of adequate utilities and other public services, the I-1 zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Protect existing light industrial uses. 
(2)  Promote and protect future development of the zone in light industrial usage. 
(3)  Exclude incompatible uses, such as residences, heavy industry and commercial enterprises not directly serving the light industrial uses, which would preempt land which is intended to be preserved for industrial uses in order to achieve a favorable balance of land uses within the city. 
(4)  Ensure the ultimate stabilization of the zone in light industrial usage. 
(5)  Encourage further development within the zone similar in character and appearance to modern planned industrial districts. 
(6)  Encourage eventual elimination of incompatible uses. 
(7)  Excluding any use which would be dangerous or offensive, or detrimental to the present or intended character of this zone or vicinity by reason of the emission of dust, glare, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibration or otherwise. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-151) 
Sec. 93-15-2. - General use criteria. 
    The principal uses permitted in any I-1 zone shall be limited in general to the assembly, packaging or processing of previously prepared goods and materials. Additional permitted uses include the storage of goods and materials, the receiving, distribution of goods and materials, fabricating shops, retail and wholesale activities requiring extensive storage or warehousing, related commercial and service activities, and other uses specifically listed below. Whenever possible, or as otherwise required, these uses shall be conducted within an enclosure or building. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-152) 
Sec. 93-15-3. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted within any I-1 zone: 
(1)  Automobile laundries. 
(2)  Automobile servicing and repairing. 
(3)  Establishments manufacturing prepared food and miscellaneous food products, such as bakeries, bottling plants, ice plants, etc. 
(4)  Building materials sales yards and contractors' equipment yards, provided these yards are completely enclosed by a solid wall at least six feet high. These walls shall comply with all setback requirements for this zone. 
(5)  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
(6)  Electronic manufacturing and assembly. 
(7)  Electrical repair shops. 
(8)  Fabricating shops such as sheet metal works, woodworking shops, cabinet shops and upholstery shops. 
(9)  Film developing. 
(10)  Gasoline service stations. 
(11)  Instruments manufacturing for professional, scientific, photography, optical and similar uses. 
(12)  Laboratories for industrial testing and research. 
(13)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments. 
(14)  Leather products manufacturing. 
(15)  Nurseries, greenhouses and truck gardens. 
(16)  Parking facilities. 
(17)  Printing shops. 
(18)  Sign manufacturing and construction. 
(19)  Small items manufacturing, such as toys, clocks, jewelry, fountain pens, pencils, and plastic products. 
(20)  Textile cutting, assembly and processing plants, not including spinning, knitting, weaving, dyeing, combing, scouring and similar activities. 
(21)  Veterinarians, animal hospitals and kennels. 
(22)  Warehouses and other storage facilities. 
(23)  Welding shops, provided all glare is shielded from outside view. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-153) 
Sec. 93-15-4. - Conditional uses. 
    Upon application to, and favorable decision thereon by, the mayor and council as provided in article 3.2 of this chapter, the conditional uses specified herein are permitted in this district provided that their establishment promotes the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city. Specific conditional uses which may be permitted as so specified are as follows: Taxicab terminals and vehicles for hire terminals provided also that: 
(1)  A maximum of six taxicabs and/or vehicles for hire shall be parked on the premises at any time. Expansion of the terminal beyond operation of six taxicabs and/or vehicles for hire shall necessitate a new application for a conditional use permit to protect adjoining uses. 
(2)  All vehicles of any kind that require licenses, emission stickers, tags, titles, tax payment receipts, or registration with state or federal agencies, found on the permittee's premises must properly display all required certifications for operation in the state or they shall be cited as abatable nuisances under local ordinance and state law and, if applicable, shall otherwise be cited for other registration or display compliance failures. 
(3)  Vehicle cleaning shall be permitted on the premises; however, no spare parts, junk vehicles or outside storage of parts or supplies of any kind shall be allowed on the permittee's premises. Vehicle cleaning shall not include engine repair, maintenance, tire changes or tire repair, oil changes, fluid changes and vehicular repairs generally. 
(4)  Any area where taxicabs and/or other vehicles are to be parked shall be stripped for parking. 
(5)  All parking associated with this conditional use must be accommodated within off-street parking areas. Further, all on-street and other parking regulations of the city will be enforced, where applicable. 
(6)  Landscaping requirements utilized for off-street parking shall be applicable to conditional uses permitted hereunder. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-154; Ord. No. 2000-05, § 1, 3-7-2000) 
ARTICLE 16. - I-2 ZONE (HEAVY INDUSTRIAL) 

Sec. 93-16-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive land development plan for the city, and because of the present character and extent of development within the area, and because of the existing anticipated accessibility to major transportation facilities, and because of the availability of adequate utilities and other public services, the I-2 zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Promote and protect industrialization within this zone from incompatible uses such as residences and commercial establishments which would preempt land which is intended to be preserved for industrial uses in order to achieve a favorable balance of land uses within the city. 
(2)  Ensure the development and ultimate stabilization of the zone in industrial uses of benefit to the economic welfare of the city. 
(3)  Encourage the eventual elimination of incompatible uses. 
(4)  Exclude uses which could be dangerous or offensive, or detrimental to the general character of this zone or vicinity by reason of emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes, odors, vibration, glare or otherwise. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-161) 
Sec. 93-16-2. - General use criteria. 
    The principal uses permitted in any I-2 zone shall in general include the uses permitted in I-1 zones, plus certain types of manufacturing and processing of raw materials and goods, and other uses, as specifically listed below. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-162) 
Sec. 93-16-3. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses are permitted within any I-2 zone: 
(1)  Any use permitted in an I-1 zone, subject to the same requirements. 
(2)  Chemical plants. 
(3)  Concrete batch or mixing plants. 
(4)  Customary accessory buildings and uses, provided that garage space be used exclusively for the storage of automotive vehicles. 
(5)  Glass plants. 
(6)  Manufacture of: 
a.  Beauty shop and barbershop equipment; 
b.  Electrical and automotive machinery, equipment and supplies; 
c.  Fountain and beverage dispensing equipment; 
d.  Machinery; 
e.  Plywood, furniture and similar wood products; 
f.  Rubber products; and 
g.  Transportation equipment, including automobiles. 
(7)  Metal fabricating plants. 
(8)  Millwork and flooring processing. 
(9)  Paper coating and glazing. 
(10)  Textile manufacturing processes such as spinning, knitting, weaving, dyeing, combing and scouring. 
(11)  Wood preserving plants. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-163) 
Sec. 93-16-4. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses listed in the I-1 zone shall be permitted within any I-2 zone, subject to the same requirements as the I-1 zone. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-164; Ord. No. 2000-05, § 2, 3-7-2000) 
ARTICLE 18. - B-P ZONE (BUSINESS PARK) 

Sec. 93-18-1. - Intent. 
(a)  The purpose of this district is to encourage the development of a high-quality community of business, office and service uses. 
(b)  In order to further the achievement of this purpose, applicants for development within the B-P business-park district shall submit proposed site development plans for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of section 93-2-16. 
(c)  All proposed developments shall be first reviewed by the city planning commission for aesthetics and architectural blending. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-170.3; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 8-11-1994) 
Sec. 93-18-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The uses permitted in any B-P zone shall be limited to business and professional offices, educational institutions, retail sales of new merchandise, and personal services as specifically identified below. All such principal uses shall be conducted wholly within completely enclosed buildings. 
(1)  Business and professional offices, including: 
a.  Architectural. 
b.  Dental. 
c.  Engineering. 
d.  Graphic arts. 
e.  Insurance. 
f.  Legal. 
g.  Manufacturers representative. 
h.  Medical. 
i.  Real estate. 
(2)  Educational institutions, including: 
a.  Business schools. 
b.  Colleges and universities. 
c.  Professional schools (including music/dance studios). 
d.  Technical schools. 
(3)  Retail; sales, including: 
a.  Appeal shops. 
b.  Banking shops. 
c.  Drugstores, pharmacies and soda shops. 
d.  General merchandise stores. 
e.  Florist shops. 
f.  Hobby shops. 
g.  Jewelry stores. 
(4)  Personal services, including: 
a.  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
b.  Laundry and dry cleaning shops. 
c.  Shoe repair shops. 
d.  Tailor shops. 
e.  Travel agencies. 
(5)  Banks and other financial institutions. 
(6)  Computer processing and data processing facilities. 
(7)  Restaurants or carry-out restaurants but not including drive-through/drive-in restaurants. Such restaurants shall be allowed to operate no more than six billiard tables upon the premises. Drive-through or drive-in restaurants may be allowed through special permit. The desired configuration for a drive-through or drive-in restaurant is not a stand-alone building but rather part of a larger development. 
(8)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with and incidental to the above principal uses. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-170.4; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 8-11-1994; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 10, 3-1-2016; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 6, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 93-18-3. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  Retail sales establishments and personal service facilities shall have a minimum of one parking space for each 100 square feet of first floor area plus one space for each 200 square feet above the first floor, excluding all floor area used for storage only. 
(b)  Every use established in the B-P district shall have a minimum of four off-street parking spaces provided. 
(c)  Restaurants, grills, cafes, taverns and similar eating and drinking establishments shall have one parking space for each four seats provided for patron use, plus one parking space for each 75 square feet of floor area provided for patron use but not containing seats. 
(d)  Computer processing and data processing facilities shall have a minimum of two off-street parking spaces per 800 square feet of gross floor area. 
(e)  Office uses shall have a minimum of four off-street parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(f)  Auditoriums, assembly areas and similar facilities shall have a minimum of one parking space for each three seats in such facility. 
(g)  For every 10,000 square feet of building floor area, or fraction thereof, a minimum of one off-street loading space shall be provided. 
(h)  Every use established in the B-P district shall have a minimum of four off-street parking spaces provided. In all instances, the minimum of off-street parking and loading spaces provided shall be equal to the number required to accommodate all normally anticipated customers, employees and other needs of the establishment. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-170.5; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 8-11-1994) 
Sec. 93-18-4. - Height restrictions. 
    No structure shall exceed 40 feet or three stories in height, unless additional height is approved by the Federal Aviation Administration, as well as the city building official and fire chief to ensure that fire safety design standards are met. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-170.6; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 8-11-1994) 
Sec. 93-18-5. - Site development and improvement standards. 
    In order to establish and maintain the B-P business park district as a quality area which will preserve the investments of all landowners and developers, as well as the tax base of the city, all construction and development within the B-P district shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Setbacks for front, rear and side yards. 
a.  Structures fronting on a street shall be located at least 20 feet from the front property line. The setback on corner lots shall be at least 20 feet from each street. 
b.  Structures, except fences and screening walls, shall be at least 20 feet from the side of any property line. 
c.  Structures shall be at least 20 feet from any rear property line. 
d.  Only driveways, parking spaces, permitted signs, and landscaped areas shall be allowed between a structure and the front property line. 
(2)  Buildings. 
a.  Exterior wall materials shall be one or more of the following: 
1.  Hard-burned clay. 
2.  Stone with either a weathered face or a polished, fluted or broken face. No quarry-faced stone shall be used except in retaining walls. 
3.  Concrete masonry. Units shall be those generally described by the National Concrete Masonry Association as "Customized Architectural Concrete Masonry Units" or shall be broken faced brick-type units with marble aggregate. There shall be no exposed concrete block on the exterior of any building, except that walls not visible from any street or building may be painted concrete block. Any concrete masonry units that have gray cement color shall be coasted with a coating approved by the building official. 
4.  i.  Concrete may be poured in-place, tilt-up or precast. Poured in-place and tilt-up walls shall have a finish of stone, a texture or a coating. Textured finishes shall be coated. Precast units which are not uniform in color shall be coated. Coating shall be an approved cementitious of any epoxy type with a life expectancy of at least ten years. 
ii.  One or more of the above-listed materials used in combination with glass and/or metal trim. 
b.  Other exterior wall materials may be used only with the prior approval of the building official. Approval or disapproval will be judged on the appropriateness of the materials when considered in context with the total building design and surrounding developments. 
c.  Outside storage of materials is prohibited. 
d.  Roof-mounted equipment shall be located and/or screened to minimize visibility from streets or surrounding buildings. 
(3)  Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area for any building site shall be 10,000 square feet. 
(4)  Landscaping. The entire area of any lot containing a building site, including the area between the building and the street right-of-way line, shall be landscaped except for areas covered by buildings and paved areas. A minimum strip of landscaping ten feet wide shall be installed and maintained along any portion of the lot bordering a public street right-of-way except for entrance driveways onto the lot. The landscaping plan submitted to the building official for approval shall identify such features as the planting of trees, shrubs, and grass and the installation of screens as appropriate. The landscaping, as approved by the planning commission, shall be installed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The maintenance of the landscaping shall be the responsibility of the owner and shall include the provision of a sprinkler system or readily available water supply with at least one outlet located within 50 feet of all plant material to be maintained. All vehicle use areas shall be landscaped in accordance with requirements of section 93-23-18, landscape requirements for vehicular use areas. 
(5)  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall comply with FAA requirements related to aircraft safety, and all exterior lighting shall be maintained in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the building official. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-170.7; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 8-11-1994) 
Sec. 93-18-6. - Protective covenants and/or deed restrictions. 
    In conjunction with the review and approval of site development plans, the city may require the preparation and submission for approval of protective covenants or deed restrictions, or both, which would be made applicable to all development within the project for the purpose of regulating such features as architectural style of structures, types of materials used in building construction, restrictions and design features for signs; limitations on, or identification of, permitted uses, and other requirements which have as their purpose guaranteeing a high-quality, compatible total development, in order to thereby protect the tax base of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-170.8; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 8-11-1994) 
Sec. 93-18-7. - Residences in business districts. 
    It shall be unlawful to construct any residence building, either single-family or multifamily, in the B-P district. However, any residence building existing in this district at the date of adoption of this section shall be permitted to continue. Any such residence maintained after the date of adoption of this section shall be considered a nonconforming use subject to the provisions of article 3 this chapter (provided, however, that these uses shall be allowed to continue in this district regardless of the extent of future damage.) A personal care home shall be considered as a residence building for purposes of this section. For the purposes of this section, "personal care home" retains the definition provided in section 93-1-2. For purposes of this section, hotels, motor courts, and motels shall not be considered residence buildings. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-170.9; Ord. No. 94-23, § 1, 8-11-1994; Ord. No. 2015-15 , § 21, 8-4-2015) 
ARTICLE 19. - D-D ZONE (DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT) 

Sec. 93-19-1. - Intent. 
    By virtue of its location within the comprehensive plan for the city, because of the present character and extent of development within the area, and because of the existing historical, artistic, architectural, cultural and economic identity and uses currently available in the downtown area, the D-D zone is established in order to: 
(1)  Promote, preserve, and protect the historic, cultural, aesthetic, and architectural tradition and character of buildings and facilities within the downtown area. 
(2)  Ensure the planned growth and development of the downtown area in a manner which is consistent with the goals stated hereinabove. 
(3)  Encourage the longterm elimination of incompatible uses; and 
(4)  Exclude uses which could pose a danger to the health, safety and/or welfare of the citizens of the city by preserving the general character of the downtown area. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-172; Ord. No. 99-12, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 93-19-2. - General use criteria. 
    The principal uses permitted in the D-D zone, include the uses specified below and specifically prohibit other uses described below. All such uses shall be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. Incidental outside repair may occur where such repair is limited in area to the rear of a shop or building, where such repair cannot be seen from adjoining properties. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-173; Ord. No. 99-12, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 93-19-3. - Uses; permitted and nonpermitted. 
(a)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Business and professional offices, including: 
a.  Architectural. 
b.  Dental. 
c.  Engineering. 
d.  Graphic arts. 
e.  Insurance. 
f.  Legal. 
g.  Manufacturers' representatives. 
h.  Medical. 
i.  Real estate. 
j.  Banks and other financial institutions (not including pawnshops and check cashing businesses). 
(2)  Institutional uses including: 
a.  Art studios. 
b.  Business schools. 
c.  Reserved. 
d.  Colleges and universities. 
e.  Dance studios. 
f.  Libraries and other public buildings. 
g.  Professional schools (including music/dance studios). 
h.  Technical schools. 
i.  Playgrounds, parks, and buildings open on a noncommercial basis for recreation only. Uses of this nature are exempt from being within a completely enclosed building. 
(3)  Retail; Sales, including 
a.  Antique shops. 
b.  Banking shops. 
c.  Book, card and stationery stores. 
d.  Drugstores, pharmacies and soda shops. 
e.  Florist shops. 
f.  Food stores. 
g.  General merchandise stores (selling new merchandise). 
h.  Hardware stores. 
i.  Office supply stores. 
j.  Opticians and optical stores. 
k.  Photography stores. 
l.  Printing shops. 
(4)  Personal services, including: 
a.  Barbershops and beauty shops. 
b.  Data processing facilities. 
c.  Laundry and dry cleaning shops. 
d.  Locksmith shops. 
e.  Shoe repair shops. 
f.  Tailor shops. 
g.  Travel agencies. 
(5)  Computer sales and repairs (offering new or used merchandise). These uses are subject to a finding by the planning commission that the proposed method of establishment and operation would not adversely impact the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties nor negatively affect the historic character of the zone. 
a.  Retail; sales, including: 
1.  Apparel shops (offering new merchandise). 
2.  Furniture stores (offering new merchandise). 
3.  Hobby shops (offering new merchandise). 
4.  Jewelry stores (offering new or used merchandise). 
b.  Personal services, including: 
Appliance, radio and television sales outlets and services, including incidental repairing where all repair is conducted out of customers view and is limited to 25 percent of the business's floor area (offering new or used merchandise). 
(6)  Bed and breakfast inns without kitchens or cooking facilities in rooms used for guest occupancy. 
(7)  Restaurants or carry-out restaurants but not including drive-through/drive-in restaurants. Such restaurants shall be allowed to operate no more than six billiard tables upon the premises. 
(8)  Theaters which do not provide entertainment as defined in section 11-2-1 of the Code, city including adult: films, stage productions, videos or other adult entertainment performances. 
(9)  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. 
(10)  Residential lofts. However, all lots in the D-D zone shall be accessed from an entrance other than through the store front or any area where business is conducted. 
(b)  Nonpermitted uses. The following uses, while permitted in other areas within the city, are not permitted in the D-D zone: 
(1)  Pawnshops and check cashing businesses excluding banks and credit unions; 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishments as defined by section 11-2-1 of this Code including but not limited to; adult bookstores, video adult rental or purchase, adult movie or adult live theaters, or adult gifts and novelties, or viewing or listening to other adult entertainment through any other electronic or other technological medium; 
(3)  Tattoo parlors; 
(4)  Palm reading and fortunetelling including psychic, tarot, and crystal readings; 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  Carnivals; 
(7)  Stables; 
(8)  Shooting galleries and firearm and archery ranges; 
(9)  Firearms dealers; 
(10)  Modeling agencies; 
(11)  Massage parlors; 
(12)  Spas; 
(13)  Hypnotists; 
(14)  Handwriting analysis; 
(15)  Escort services; 
(16)  Bazaars; 
(17)  Specialty shops; 
(18)  Flea markets; 
(19)  Variety shops; 
(21)  Labor pools; 
(22)  Extended stay motels/hotels; 
(23)  Commercial parking lots, and; 
(24)  Warehouses or long term storage of material (except where such storage is for material for immediate sale and such material does not constitute more than 25 percent of the business' floor space). 
(c)  Conditional uses. The following use may be allowed as a conditional use in the D-D zone with approval of the mayor and council pursuant to article 25 of this chapter and the additional conditions that the use is determined by the mayor and council to be: 
(1)  Conducive to the D-D zone concept; 
(2)  In harmony with all revitalization and redevelopment efforts directly affecting existing buildings, new construction and redevelopment in the D-D zone; 
(3)  A historically accepted use or service within the downtown area of the city; and 
(4)  Designed to meet a service need consistent with the D-D zone concept. 
Facilities that do no other work other than to replace, rebuild and remanufacture torque converters shall be considered automotive transmission repair shops and such may be allowed as a conditional use upon a showing that the required elements above are met. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-174; Ord. No. 2002-09, §§ 1, 2, 5-7-2002; Ord No. 2016-03 , § 11, 3-1-2016; Ord. No. 2018-15 , § 7, 11-6-2018) 
Sec. 93-19-4. - Off-street parking and loading requirements, landscaping in parking areas, and entrances and exits. 
(1)  All establishments in the D-D zone shall, at a minimum, include one space per every 300 square feet of floor area excluding floor area user for storage only. For every 10,000 square feet of building floor area, or fraction thereof, a minimum of one off-street loading space shall be provided. 
(2)  Vehicle parking and loading zones shall be confined to the rear of businesses when possible, or via shared centrally located areas in order to reduce the amount of required asphalt and provide for more open space and/or landscape area. Parking areas shall connect to public rights-of-way via pedestrian walkways, which may be constructed of materials other than or in conjunction with concrete paving (brick, stone, pavers, etc.). However, no parking and loading zones shall impede or disrupt any rear pedestrian access. 
(3)  Landscape design elements regarding parking and loading zones as provided in section 93-19-6 and in ordinances effective on the date of adoption of this article shall be applied in the D-D zone. 
(4)  Entrance and exit points shall conform to the requirements of section 93-23-2 in effect at the time of the adoption of this article. 
(5)  Driveways shall conform to the standard in effect in city ordinances at the date of the adoption of this article. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-176; Ord. No. 99-12, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 93-19-5. - Height restrictions. 
    No structure shall exceed 40 feet or three stories in height, unless additional height is approved by the city building official and fire chief to ensure that fire safety design standards are met. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-177; Ord. No. 99-12, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 93-19-6. - Site development and improvement standards. 
    In order to establish and maintain the D-D zone as a quality area which will preserve the investments of all landowners and developers, while maintaining the historic and architectural character of the zone, as well as the tax base of the city, all new construction, remodeling/repair and development within the D-D district shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Setbacks for front, rear and side yards. Only driveways, parking spaces on private land, permitted signs, landscaped areas shall be allowed between a structure and the front or rear property lines, alleys or loading zones. The following exceptions are allowed: 
a.  Merchandise displays (which must be removed at the close of business at the close of each working day) so long as at least five feet of pedestrian walkway is kept free of obstructions. The five feet shall be measured from the outer edge of the paved road surface (as opposed to the center of a road or street) or the curb edge nearest to the paved road edge; 
b.  Cafe tables, chairs and benches are allowed on street frontage so long as at least five feet of pedestrian walkway is kept free of obstructions. The five feet shall be measured from the outer edge of the paved road surface (as opposed to the center of a road or street) or the curb edge nearest to the paved road edge. Other structures may be allowed by special exception which do not pose an aesthetic, safety, or health hazards. 
(2)  Buildings. 
a.  Exterior wall materials shall be one or more of the following: 
1.  Hard-burned clay. 
2.  Stone with either a weathered face or a polished, fluted or broken face. No quarry-faced stone shall be used except in retaining walls. Marble shall be considered stone for the purposes of this section 93-19-5 et seq. 
3.  Concrete masonry. Units shall be those generally described by the National Concrete Masonry Association as "Customized Architectural Concrete Masonry Units" or shall be broken faced brick-type units with marble aggregate. There shall be no exposed concrete block on the exterior of any building, except that walls not visible from any street or building may be painted concrete block. Any concrete masonry units that have gray cement color shall be coated with a coating approved by the building official. 
4.  Concrete may be poured in-place, tilt-up or precast. Poured in-place and tilt-up walls shall have a finish of stone, a texture or a coating. Textured finishes shall be coated. Precast units which are not uniform in color shall be coated. Coating shall be an approved cementitious of any epoxy type with a life expectancy of at least ten years. 
5.  One or more of the above listed materials shall be used in combination with glass and/or metal trim. 
6.  Wood. Excluding for exterior usage masonite siding, plyboard, gypsum board, other wood/glue combination construction materials, and exterior insulation finishes. It is not the intention of this section to disallow use of this material for internal insulation or other internal construction purposes where approved by the building inspector. 
b.  Other exterior wall materials including stucco may be used only with the prior approval of the building official. Approval or disapproval will be judged on the appropriateness of the materials when considered in context with the total building design and surrounding developments. 
c.  Preengineered buildings are not permitted in the D-D zone. Buildings with glass storefronts, made of steel or metal fabrications are permitted. 
d.  Outside storage of materials is prohibited. However, nonpermanent structures as described in subsection (1) above are allowed. 
e.  Roof-mounted equipment and penetrations shall be located and/or screened to minimize visibility from streets or surrounding buildings. 
f.  Mechanical equipment shall be located and/or screened so as to minimize their visual impact. 
g.  Wherever possible, historic buildings will be preserved or restored to reflect the architectural, geographic, and artistic context of the building while preserving the cultural, historic and authentic character of the D-D zone. Construction and restoration construction material will comply with the planning commission standards for historic preservation and restoration. All historic renovations will comply with the planning commission standards for historic preservation and restoration. 
h.  New construction both infill and/or remodeling shall be of a style, size, and detailing consistent with the existing structures in the D-D zone. 
i.  Front facades of principal buildings shall face and be parallel to the street. 
(3)  Exterior lighting. All exterior lighting shall comply with FAA requirements related to aircraft safety, and all exterior lighting shall be maintained in accordance with plans and specifications submitted to and approved by the building official. 
(4)  Utilities. All utilities for new construction both infill and/or remodeling shall be located and/or screened so as to minimize their visual impact. Site utilities shall be limited to underground systems in all new construction (both infill and/or remodeling). 
(5)  Storefronts and building facades. Storefronts and building facades shall incorporate architectural features which facet or break up sight lines to discourage blank facades, large expanses of storefronts, and to foster a sense of individuality for each business. One-fifth of the width of each storefront shall be recessed back from the public right-of-way, a minimum of three feet to create pockets along the right-of-way. 
(6)  Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance. All new construction both infill and/or remodeling shall be ADA compliant unless the building or structure is otherwise historically exempt. 
(7)  Landscape requirements applicability. Landscape requirement ordinances governing landscape design, building plans, perimeter areas, dimensions, screening, numbers and/or percentages of trees and other vegetative greenery and containment of trees and vegetative greenery as set forth in the city's ordinance shall remain in full force and effect except that the following provisions shall be applicable to new construction both infill and/or remodeling in the D-D zone and where there provisions conflict with the general landscape requirements the provisions herein shall prevail without nullifying the remainder of the landscape ordinance: 
a.  Where not otherwise provided one planted and irrigated landscaped island shall be constructed per each ten parking spaces in any paved parking area. The planted island shall be a minimum of six feet by 18 feet in size. 
b.  Landscaped areas shall be required in all parking areas and/or public-right-of-way. Parking areas shall be required to have a minimum ten-foot landscape area adjacent to public right-of-way. Adjacent interior parking lot boundary lines shall provide for a shared three-foot buffer between parking areas. 
(8)  Curbcuts, sidewalks and pavers. No vehicles may park between any sidewalk in the D-D zone and the front facade of a building in the D-D zone for the purposes of fire safety and aesthetics. Variances may be granted to this section where such parking is shown not to create a fire safety, safety or aesthetic danger or disruption. 
a.  All curbcuts, sidewalks, and pavers in the D-D zone shall comply (when not historically or otherwise exempt) with ADA requirements. 
b.  A six-inch curb shall be used to separate pedestrian areas from vehicular travel lanes, parking areas, and gutters. 
c.  All curbs, sidewalks and pavers shall be constructed of: 
1.  A minimum of 3,500 psi concrete; 
2.  Concrete stamped with textures and/or colors to emulate various types of stone or brick masonry; and/or 
3.  A combination of grout set brick and concrete with a joint and scoring pattern approved by the city. 
d.  No vehicles will traverse curbs or otherwise park on or travel on/over or in any other way damage city curbs or sidewalks. 
e.  When property owners/developers introduce new construction both infill and/or remodeling, they shall comply with the standards described hereinabove. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-178; Ord. No. 99-12, § 3, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 2005-01, § 2(8-5-178), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 93-19-7. - Protective covenants and/or deed restrictions. 
    In conjunction with the review and approval of site development plans, the city may require the preparation and submission for approval of protective covenants or deed restrictions, or both, which would be made applicable to all development within the development for the purpose of regulating such features as architectural style of structures, types of materials used in building construction, restrictions and design features for signs; limitations on, or identification of permitted uses, and other requirements which have as their purpose guaranteeing a high quality, compatible total development, in order to thereby protect the tax base of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-179; Ord. No. 99-12, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 93-19-8. - Site plan review. 
    Provisions requiring site plan review in this Code shall be applicable to the D-D zone. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-180; Ord. No. 99-12, § 3, 9-7-1999) 
ARTICLE 20. - C-T ZONE (COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION) 

Sec. 93-20-1. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this district is to provide a zoning designation for railroad owned and controlled property in order to facilitate railroad activities while preserving and protecting nonrailroad owned and controlled property. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-180A-1; Ord. No. 2000-21, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 93-20-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following are permitted uses within any C-T zone: 
(1)  Buildings such as depots, intermodal facilities, and transfer stations related to railroad operation; 
(2)  Off-street parking; and 
(3)  General commercial transport of persons, chattels and other items. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-180A-2; Ord. No. 2000-21, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
Sec. 93-20-3. - Dimensional chart applicability. 
    Section 93-22.1-1, chart of dimensional requirements, C-1 retail commercial (MARTA-oriented retail) shall apply to all areas zoned C-T. If a conflict between this article and section 93-22.1-1 occurs, the more restrictive provision shall apply. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-180A-3; Ord. No. 2000-21, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
ARTICLE 20.1. - CONSERVATION SUBDIVISION AND OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT 

Sec. 93-20.1-1. - General regulations. 
(a)  Applicability of regulations. The conservation subdivision option is available in the R-0 zone (one-family detached) as a use by right. Applicant shall comply with all other provisions of the zoning code and all other applicable laws, except those that are incompatible with the provisions contained herein. 
(b)  Ownership of development site. The tract of land to be subdivided may be held in single and separate ownership or in multiple ownership. If held in multiple ownership, however, the site shall be developed according to a single plan with common authority and common responsibility. 
(c)  Housing density determination. The maximum number of lots in the conservation subdivision shall be determined by either of the following two methods, at the discretion of the department of community affairs: 
(1)  Calculation. The maximum number of lots is determined by dividing the area of the tract of land by the minimum lot size specified in the underlying zoning. In making this calculation, the following shall not be included in the total area of the parcel: 
a.  Slopes over 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
b.  The 100-year floodplain; 
c.  Bodies of open water over 5,000 square feet of contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; or 
e.  Anticipated right-of-way needs for roads and utilities. 
(2)  Yield plan. The maximum number of lots is based on a conventional subdivision design plan, prepared by the applicant, in which the tract of land is subdivided in a manner intended to yield the highest number of lots possible. The plan does not have to meet formal requirements for a site design plan, but the design must be capable of being constructed given site features and all applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1(8-5-180A-4), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 93-20.1-2. - Application requirements. 
(a)  Site analysis map required. Concurrent with the submission of a site concept plan, applicant shall prepare and submit a site analysis map. The purpose of the site analysis map is to ensure that the important site features have been adequately identified prior to the creation of the site design, and that the proposed open space will meet the requirements of this article. The preliminary site plan shall include the following features: 
(1)  Property boundaries; 
(2)  All streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and other hydrologic features; 
(3)  Topographic contours of no less than five-foot intervals; 
(4)  All primary and secondary conservation areas labeled by type, as described in section 93-20.1-3 of this article; 
(5)  General vegetation characteristics; 
(6)  General soil types; 
(7)  The planned location of protected open space; 
(8)  Existing roads and structures; and, 
(9)  Potential connections with existing greenspace and trails. 
(b)  Open space management plan required. An open space management plan, as described in section 93-20.1-3, shall be prepared and submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(c)  Instrument of permanent protection required. An instrument of permanent protection, such as a conservation easement or permanent restrictive covenant and as described in section 93-20.1-3, shall be placed on the open space concurrent with the issuance of a land disturbance permit. 
(d)  Other requirements. The applicant shall adhere to all other applicable requirements of the underlying zoning and the subdivision code. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1(8-5-180A-5), 8-3-2004) 
Sec. 93-20.1-3. - Open space. 
(a)  Definition. Open space is the portion of the conservation subdivision that has been set aside for permanent protection. Activities within the open space are restricted in perpetuity through the use of an approved legal instrument. 
(b)  Standards to determine open space. 
(1)  The minimum restricted open space shall comprise at least ten percent of the gross tract area. 
(2)  The following are considered primary conservation areas and are required to be included within the open space, unless the Applicant demonstrates that this provision would constitute an unusual hardship and be counter to the purposes of this article: 
a.  The regulatory 100-year floodplain; 
b.  Buffer zones of at least 75 ft width along all perennial and intermittent streams; 
c.  Slopes above 25 percent of at least 5,000 square feet contiguous area; 
d.  Wetlands that meet the definition used by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers pursuant to the Clean Water Act; 
e.  Populations of endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; and 
f.  Archaeological sites, cemeteries and burial grounds. 
(3)  The following are considered secondary conservation areas and should be included within the open space to the maximum extent feasible: 
a.  Important historic sites; 
b.  Existing healthy, native forests of at least one acre contiguous area; 
c.  Individual existing healthy trees greater than eight inches caliper, as measured from their outermost dripline; 
d.  Other significant natural features and scenic viewsheds such as ridge lines, peaks and rock outcroppings, particularly those that can be seen from public roads; 
e.  Existing trails that connect the tract to neighboring areas. 
(4)  Aboveground utility rights-of-way and small areas of impervious surface may be included within the protected open space but cannot be counted towards the 40 percent minimum area requirement (exception: historic structures and existing trails may be counted). Large areas of impervious surface shall be excluded from the open space. 
(5)  At least 75 percent of the open space shall be in a contiguous tract. The open space should adjoin any neighboring areas of open space, other protected areas, and non-protected natural areas that would be candidates for inclusion as part of a future area of protected open space. 
(6)  The open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within the subdivision. Nonadjoining lots shall be provided with safe, convenient access to the open space. 
(c)  Permitted uses of open space. Uses of open space may include the following: 
(1)  Conservation of natural, archeological or historical resources; 
(2)  Meadows, woodlands, wetlands, wildlife corridors, game preserves, or similar conservation-oriented areas; 
(3)  Walking or bicycle trails, provided they are constructed of porous paving materials; 
(4)  Passive recreation areas; 
(5)  Active recreation areas, provided that they are limited to no more than ten percent of the total open space and are not located within primary conservation areas. Active recreation areas may include impervious surfaces. Active recreation areas in excess of this limit must be located outside of the protected open space; 
(6)  Agriculture, horticulture, silviculture or pasture uses, provided that all applicable best management practices are used to minimize environmental impacts, and such activities are not conducted within primary conservation areas; 
(7)  Nonstructural stormwater management practices; 
(8)  Easements for drainage, access, and underground utility lines; or 
(9)  Other conservation-oriented uses compatible with the purposes of this article. 
(d)  Prohibited uses of open space. 
(1)  Golf courses; 
(2)  Roads, parking lots and impervious surfaces, except as specifically authorized in the previous sections; 
(3)  Agricultural and forestry activities not conducted according to accepted best management practices; and 
(4)  Other activities as determined by the applicant and recorded on the legal instrument providing for permanent protection. 
(e)  Ownership and management of open space. 
(1)  Ownership of open space. The applicant must identify the owner of the open space who is responsible for maintaining the open space and facilities located thereon. If a homeowner's association is the owner, membership in the association shall be mandatory and automatic for all homeowners of the subdivision and their successors. If a homeowners' association is the owner, the homeowners' association shall have lien authority to ensure the collection of dues from all members. The responsibility for maintaining the open space and any facilities located thereon shall be borne by the owner. 
(2)  Management plan. The applicant shall submit a plan for management of open space and common facilities ("plan") that: 
a.  Allocates responsibility and guidelines for the maintenance and operation of the open space and any facilities located thereon, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and for longterm capital improvements; 
b.  Estimates the costs and staffing requirements needed for maintenance and operation of, and insurance for, the open space and outlines the means by which such funding will be obtained or provided; 
c.  Provides that any changes to the plan be approved by the planning commission; and 
d.  Provides for enforcement of the plan. 
(3)  Failure to maintain; city assumption of responsibility. In the event the party responsible for maintenance of the open space fails to maintain all or any portion in reasonable order and condition, the city jurisdiction may assume responsibility for its maintenance and may enter the premises and take corrective action, including the provision of extended maintenance. The costs of such maintenance may be charged to the owner, homeowners' association, or to the individual property owners that make up the homeowners' association, and may include administrative costs and penalties. Such costs shall become a lien on all subdivision properties. All homeowners' association documents and owners acceptance of the same shall acknowledge this eventuality and the city authority must be denoted in the open space protection documents described under subsection (f)(1) and (2) below. 
(f)  Legal instrument for permanent protection. 
(1)  The open space shall be protected in perpetuity by a binding legal instrument that is recorded with the deed. The instrument shall be one of the following: 
a.  A permanent conservation easement in favor of either: 
1.  A land trust or similar conservation-oriented nonprofit organization with legal authority to accept such easements. The organization shall be bona fide and in perpetual existence and the conveyance instruments shall contain an appropriate provision for retransfer in the event the organization becomes unable to carry-out its functions; or 
2.  A governmental entity with an interest in pursuing goals compatible with the purposes of this ordinance. If the entity accepting the easement is not the city, then a right of enforcement favoring the city shall be included in the easement; 
b.  A permanent restrictive covenant for conservation purposes in favor of a governmental entity; or 
c.  An equivalent legal tool that provides permanent protection, if approved by the city. 
(2)  The instrument for permanent protection shall include clear restrictions on the use of the open space. These restrictions shall include all restrictions contained in this article, as well as any further restrictions the applicant chooses to place on the use of the open space. 
(Ord. No. 2004-12, § 1(8-5-180A-6), 8-3-2004) 
ARTICLE 21. - P-D ZONE (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT) 

Sec. 93-21-1. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this district is to provide flexibility in the development of certain types of intense land uses, and to insure that these developments will be in harmony with the character of the area, provisions are hereby made for planned unit developments. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2(8-5-180B-1), 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 93-21-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The planned unit development (P-D) district recognizes and allows mixed uses. Mixed uses that are in the same structure are permitted. P-D district uses are regulated hereinbelow and as the same are submitted and approved in a planned unit development application. No nonpermitted use shall be approved in a plan. Other permitted uses include: 
(1)  Commercial parking lots and parking garages are accepted where such facilities are parking decks which: do not exceed 40 feet in height, are placed to the rear or at the interior of all developments, conceal automobiles from visibility at the public right-of-way, have the appearance of a horizontally storied building, contain continuous, street fronting, ground level office, retail, hospitality uses, restaurants and/or residential uses on at least two facades, underground parking is allowed when possible; and 
(2)  Attached noncommercial parking designed and utilized specifically for the use of a facility containing a permitted use operation on the same lot is allowed. The standards for noncommercial parking shall be as follows: 
a.  Noncommercial parking areas shall be placed to the rear or at the interior of all commercial developments and are prohibited from being placed in front of buildings, between the building and public right-of-way in new developments. 
b.  A continuous landscape buffer, a minimum of ten feet in width, shall be required between the parking area and the right-of-way for new and existing parking areas. The landscape buffer must be provided when repairs are made to parking areas. 
c.  Underground parking is allowed when possible. Aboveground parking decks shall conceal automobiles from visibility at the public right-of-way and shall have the appearance of a horizontally storied building. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2(8-5-180B-2), 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 93-21-3. - Nonpermitted uses. 
    The following uses are not allowed in a P-D zone: 
(1)  Cellular telephone or other communications towers; 
(2)  Undertaking; and 
(3)  All uses allowed in I-1 and I-2 zones except: 
a.  Film developing; 
b.  Dry cleaners; and 
c.  Printing shops. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2(8-5-180B-3), 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 93-21-4. - Application procedure. 
    Application for approval of a planned unit development shall be made with the office of the building official. The building official will forward the application to the design review committee (DRC). A preapplication conference will be scheduled with the applicant and the DRC. Upon completion of this process, a final application with plan may proceed forward. The terms "application" and "plan" are used synonymously in this article. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2(8-5-180B-4), 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 93-21-5. - Application review. 
(a)  In reviewing the application, the DRC will establish that the following development criteria (as applicable) have been met: 
(1)  The P-D application contains specific plans and designs including property boundaries, grading, building locations, location and size of all sewer, water and storage drainage lines, right-of-way and easements both existing and proposed, square footage of all buildings, height of all buildings, land uses of all buildings, architectural style and facade treatment of buildings, location and size of all parking spaces, loading areas, driveways, walkways, curb cuts, landscaping, open space, recreational areas and facilities. 
(2)  Existing developments will not be adversely affected by and will be protected from noise, light, odor, glare, dust and fumes. 
(3)  Residential uses within the development will not be adversely affected by and will be protected from noise, light, odor, glare, dust, and fumes. 
(4)  Planted buffers, solid walls and setbacks provide sufficient separation between different types of land use, such as between attached and detached residential developments, or residential and commercial facilities to guarantee compatibility of the mixed land uses. 
(5)  Accessory uses and their required parking do not occupy more than 30 percent of the land area of the property, nor more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the combined floor area of all buildings. 
(6)  All buildings maintain a compatible architectural style. 
(7)  Any traffic generated by such a use will not present problems of safety or unduly impede normal traffic movement on adjacent streets. 
(8)  Landscaping, screening, open space, building location, parking and loading areas, services areas, lighting and signs and overall layout is adequate and appropriate and has a reasonable spatial and functional relationship within each development and to exterior structures, spaces and circulation elements. 
(9)  The vehicular circulation system is so located and designed as to provide an efficient, safe and convenient transportation system and accommodates various transportation modes. 
(10)  The pedestrian circulation system is so located and designed as to provide safe, pleasing and efficient movement, convenient linkages among land uses and facilities and generally encourages pedestrian travel. 
(11)  Reservation of greenspace shall be a minimum of ten percent per plan. 
(12)  The establishment of all uses at the requested locations are in accordance with the aforementioned intent section in establishing this zone and meets all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(13)  The minimum land assemblage requirements of two acres of contiguous land are met and that such land is under a single ownership. 
(b)  Once an application is determined to meet the criteria listed above the application shall be treated like a request for rezoning pursuant to article 25 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2(8-5-180B-5), 2-4-2003) 
Sec. 93-21-6. - Dimensional chart applicability. 
    Section 93-22.1-1, chart of dimensional requirements, shall not apply to this article. Dimensional requirements applicable to the P-D district shall be generated by the application, as approved in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 2003-04, § 2(8-5-180B-6), 2-4-2003) 
ARTICLE 22. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 93-22-1. - Lot of record. 
    Except as herein provided, in any residential zone where the owner of a lot, at the time of the adoption of this chapter, or his successor in title thereto, does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the minimum lot area and/or frontage requirements of this chapter, the lot may be used as a building site for a single-family detached residence; and provided further that the minimum yard, setback and floor area requirements for the zone in which the lot is located are maintained. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-181) 
Sec. 93-22-2. - Combination of adjoining and vacant lots of record. 
    If two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of this chapter, and those lots individually are less than the lot width requirements for the zone in which they are located, those groups of lots shall together be considered as a single lot or shall be grouped into several lots of minimum permitted size, and the resulting lot or lots shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-182) 
Sec. 93-22-3. - Front yard setbacks. 
    The setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line on lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of any lot, within the same block and zoning district, and fronting on the same side of the same street as that lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases, the setback on that lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or within ten feet of the street right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-183) 
Sec. 93-22-4. - Exceptions to height limits. 
(a)  The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, masts and aerials. 
(b)  In no case shall an exception be granted which will be in conflict with air navigation as indicated by the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-184) 
Sec. 93-22-5. - Existing churches. 
    The provisions of this chapter regulating expansion of nonconforming uses shall not apply to an existing church increasing the size of its present building, rebuilding or building new facilities; provided that any new building or portion thereof has a minimum front, side and rear setback of 40 feet; except a front setback of less than 40 feet may be allowed if the setback is no nearer the street than the existing setback line of existing buildings. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-185) 
ARTICLE 22.1. - DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 93-22.1-1. - Chart of dimensional requirements. 
City of Hapeville 
Article 22.1 Dimensional Requirements 
Minimum Front Yard Minimum Maximum Zoning District Development Type Lot 
Frontage 
(Feet) Min. Lot 
Area Sq. Ft. Lot Area/DU 
Square Feet Bed & Bath Req. Floor Area/DU Sq. Ft. Max Lot Coverage Minor Col. Maj. Arterial Side Rear Stories Feet Min. Parking Spaces Max. Unit Per Bldg. Lot R-O Single-family Detached 60 10,000 10,000 3br/2bth 1,600 40 30 30 6 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 R-1 Single-family Detached 50 6,750 6,750 3br/2bth 1,600 40 15 15 5 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 2 DU R-2 Single-family Detached 60 8,500 8,500 3br/2bth 1,400 40 15 15 6 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 5 25 2 DU Two-Family Attached-Duplex 8,500 4,250 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 10 20 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 R-3 Single-family Detached 60 8,500 8,500 3br/2bth 1,600 40 15 15 5 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Single-family Attached-Duplex 60 8,500 4,250 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 10 20 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Single-family Attached Patio/Townhomes 60 10,000 2,500 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 5 0 21/2 35 2 DU a. Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 R-4 Single-family Detached 60 8,500 8,500 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 8 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 6 2 25 Two-Family Attached Duplex 60 8,500 4,250 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 5 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Single-family Attached Public/Townhomes 60 10,000 2,500 3br/2bth 1,400 50 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU a. Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Multifamily-2 Stories or Less 100 10,000 3,000 730 50 20 20 10 25 2 30 2 DU 20 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Multifamily-2 Stories or More 200 5 acres 2,000 730 50 20 20 10 25 4 40 b. 2 DU 20 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 R-5 Single-family Detached 40 4,000 4,000 3br/2bth 1,600 70 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Single-family Attached 4 to 8 Units 40 10,000 2,500 3br/2bth 1,400 70 15 15 5 10 21/2 35 2 DU a. Accessory Structure(s) 15 5 5 25 R-SF Single-family Detached 40 4,000 4,000 3br/2bth 1,000 70 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 R-I Single-family Detached 40 4,000 4,000 3br/2bth 1,400 40 15 15 5 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Single-family Attached- Duplex 40 4,000 2,000 3br/2bth 1,400 50 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Single-family Attached Patio/Townhomes 40 10,000 2,500 3br/2bth 1,200 60 15 15 5 10 21/2 35 2 DU a. Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 V Single-family Detached 50 4,000 4,000 3br/2bth 1,600 70 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 26 Single-family Attached-4 to 8 Units 50 10,000 2,500 3br/2bth 1,500 70 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU a. Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Condominiums 200 43,500 2,500 3br/2bth 1,400 70 15 15 10 25 40 b.. 2 DU 12 Accessory Structure(s) Conditional 5 5 2 25 Conditional Nonresidential 50 10,000 10,000 1,000 70 15 15 15 25 40 b.. c., d., e. N/A C-R Single-family Detached 60 8,500 8,500 3br/2bth 1,600 40 15 15 8 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 21/2 25 Two-Family Attached- Duplex 60 8,500 4,250 3br/2bth 1,400 40 15 15 6 20 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Single-family Attached Patio/Townhomes 50 10,000 2,500 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 5 0 21/2 35 2 DU a. Multifamily-2 Stories or Less 100 30,000 3,000 480 50 15 15 10 25 2 35 2 DU 1 Nonresidential with floor areas not exceeding 6,000 sf 100 8,500 1,000 60 15 15 15 25 21/2 40 b. c., d., e. Nonresidential with floor areas in exceeding 6,000 sf 200 5 acres 1,000 500 50 15 15 15 25 40 b. c., d., e. C-1 Nonresidential 80 15 15 0 0 40 b. c., e. C-2 Nonresidential 80 15 15 0 0 40 b. c., d., e. D-D Nonresidential 80 15 15 0 0 40 b. c., e. I-1 Light Industrial 80 20 20 10 20 40 b. c., d., e., f. I-2 Heavy Industrial 80 20 20 10 20 40 b. c., d., e., f. N-C Single-family Detached 60 8,500 8,500 1,600 40 15 15 8 25 21/2 35 2 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Single-family Attached Duplex 80 8,500 4,250 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU 2 Single-family Attached Patio/Townhomes 60 10,000 2,500 3br/2bth 1,400 60 15 15 5 20 21/2 35 2 DU a. Accessory Structure(s) 5 5 2 25 Multifamily-2 Stories or Less 100 10,000 3,000 2br/2bth 480 50 20 20 10 26 2 35 2 DU 20 Multifamily - 3 Stories or Greater 125 10,000 3,000 2br/2bth 730 50 20 20 10 25 4 40 b. 2 DU 30 Nonresidential 100 8,500 1,000 60 15 15 15 25 4 40 b. c., d., e., f. UV Single-family Detached 30 2,400 1,600 90 0/15 0/15 0 0 21/2 35 15 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 0 0 2 25 Single-family Attached - Duplex 30 2,400 2br/2bth 1,400 90 0/15 0/15 0 0 21/2 35 1 DU 2 Single-family Attached Patio/Townhomes and Live-Work Unit 20 1,200 2br/2bth 1,400 90 0/15 0/15 0 0 3 45 1 DU a. Accessory Structure(s) 0 0 2 25 Multifamily 20 2,000 1br/1bth 600 90 0/15 0/15 0 0 4 g. 64 g. 1 DU Nonresidential 20 2,000 90 0/15 0/15 0 0 4 g. 64 g. d, e, i. j. k. RMU Single-family Detached 30 2,400 m 1,600 100 0/16 0/15 0 0 21/2 35 1.5 DU 1 Accessory Structure(s) 0 0 2 25 Single-family Attached - Duplex 30 2,400 m 2br/2bth 1,400 100 0/15 0/15 0 0 21/2 35 1 DU 2 Single-family Attached Patio/Townhomes and Live-Work Unit 20 1,200 m 2/br/2bth 1,400 100 0/15 0/15 0 0 3 45 1 DU, h a. Accessory Structure(s) 0 0 2 25 Multifamily-Condominium 20 2,000 m 1br/1bth 600 100 0/15 0/15 0 0 6 b. m 1 DU Non-Residential 20 2,000 100 0/15 0/15 0 0 6 b. m d., e., i., j., k.  
a.  Single-family attached patio/townhomes cannot have more than eight units per building and no less than four units attached. 
b.  Buildings over 40 feet in height must be approved by the building official and fire chief to ensure that fire safety design standards are met. 
c.  One parking space for every 200 square feet of enclosed commercial floor area. 
d.  One parking space for every unit in a hospital, hotel, motel, boardinghouse, or similar establishment. One off-street loading space for every 10,000 square feet of building. 
e.  One parking space for every three seats in an auditorium, church, theater, or similar establishment. 
f.  One parking space for every two employees on the largest shift of any industrial uses or similar establishment. 
g.  Buildings over four stories or 64 feet in height must be approved by the planning commission and the fire chief to insurance that fire safety standards are met. One off-street loading space for every 10,000 
h.  All live-work units shall provide a total of three parking spaces per dwelling unit, one of which may be provided in adjacent on-street parking. 
i.  Three parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of enclosed commercial/office floor area. 
j.  One parking space for every three seats in an auditorium, church, theater, or similar establishment. 
k.  Three parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of enclosed restaurant floor area; and three parking spaces for every 1,000 square feet of unenclosed restaurant floor area when such floor area exceeds 
l.  Reserved. 
m.  Reference subsection 93-11.5-3(18) Residential density limitations. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-171; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 81-4, § 5, 8-4-1981; Ord. No. 87-16, 5-5-1987; Ord. No. 88-5, 8-2-1988; Ord. No. 99-12, § 4, 9-7-1999; Ord. No. 2000-01, § 2, 1-4-2000; Ord. No. 2000-05, § 3, 3-7-2000; Ord. No. 2000-11, § 3, 4-4-2000; Ord. No. 2004-18, § 1, 10-5-2004; Ord. No. 2006-10, § 1, 7-11-2006; Ord. No. 2008-23, § 1, 1-6-2009; Ord. No. 2014-10 , § 2, 9-16-2014) 
ARTICLE 23. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 93-23-1. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure the reasonable provision of off-street parking and loading facilities within the city. The requirements contained herein are minimum standards only, and are intended to protect and promote the health, safety and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-191) 
Sec. 93-23-2. - Entrance and exit points. 
    Except in districts zoned R-0, R-1, R-2 and R-3, curb breaks shall not be more than 30 feet in width, nor less than 25 feet in width. In no case shall there be less than 50 feet from the closest sides of any two-driveway curblines. Curb breaks shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest intersection of two curblines as measured along one of the curblines. Business establishments on contiguous lots are encouraged to consolidate entrance and exit points. Suitable provisions, including a five-foot-wide planted buffer strip between the right-of-way and parking area shall be made to prevent entrance or exit from other than at designated entrance or exit points. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-192) 
Sec. 93-23-3. - Setbacks from property lines. 
    Off-street parking and loading spaces and their respective maneuvering areas shall be set back not less than five feet from all property lines, except where those spaces and areas for adjacent properties abut, or are in contiguous use, there need not be any setback. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-193) 
Sec. 93-23-4. - Maneuvering areas. 
    All off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided with adequate off-street maneuvering areas. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-194) 
Sec. 93-23-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2016-33 , § 1, adopted January 10, 2017, repealed § 93-23-5, which pertained to surfacing and maintenance and derived from the 1981 Code, § 8-5-195; and Ord. No. 2013-08, § 4, adopted July 26, 2013. 
Sec. 93-23-6. - Reduction in area and number of parking spaces. 
    No open area in an off-street parking area shall be encroached upon by buildings, storage or any other use; nor shall the number of parking spaces and/or off-street loading spaces be reduced except upon approval of the board of appeals, and then only after proof that, by reason of diminution in floor area, seating area, number of employees or change in other factors controlling the regulation of the number of parking spaces, the proposed reduction is reasonable and consistent with the intent of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-196) 
Sec. 93-23-7. - Mixed uses. 
    In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading space shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately as specified herein. Off-street parking and off-street loading space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking or off-street loading space for any other use. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-197) 
Sec. 93-23-8. - Uses not specifically mentioned. 
    In the case of a use not specifically mentioned herein, the requirements for off-street parkingspace and off-street loading space for a use which is so mentioned, and to which that use is most similar, shall apply. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-198) 
Sec. 93-23-9. - Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building or group of buildings unless and until all required off-street parking and loading facilities are in place and ready to use. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-199) 
Sec. 93-23-10. - Off-street parking requirements according to district and uses. 
    At the time of the erection of any building or structure hereinafter listed, or at the time any such building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity by adding dwelling units, guestrooms, floor area, seats, beds, members or employees, there shall be provided for such new construction, enlargement or increased capacity only, off-street automobile parking space and off-street loading spaces in accordance with the minimum requirements established for each zone. The maximum number of off-street automobile parking spaces shall be 110 percent of the requirement for uses proposed at the time of development approval. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-200; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 5, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 93-23-11. - Size of off-street parking spaces, including parking spaces for compact automobiles, and parking spaces for automobiles of the physically handicapped. 
(a)  Of the total number of parking spaces required for any nonresidential use having 20 or more off-street parking spaces, a maximum of 70 percent shall be "full-size" as described in the table below, and a minimum of 30 percent shall be "compact size" as described in the table below: 
Minimum Full-Size Space Dimensions 
Type of Space Width of Space Length of Space Parallel at curb to angle of 29 degrees 8.5 feet 22 feet Angle of 30 degrees to 60 degrees 9 feet 18 feet Angle of 61 degrees to 90 degrees 10 feet 18 feet  
Minimum Compact-Size Parking Space
Dimensions 
Type of Space Width of Space 
(feet) Length of Space 
(feet) Parallel at curb to angle of 29 degrees 8 19 Angle of 30 degrees to 60 degrees 8.5 15 Angle of 61 degrees to 90 degrees 9 15  
(b)  There shall be adequate interior passageways, drives and maneuver areas, as determined by the building official, to accommodate each space and to connect each space with a public street. 
(c)  In addition to the above-stated requirements, parking space for automobiles of the physically handicapped shall be provided in accordance with the following standards. 
(1)  Access to buildings generally. 
a.  Accessibility to such building shall be provided from rights-of-way in parking areas by means of a pathway leading to at least one entrance generally used by the public. Such pathway shall have been cleared of all obstructions relating to construction activity, prior to the opening of the building to the general public. Where curbs exist along such pathway, as between a parking lot surface and a sidewalk surface, inclined curb approaches or curb cuts having a gradient of not more than one foot in 12 feet and a width of not less than four feet shall be provided for access by wheelchairs. 
b.  A parking lot servicing each entrance pathway shall have a number of level parking spaces as set forth in the following table, identified by abovegrade signs as being reserved for physically handicapped persons. Each parking space so reserved shall be not less than 12 feet in width. 
Parking Spaces for Handicapped 
Total Spaces and Lot Required No. of Reserved Spaces Up to 25 1 26 to 50 2 51 to 75 3 75 to 100 4 100 to 150 5 150 to 200 6 201 to 300 7 301 to 400 8 401 to 500 9 501 to 1,000 2% of total Over 1,000 20, plus 1 
for each 100 
over 1,000  
(2)  Location. Parking spaces for the physically handicapped shall be located as close as possible to elevators, ramps, walkways and entrances. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-201; Ord. No. 75-3, 4-1-1975; Ord. No. 86-9, 10-21-1986; Ord. No. 2013-08, § 6, 7-16-2013) 
Sec. 93-23-12. - Location. 
    If the required off-street parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot as the building it serves, the board of appeals may permit that space to be provided on other off-street property. That property shall be within 400 feet of the premises to which it is appurtenant, as measured along the nearest pedestrian walkway. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-202) 
Sec. 93-23-13. - Joint use of required off-street parking spaces. 
    No part of an off-street parking area required for any building or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of an off-street parking area similarly required for another building or use unless the type of structure indicates that the periods of usage of that structure will not be simultaneous with each other, as determined by the board of appeals. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-203) 
Sec. 93-23-14. - Size of off-street loading spaces. 
    Each off-street loading space shall have minimum dimensions of 15 feet in height, 15 feet in width, and 60 feet in length. However, upon sufficient demonstration in a specific instance that a particular loading space will be used exclusively by shorter or lower trucks, the board of appeals may reduce the minimum length or height. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-204) 
Sec. 93-23-15. - Location of off-street loading spaces. 
    All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve, or on an adjacent lot when shared with the use occupying the lot. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-205) 
Sec. 93-23-16. - Drive-in establishments. 
    There shall be no drive-in establishments in which customers are served while located on a public right-of-way. In the case of a drive-in establishment where customers are served while occupying automobiles parked off a public right-of-way, that establishment shall provide on the premises sufficient parking space which, in the judgment of the building official, the chief of police and the city engineer will accommodate the largest number of automobiles being served or waiting to be served at any one time. This required space shall be appropriately arranged for the purpose and in no case shall it be less than the minimum space as specified in this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-206) 
Sec. 93-23-17. - Continuing character of obligation. 
    The schedule of requirements for off-street parking space and off-street loading space applicable to newly erected or altered structures shall be a continuing obligation of the owner of the real estate on which any such structure is located, so long as the structure is in existence and its use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities continues, and it shall be unlawful for an owner of any building affected by this chapter to discontinue, change or dispense with, or to cause the discontinuance or change of the required vehicle parking or loading space apart from the discontinuance, sale or transfer of the structure, without establishing alternative vehicle parking or loading space which meets the requirements of and is in compliance with this chapter, or for any person, firm or corporation to use that building without acquiring the land for vehicle parking or loading space which meets the requirements of and is in compliance with this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-207) 
Sec. 93-23-18. - Landscape requirements for vehicular use areas. 
(a)  Intent. The objective of this section is to provide space for the use of landscape beautification and natural plant growth for developments where off-street parking and open lot sales, displays, and service areas are provided. The intent is to improve and protect the appearance, environmental and ecological condition, character, design, and value of the total urban area, thereby promoting the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  Areas subject to the requirements of this section. Vehicular use areas, except those serving single-family or duplex developments, parking garages, and public rights-of-way shall conform to the minimum landscaping requirements hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Procedure for the development of vehicular use areas. 
(1)  Permit requirements. No building grading, or tree removal permit shall be issued until approval of a required landscape plan for vehicular use areas. Prior to submission of building plans, the requirements of this section must be met. In cases where a vehicular use area is located on a lot other than that of the principal building, building plans may be submitted for review. 
(2)  Submission of a required survey and proposed landscape plan. 
a.  The applicant or his authorized agent shall submit to the department of public service three copies of each survey and landscape plan at a scale no greater than one inch equals 50 feet. The proposed landscaping may be superimposed on the proposed site plan or on a separate sheet, provided all drawing are the same scale. 
b.  Each survey and landscape plan shall include the following: 
1.  Name, signature, address, and telephone number of property owner, surveyor, and or designer; 
2.  North arrow and scale; 
3.  All dimensions; and 
4.  All required information and data listed on drawings. 
(3)  Survey. The required survey shall include the following information: 
a.  Legal description of the property. 
b.  All trees and survey data as defined in this chapter. 
c.  Existing structures, buildings, parking spaces, accessways, and public streets. 
d.  Aboveground and belowground utility lines and easements. 
e.  Existing natural features and topography at one-foot contour intervals. In areas where slopes are 20 percent or greater, a five-foot contour interval may be substituted. 
(4)  Landscape plan. The proposed landscape plan shall include the following information: 
a.  All trees, natural features, man-made appurtenances and structures to be retained upon the site and all topographic changes. 
b.  All proposed landscaping improvements and planting or landscaping areas identified. The grade, spacing, size, and name of proposed landscape materials shall be listed on the plan. 
c.  Comments regarding site preparation, tree preservation, methods of installation, and methods of maintenance shall be listed on the plan. 
d.  Required plans shall identify all vehicular use areas, aisles, driveways, sidewalks, wheel stops, and or curbs and other vehicular use controls. The location of the curb cuts, median openings on abutting streets, lighting, underground irrigation system, hose bibs, proposed planting areas, decorative and or screening walls, and related buildings shall be shown. 
(d)  Landscape requirements. All vehicular use areas subject to these regulations shall be required to have the following maintained perimeter and interior landscaped areas: 
(1)  Perimeter landscape requirements. 
a.  All exterior perimeters of all vehicular use areas shall have a perimeter landscaped area with no horizontal dimension less than five feet. A decorative masonry wall, earth berm, natural landscaping screen, and or combinations of the above shall be installed in such a manner as to screen the vehicular use area from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Screening areas shall be maintained at a minimum height of three feet. 
b.  All required perimeter landscaped areas shall have at least one tree for every 250 square feet or fraction thereof. 
c.  Where other provisions of this chapter required a six-foot screening wall of masonry construction, such screening wall may totally or in part be substituted with a natural landscape screen and or earth berm upon approval of the planning commission. Such natural screening shall be at least three feet in height at time of planting and maintained at a height of five feet with a visibility obstruction of at least 75 percent. 
1.  i.  When abutting a public street right-of-way, landscaped areas along a public street shall have a minimum dimension of five feet and a minimum average dimension of ten feet from the right-of-way line to the vehicular use area. 
ii.  In addition, the requirements of section 93-2-7, "Vision clearance at corners," shall be met. 
2.  When abutting adjacent properties. Required perimeter landscaped areas which would abut adjacent, existing nonresidential properties may be allocated as additional interior or other additional perimeter landscaping. 
(2)  Interior landscape requirements. 
a.  An area or combination of areas equal to ten percent of the total vehicular use area exclusive of perimeter landscaped areas shall be devoted to interior landscaping. 
b.  There shall be a minimum of one tree provided for every 250 square feet or fraction thereof of interior landscaping area. 
(3)  Permitted modification to the landscaping requirements. 
a.  In cases where the landscaped area requirements of subsection (d)(1) and (d)(2) may exceed 20 percent of the vehicular use area, the applicant may be allowed to reduce dimensions of landscaped areas other than those abutting a public street right-of-way or adjacent to the residential uses or zones to equal a 20 percent maximum provided a method of vegetative and or masonry screening is maintained and is approved by the department of public service. 
b.  In instances where proposed innovative designs, landscaping techniques, and site amenities are believed to fulfill the intent of subsection (a) above, the strict requirements of this section may be waived by the planning commission. 
c.  In instances where healthy plant material exists, the requirements outlined in subsections (d)(1) and (d)(2) of this article may be adjusted thereby allowing credit for the preservation of existing plant material. The planning commission may make such adjustments so long as the intent of this section is preserved. 
d.  Open lot sales of vehicles may be excluded from the perimeter screening requirements adjacent to public rights-of-way by the planing commission, provided the tree requirements and area requirements are met. 
(4)  Landscape installation requirements. All landscaping shall be installed in accordance with accepted good planting procedures. 
a.  New plant materials. 
1.  All new living plant materials shall satisfy the requirements of No. 1 or better as defined in the most current edition of Grades and Standards for Nursery Plants. 
2.  All separate landscaped areas shall have a minimum variety of two living plant materials other than trees; total landscaping areas required shall include a minimum variety of three landscape materials other than trees. 
3.  Paving (other than walks) and artificial plants shall not be permitted within landscaping areas. 
4.  Trees. A tree shall attain an average crown spread over 15 feet at maturity. Trees having an average crown spread less than 15 feet may be substituted by grouping the same so as to create the equivalent of a 15-foot crown spread. All trees shall be of a species which can be maintained with a minimum of five feet of truck height. Trees shall have a minimum of two inches DBH (diameter at breast height) measured 41/2 feet above the ground and shall be a minimum of six feet in overall height immediately after planting. 
5.  Shrubs. Shrubs shall be a minimum of one foot in height when measured at the time of planting except where they are to act as screening for residential uses or districts. In which case, they shall be a minimum of three feet in height at the time of planting and maintained at a minimum height of five feet at maturity. 
6.  Lawn grass and ground covers. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. In areas where plant materials other than solid sod or grass is used, a fast-growing grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. Grass sod shall be clean and reasonably free of weeds and noxious pests or disease. Ground covers which present a finished appearance and reasonable complete coverage at time of planting may be used in lieu of grass sod. 
b.  Existing plant materials. Existing living plant materials to be preserved shall be in accordance with of this chapter. 
c.  Earthwork. Earth berms shall be of variable height and slope. Swales and ponds shall be permitted for onsite retention of stormwater provided they are approved by the city's department of public service. 
d.  Encroachment. Landscaped areas, walls, structures, and walks shall require appropriate protection from vehicular encroachment by utilizing wheel stops, curbs, posts, wood, brick-work, and/or other devices. Placement of these devices shall be located at least 21/2 feet from walks, walks, and structures and may be placed one foot from landscaped areas to prevent a vehicular overhang of no more than 11/2; feet of landscaping area may be counted as part of the required depth of each parking space. 
e.  Maintenance. The owner or his agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a sprinkler system or readily available water supply with at least one outlet located within 50 feet of all plant material to be maintained. The owner shall replace all landscaped materials required if, for any reason, they die or are severely damaged within one year of the final approval of the installation. The owner is thereafter responsible to maintain the landscaping in a healthy manner. 
f.  Planting bed. The planting bed for all landscaping materials shall be free of weeds, debris, and noxious material and shall consist of a healthy plant growth medium. The planting bed soil shall provide adequate support, drainage, and nutrients for the plants and thus may require the incorporation of sand, peat, and or topsoil into the soil. Such planting soil shall be placed throughout the planting hole for each plant, and this hole shall be at least twice as wide as the width of the plant ball and 11/2 as deep as the depth of the plant ball. 
(e)  City review of landscape plan. The department of public service shall approve or reject the required landscape plan. The decision of the department of public service shall be deemed final administrative action, but may be appealed to the planning commission provided such appeal is made in writing at least ten days prior to the next regular planning commission meeting. Developments which require site plan approval by the planning commission shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission for compliance to this section. 
(f)  Certification of compliance. Upon completion of the landscape improvements, the site shall be inspected for compliance to the approved landscape plant. A certificate of compliance must be issued before a certificate of occupancy can be issued for any related structures. When occupancy of a related building is desired prior to completion of the required landscaping, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued if a financial guarantee in the amount equal to 100 percent of the cost for landscaping improvements is provided and acceptable in form to the city attorney. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-208; Ord. No. 89-3, § 4, 3-7-1989) 
ARTICLE 24. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 93-24-1. - Enforcing officer. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official of the city, hereinafter referred to as the building official. His duties shall include inspecting premises and issuing building permits and certificates of occupancy for uses and buildings that meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-121) 
Sec. 93-24-2. - Building permits. 
    Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Building permit required. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building, until the building official has issued a building permit for that work. 
(2)  Issuance of building permit. In applying to the building official for a building permit, the applicant shall submit two copies of a dimensional sketch, or to-scale plan, signed by the owner or his authorized agent, indicating the shape, size and location of the lot to be built upon and the shape, size, height, use and location of the building to be erected, demolished, altered or moved, and of any buildings already on the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, if any, the setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots, the number and location of off-street parking spaces and off-street loading spaces, the location of storm drainage pipes, and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. If the proposed excavation, filling, construction or movement set forth in the sketch or plan are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city then in force, the building official shall sign and return one copy of the sketch or plan to the applicant and shall issue a building permit upon payment of any required fees. The building official shall retain one copy of the building permit and one copy of the sketch or plan. 
(3)  Refusal of building permit. If the sketch or plan submitted described work which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall not issue a building permit, but shall return one copy of the sketch or plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal in writing. This refusal shall state the reasons therefor and shall cite the portions of this chapter with which the submitted sketch or plan does not comply. The building official shall retain one copy of the sketch or plan and two copies of the refusal. 
(4)  Time limitations. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been within six months of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-222) 
Sec. 93-24-3. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    Certificates of occupancy shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a.  A building hereafter required; 
b.  A building hereafter altered or relocated on or off the original site; and 
c.  A change of type of occupancy or use of any building or land. 
(2)  Issuance of certificate. 
a.  Upon payment of any required fees, the building official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or a building, as stated on the certificate of occupancy and signed thereto by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the building permit, one copy of all certificates of occupancy issued, which contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property, signed by the owner or his agent, shall be kept on file in the office of the building official. 
b.  Copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved, at that person's expense. 
(3)  Denial of certificate. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter, or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan upon which the building permit was issued. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-223) 
Sec. 93-24-4. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official to keep a record of all building permits and certificates of occupancy issued, with a notation of all special conditions involved. The building official shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of the building official and shall be available for the use of the mayor and council, board of appeals, planning commission and officials of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-224) 
Sec. 93-24-5. - Duties of building official, board of appeals, mayor and council on matters of appeal. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of the interpretation of this chapter (except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter) shall be first presented to the building official and that these questions shall be presented to the board of appeals only on appeal from the building official and that from the decisions of the board of appeals, recourse shall be taken only to the courts as provided by law. 
(b)  It is further the intent of this chapter that the duties of the mayor and council in connection with this chapter shall not include hearing and passing on disputed questions which might arise in connection with the enforcement or interpretation of this chapter, but the procedures for determining those questions shall be as stated in this chapter, and that the duties of the mayor and council in connection with this chapter except as otherwise specifically provided in section 8-5-26 [article 21 of this chapter] shall be only the duty of voting upon any proposed amendment or repeal of this chapter, as provided by law and after receiving from the planning commission, its recommendation regarding the proposed amendment. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-225) 
Sec. 93-24-6. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each day any violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-226) 
Sec. 93-24-7. - Remedies. 
    In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building official, or any appropriate authority of the city, or any person who would be damaged by that violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each such building or use of land. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-227) 
Sec. 93-24-8. - Time limitations on initiation of development. 
(a)  Upon approval by the city of a zoning amendment petition initiated by a person or agency, other than the mayor and council, planning commission, department or agency of the city, the person or agency which initiated such petition shall secure a building permit for development in accordance with such approved amendment within 12 months of the approval and shall initiate substantial development within 15 months of the approval, or the approved amendment shall lapse and the property shall automatically revert back to the previous zoning classification. 
(b)  Similarly, a site plan approval by the planning commission and/or the approval of an appeal, special exception or variance by the board of appeals shall lapse unless the applicant for such approval secures a building permit for development in accordance with the approval within 12 months and initiates substantial development within 15 months of the approval. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-228; Ord. No. 89-3, § 5, 3-7-1989) 
Sec. 93-24-9. - Antique, junk, used merchandise enforcement. 
(a)  The following procedure shall be utilized to determine the percentage of new or reproduction goods as defined in sections 93-1-2 of this article. An official or officials shall be designated by the mayor and council of the city to monitor compliance with this article. Said officials shall cause to be produced a form or forms which shall be made available to shop owners, employees, and/or managers. These forms shall serve as a reporting mechanism for the shop. The party who completes the form shall be fully authorized to complete the form and shall be liable and responsible for the contents thereof. The form shall, on a quarterly basis, report the percentage of new and reproduction goods in the inventory of the shop. The form shall be signed under oath or affirmation and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. False swearing or representations shall be prosecuted and punishable as a felony under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. The forms shall be submitted to the officials designated for their keeping and inspection by the mayor and council of the city. Periodic inspections and confirmation of the age of items by certified antique experts may be utilized. 
(b)  Throughout this article all determinations of the: age of antiques or other merchandise and the percentage of types of merchandise sold shall be submitted and sworn to on reports prepared for such purposes by the official(s) designated to perform such tasks by the mayor and council of the city. The reports shall be filed on a quarterly basis and shall be under oath or affirmation and in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. False swearing or representations punishable as a felony under O.C.G.A. § 16-10-20. The forms shall be submitted to the official(s) designated for their keeping and inspection by the mayor and council of the city. Periodic inspections and confirmation of the age of items by certified antique experts may be utilized. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-229; Ord. No. 99-12, § 5, 9-7-1999) 
Sec. 93-24-10. - Special exceptions. 
(a)  Special exceptions and special property use permits shall be decided by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The planning commission shall review and make nonbinding recommendations to the mayor and council on special exceptions and special property use permits. 
(c)  Special exceptions may be sought for: 
(1)  Reduction of the number and size of parking spaces and off-street loading space requirements; 
(2)  Location of off-street parking space and off-street loading spaces; and 
(3)  Location and number of drive-throughs. 
(d)  When acting upon an application for a special exception, in addition to the requirements listed under the above references, the planning commission and the mayor and council shall give consideration to the following factors where applicable: 
(1)  The proposed design and location of the particular development; 
(2)  The possible traffic generating characteristics of the proposed development; 
(3)  The effects the proposed development will have on the present or intended character of the area in which it proposes to locate; 
(4)  The availability of public utilities, facilities and services; and 
(5)  The character, and effect of the parking demands of the proposed development. 
(e)  After considering the above-listed factors and after reviewing the planning commission recommendation, the mayor and council shall take any actions or establish any reasonable conditions of approval, such as planted buffers, as will accomplish the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2003-07, § 2(8-5-249), 3-4-2003) 
ARTICLE 25. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 93-25-1. - Amendments to chapter. 
    The text of this chapter, as well as the official zoning map, may be amended by the mayor and council on its own motion, or on application or recommendation by the building official, any public agency, or department of the city. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-261; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 93-25-2. - Application for zoning amendment by individual. 
(a)  A zoning map amendment may be proposed by an individual or entity owning fee simple title to the subject property or written authorization to act on behalf of such an owner. 
(b)  A petition for amendment to the official zoning map or text, except those proposed by the mayor and council or other city agents shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by separate action, and shall be filed on a form provided by, and shall be filed with, the building official, at least 30 days prior to the date of the planning commission meeting at which the applicant wishes the petition to be considered. 
(c)  The building official may vary the deadline by up to seven days provided that he/she determines that the petition may still be properly advertised and all notice requirements followed on schedule for the regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
(d)  An application for a zoning map amendment should contain the following: 
(1)  A completed copy of the application for a zoning map amendment on the form provided by the building official. 
(2)  A conceptual site plan depicting the proposed use of the property including: 
a.  A correct scale and north arrow; 
b.  The proposed land use and building outline as it would appear should the zoning map amendment application be approved; 
c.  The present zoning classification of all adjacent parcels; 
d.  The gross square footage of all proposed buildings; 
e.  The proposed location of all driveways and entry/exit points for vehicular traffic, using arrows to depict direction of movement; 
f.  The location of required off-street parking and loading spaces, including number of spaces and driveway dimensions; 
g.  Required yard setbacks appropriately dimensioned; and 
h.  The location and extent of required buffer areas, depicting extent of natural vegetation and type and location of additional vegetation if required. 
(e)  Within ten days of receipt of an application for zoning map amendment, including the conceptual site plan, the building official shall determine compliance with this section and shall either accept the application as being "sufficient" or reject as being "insufficient." If it is so rejected, the revised application may be resubmitted for the following application period. The city will refund 50 percent of the application fee for a rezoning if the building official rejects the application due to an insufficient site plan. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-262) 
Sec. 93-25-3. - Planning commission review of application for amendment. 
(a)  All proposed amendments to the official zoning map or text except those proposed by the mayor and council shall be transmitted to the building official for study and recommendation by the building official and the planning commission. 
(b)  The building official shall circulate the application and/or appropriate materials regarding the application to those agencies, departments, and/or entities of government which the building official deems to be appropriate for solicitation of comments. 
(c)  The planning commission shall convene and discuss the proposed change within 30 days from the date on which the building official accepts a site plan as "sufficient." The planning commission may solicit comments concerning the proposed change, including those from those persons or entities referred to in subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Upon deciding on the proposed amendment, the planning commission shall submit its recommendation to the mayor and council of the city. This report shall be in writing and shall be submitted to the director of public services within 60 days from the date of which the building official accepts the site plan as "sufficient." The recommendation by the planning commission shall be one of the following: 
(1)  Recommend approval; 
(2)  Recommend approval subject to stated conditions; or 
(3)  Recommend disapproval. 
(e)  If the planning commission fails to act on a petition within 60 days from the date upon which the building official accepts the site plan as "sufficient," it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-263; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 93-25-4. - Notification and public hearing by mayor and council. 
(a)  Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, whether the proposed amendment is a text or map amendment, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing thereon for the purpose of receiving and considering public comment on the merits of the proposed amendment. Such hearings shall be held only after substantial compliance with all required public notification of the hearing as set forth herein and shall occur within 60 days of submission of the planning commission's recommendations. 
(b)  The city shall cause a legal notice to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, as required by state law, prior to the required public hearing by the mayor and council, stating, where applicable, the time and place of such hearing, the location of the property, and the present and proposed zoning classifications. 
(c)  Additionally, whenever a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance, initiated by a party other than the city, involves changes in the zoning classification of property from one zone to another (map amendment), the building official shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property proposed to be rezoned one or more signs, each of which shall not be less than three square feet in area and each of which shall contain the time, date and location of the public hearing scheduled for the application, and such other information as the building official deems appropriate. 
(d)  In instances where the posting of a sign or signs is required under this section, and if the property proposed for rezoning does not have frontage on a public street, then an additional sign may be posted on the right-of-way of the nearest public street which provides access to the site. 
(e)  If the posting of a sign or signs is required under this section, and the property proposed for rezoning is made up of more than one parcel of property and in the opinion of the building official it would be either impractical or duplicitous to post signs on each parcel, then the building official in his discretion may cause fewer than one sign per parcel to be erected. In such cases, however, there shall be at least one sign posted on each public street which fronts the property proposed for rezoning. In determining compliance under this section, a sign placed at an intersection between streets which each front the property proposed for rezoning shall be deemed posted on each of those streets if, in the opinion of the building official, the sign is placed in such a position as to be visible from each street. 
(f)  Proposed zoning text amendments and proposed revisions of the zoning map which are initiated by the city shall not require the posting of signs on affected property. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-264; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 93-25-5. - Hearing procedures of mayor and council. 
(a)  The provisions of this section shall apply to public hearings by the mayor and council on all petitions for amendments under this article. 
(b)  The governing, calling, and conducting of hearings shall be accomplished in accordance with the following policies and procedures: 
(1)  If any person desires a stenographic record of the proceedings, such person shall make arrangements for and bear the costs of such. 
(2)  The presiding officer of the hearing body shall indicate that a public hearing has been called for the consideration of zoning decisions. Thereupon, the hearing body shall consider each application on an individual basis. 
(3)  When an application comes up for review, the presiding officer shall ask those persons who wish to present data, evidence, and opinions both in favor or against the application to identify themselves. The presiding officer shall notify the persons described above that each side shall have a minimum of ten minutes to present data, evidence, and opinion. Additional and equal time may be allowed in the discretion of the presiding officer. However, such time should not exceed 30 minutes per side unless the presiding officer determines a greater amount of time is necessary. The presiding may ask those with concurring view point to elect a spokesperson. 
(4)  After the comments and concerns of the public have been heard, the hearing body may thereupon request a report from officers or agents of the city. 
(5)  The applicant may reserve some part of their time for rebuttal. However, in no case shall the applicant be granted more time than those in opposition. 
(6)  After the above procedures have been completed, the presiding officer will indicate that the public hearing is formally closed. 
(7)  After the public hearing is closed, the hearing body may either vote upon the proposed change or may delay their vote to a subsequent meeting, provided that notice of the time, date, and location when such zoning decision is to be announced at the meeting during which the public hearing is held. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-265; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2005-05, §§ 1, 2(8-5-265), 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 93-25-6. - Standards of review. 
(a)  In ruling on any matter herein in which the exercise of discretion is required, or in ruling upon any application for zoning map amendment, the administrative official or legislative body shall act in the best interest of the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city. In doing so, they will consider one or more of the following factors as they may be relevant to the application: 
(1)  The existing land use pattern; 
(2)  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
(3)  The population density pattern and possible increase or overtaxing of the load one public facilities including, but not limited to, schools, utilities, and streets; 
(4)  The cost of the city and other governmental entities in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets and other public safety measures; 
(5)  The possible impact on the environment, including, but not limited to, drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quantity; 
(6)  Whether the proposed zoning map amendment will be a deterrent to the value or improvement of development of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
(7)  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing regulations; 
(8)  The aesthetic effect of existing and future use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
(9)  The extent to which the proposed zoning map amendment is consistent with the land use plan; 
(10)  The possible effects of the proposed zoning map amendment on the character of a zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area, or the community; 
(11)  The relation that the proposed zoning map amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed change will help carry-out the purposes of these zoning regulations; 
(12)  Applications for a zoning map amendment which do not contain specific site plans carry a rebuttable presumption that such rezoning shall adversely affect the zoning scheme; 
(13)  The consideration of the preservation of the integrity of residential neighborhoods shall be considered to carry great weight; 
(14)  In those instances in which property fronts on a major thoroughfare and also adjoins an established residential neighborhood, the factor of preservation of the residential area shall be considered to carry great weight. 
(b)  After hearing evidence at the zoning hearing, the mayor and council shall apply the evidence to the standards of review in making their decision. It will not be required that the mayor and council consider every criteria contained in the standards of review. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
(c)  If the mayor and council determine from the evidence presented that the applicant has shown that the proposed zoning map amendment promotes the health, safety, morals and general welfare under the standards of review, then the application shall be granted, subject to those reasonable provisions as may be imposed by the mayor and council pursuant to section 93-25-8. Otherwise, such application shall be denied. 
(d)  In ruling on any petition in which the petitioner has brought a challenge of the existing zoning classification, the mayor and council may impose upon such property any appropriate zoning classification, including provisions allowed by section 93-25-7, which might be consistent with the considerations contained in (a) above. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-266; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 7-8-1997) 
Sec. 93-25-7. - Conditions on zoning. 
(a)  In deciding upon any application for zoning map amendment, the mayor and council may, on their own motion or upon the suggestion of the applicant, grant the application subject to certain conditions necessary to promote and protect the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the city. Such conditions shall be imposed for the benefit of the community to lessen any negative effects that the zoning map amendment may cause. 
(b)  The mayor and council may grant any zoning map amendment and include condition as follows: 
(1)  Such conditions as are deemed necessary to protect neighbors and to lessen any negative effects of the zoning change; 
(2)  That the rezoning is conditional and that the applicant or any successor in title may construct only those uses and only in such a manner as is depicted upon any site plan submitted and approved with the application. 
(c)  Prior to a final vote being taken upon any application for zoning map amendment in which conditions shall be imposed, such conditions will be announced at the hearing and the applicant shall be afforded an opportunity to present its position on such conditional requirements. If the applicant finds such proposed conditional requirements to be unacceptable, it may, at that time, withdraw its application for zoning map amendment; or seek a vote on the applicant. 
(d)  If the mayor and council adopt a zoning map amendment which contains conditional requirements, such requirements shall become a part of the zoning ordinance and the official zoning map. Such property shall thereafter carry the suffix "-C" to indicate that such property has been conditionally zoned (e.g., R-1-C, I-1-C etc.). Such conditions shall be binding upon all owners of the property until removed or modified by the mayor and council. The building official shall so indicate in the records of the zoning actions the existence of the conditional requirements. The suffix "-C" shall be affixed to the zoning map for the appropriate property. 
(e)  A conditional requirement may be imposed upon either permitted and/or conditional uses in any zoning district. In ruling on such conditional requirements, the mayor and council shall utilize the applicable standards of review contained in section 93-25-6. 
(f)  In those instances where a rezoning is granted which is conditional upon the submitted site plan, such property shall revert to its former zoning classification by operation of law if a building permit for such development has not been applied for within one year, provided that the mayor and council, at a zoning hearing, may extend this period for good cause shown by the property owner. The building official may grant "minor" changes to such site plans if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The developer can show a hardship requiring such modifications; and 
(2)  The building official determines that the changes so requested do not materially affect the basis design nor negate any special features which were an integral component of the plan. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the building official to review on a quarterly basis such conditional rezoning and to report to the mayor and council those rezoning actions which have reverted by operation of law. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-267; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 1(8-5-267), 4-5-2005) 
Sec. 93-25-8. - Amendment to conditions. 
    Procedures for removing or modifying any conditional requirements shall be the same as any other zoning amendment. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-268; Ord. No. 97-05, § 1, 7-8-1997; Ord. No. 2005-04, § 2(8-5-268), 4-5-2005) 
ARTICLE 26. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 93-26-1. - Conflict with other laws. 
    When the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. When the provisions of any statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of that statute shall govern. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-281) 
Sec. 93-26-2. - Validity. 
    Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, that declaration shall not affect any other portion or provision of this chapter. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-282) 
Sec. 93-26-3. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-283) 
Sec. 93-26-4. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed. 
(Code 1981, § 8-5-284) 
ARTICLE 27. - UNIVERSAL SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 93-27-1. - General commercial and mixed-use sign regulations. 
    In all commercial zoning districts, the following sign regulations shall apply where no other more specific sign regulations found in this chapter exist: 
(1)  Maximum height of any sign, 20 feet; 
(2)  Minimum height of any sign, 15 feet; 
(3)  Maximum aggregate signable area, 500 square feet; and 
(4)  Minimum thickness of any sign, two inches. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1(8-5-298), 12-21-2004) 
Sec. 93-27-2. - General residential sign regulations. 
    In all residential zoning districts, the following sign regulations shall apply where no other more specific sign regulations found in this chapter exist: 
(1)  Maximum height of any sign, five feet; 
(2)  Minimum width of any sign, eight feet; and 
(3)  Maximum aggregate signable area, 20 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2004-26, § 1(8-5-299), 12-21-2004) 
ARTICLE 28. - A-D ZONE (ARTS DISTRICT OVERLAY) 

Sec. 93-28-1. - Factual basis. 
    In adopting the Hapeville Arts District Overlay Zone (the "arts district overlay"), the city seeks to reinvent itself as a cultural destination, particularly its walkable downtown. The downtown has declined over the past 40 or more years. Likely the primary driver of that decline was expansion of Hartsfield Jackson Atlanta International Airport in the 1980's. This expansion removed half the city's land base and nearly half the population having devastating impacts on retail trade and service industries. Secondary factors were the building of the interstate system that served as a bypass for travelers. This effectively eliminated Hapeville as a recipient of a very significant consumer market generated by east coast travelers and local commuters. Hapeville has also suffered from the general lack of investment characterizing Atlanta's Southside, reinforced by a failure of Southside incomes and housing values to keep pace with Atlanta's north side. Finally, closure of the Hapeville Ford Plant removed a significant revenue base and spelled the need for a substantial retooling of the local economy. 
    As the regional and national economy rebounds, the city seeks to create an in-town, arts identity that will attract air travelers, local visitors and as importantly, bolster consumer offerings for Hapeville residents. The arts district overlay will become a significant element of an economic development strategy that will capitalize on Hapeville's airport location, sense of place, walkability and small town charm. 
    An important aspect of that development strategy is the assignment of property rights not available to owners outside the arts district overlay. This reflects an emphasis on compact development supported by such public investment as streetscapes, public parking, public art, wayfinding signs, kiosks, film festivals and community events. The flexibility of building and site design and planned public investment are intended to foster an arts district that will establish downtown Hapeville as a regional destination for the arts and for community celebrations, dining and shopping. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-2. - Definitions. 
    Arts. The interpretation of imagination and creativity in a physical form or performance. 
    Art gallery. An establishment that engages in the sale, loan or display of paintings, sculptures, photographs, video art or other works of art. "Art gallery" does not include a cultural facility such as a library, museum or non-commercial gallery that may also display works of art or an arts studio. 
    Art center. A facility whose mission is to promote the arts and make them available to the public. An arts center may hosts art exhibits and shows, provide studio space for the use of artists and engage in public education and exposure to the arts. 
    Art use. Creation or assembly of visual art, including two- and three-dimensional works of fine art or craft, or other fine art objects created or assembled for purposes of sale, display, commission, or trade by artists or artisans. Art use may also include classes held for art instruction. 
    Artist studio. An area in a building used for creation, production, rehearsal, study or teaching of any visual art or craft, including but not limited to painting, drawing, graphic design, photography, video, film, sculpture and pottery; written works of fiction or nonfiction; or any performing art, whether for live or recorded performance, including music, dance and theater. "Artist studio" may include performance space related to classes taught on-site and recording studios; a studio for artisan related crafts, such as small scale metalworking, glassblowing, furniture making, pottery, leather craft and similar activities. "Artist studio" may also include accessory sales of art produced on the premises. 
    Artist. A person who practices one of the fine arts, design, graphic, musical, literary, computer, or performing arts; or a person whose profession relies on application of these skills to produce a creative product. The term includes, but is not limited to, individuals who practice visual arts, such as painters, print makers, illustrators, sculptors, potters, jewelry makers, glass makers, craft artists and photographers; performing arts, such as musicians, composers, playwrights, choreographers and dancers; literary arts, such as creative writers and literary translators; architecture and design, such as architects, landscape architects, engineers, urban designers and planners, interior designers and decorators, industrial designers, graphic designers and fashion designers; and media arts, such as filmmakers, video and audio artists and web-based designers. 
    Consignment store. An enclosed retail establishment, whether operated by a for or not for profit organization or entity, engaged in selling used merchandise, such as clothing, furniture, jewelry, books, shoes, or household appliances, etc., on consignment. Consignment stores do not include those selling vehicles, auto parts, scrap, or waste. 
    Drive-through. Any facility that may be accessed directly by means of a motor vehicle for transacting business. 
    Entertainment, live. Any musical act, including karaoke; theatrical act, including a play, revue or stand-up comedy; dance; magic act; disc jockey or similar activity performed live by one or more persons, whether or not for compensation or an admission charge. 
    Food truck. A motorized vehicle or trailer drawn by a motorized vehicle used to prepare and sell food to the public directly from the vehicle or trailer. 
    Food truck court. An area designated in a private parking lot that is accessory to a permitted use conducted in a building on the lot or a freestanding commercial parking lot, subject to the requirements of section 93-28-12 of this article. 
    Food truck vendor. Any person or entity that prepares and sells food from a food truck in a designated food truck court. 
    Juried commission. The commission that determines whether individual(s) are eligible to occupy live-work and artist housing unit(s) in the arts district overlay. The juried commission will consist of five members. Three of these members must be an artist, architect, landscape architect, arts educator, or gallery owner. Lay persons with sufficient knowledge, experience, and judgment who have an interest in public art shall make up the balance of the juried commission. The members of the juried commission shall each be appointed by the mayor and council of the city. Three of the initial five members shall be appointed for a term of two years, and two of the initial five members shall be appointed for a term of three years. Thereafter, each new member shall be appointed for a term of two years. 
    Makerspace. An indoor or outdoor facility or both intended to be used by artists as studio and retail space. Makerspaces often combine production, equipment, community, and education for the purposes of enabling participating individuals to design, prototype, and create works that said individuals would have difficulty producing if working alone due to a lack of resources, tools, artistic input, and/or space. Such space may be in a residential, commercial, mixed use or a live/work building and often provides tools for community use. Makerspaces are characterized by consistent design elements, such as high ceilings, large windows, durable surfaces and wide entrances. These spaces are designed to accommodate and foster a variety of creative activities. Makerspaces may also include common space such as galleries, meeting rooms and open space that encourages resident engagement and community involvement. 
    Microbrewery. Any establishment where malt beverages are produced or brewed (as further defined and regulated in chapter 5, "Alcoholic beverages," of this Code). 
    Outdoor arts market. A temporary event held on private or public property where artwork is offered for sale. 
    Small power tools. Hand equipment driven by other than human means. Examples include circular saws, power drills, portable mitre saws, routers, electric belt sanders and wood lathes. Not defined as small power tools are chain saws, mounted mitre saws, band saws, jackhammers and similar power tools. 
    Thrift store. An enclosed retail establishment, whether operated by a for or not for profit organization or entity, engaged in selling previously owned or used goods and merchandise from an area greater than 25 percent of the total floor area devoted to retail sales and whose merchandise is acquired principally by donation. Thrift stores do not include those selling vehicles, auto parts, scrap, or waste. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the arts district overlay is to facilitate creation of an arts destination, sustain established arts and cultural uses and promote new arts and cultural uses. The arts district overlay seeks integration of the arts into the fabric of the community and is conceived as the location of art galleries and art studios forming the core of an arts district. A complementary mix of shops, restaurants and entertainment venues will support these uses. These elements are expected to generate interest in downtown Hapeville and attract arts and cultural events. 
    The arts district overlay features an expanded range of permitted uses focused on the arts while retaining all property rights established by the underlying zoning. The arts district overlay encourages adaptive reuse of historic buildings and new construction technologies, affording owners expanded development options. These measures will enhance the market attractiveness of the arts district. 
    Arts venues, community festivals, expanded arts uses and pedestrian character are expected to promote an arts district. Planned investment in public art, lighting, sidewalks and off-street parking will leverage private investment and enhance public safety. This combination of public and private investment is expected to advance Hapeville's position in regional leadership in the arts and stimulate broad economic revitalization. Importantly, the arts district overlay features walkable distances from nearby neighborhoods to small-scale establishments and live entertainment venues accommodated by the arts district overlay and compatible with the neighborhood character. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-4. - Applicability. 
    Unless expressly modified by regulations in this article establishing the arts district overlay, the regulations governing the use of land and structures shall be as set forth in the underlying zoning districts and as regulated by other provisions of this Code. The architectural design standards shall control development in the arts district overlay unless an alternate provision is adopted in the arts district overlay. Where a conflict with other City Code and ordinance provisions exists, the more permissive standard shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-5. - Geography. 
    Generally, the arts district overlay radiates from downtown Hapeville running along North Central and South Central Avenues, Dogwood Drive, the two-lane segment of Virginia Avenue (i.e. from South Central Avenue to Doug Davis Drive) and North and South Fulton Avenues. The District is more specifically identified in Exhibit A entitled "Hapeville Arts District Overlay Zone." 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A as referenced in this section is not set out at length in this Code, but may be found in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 93-28-6. - Scale. 
    Downtown Hapeville is the focus of the arts district overlay. Hapeville was established at a time when walking was the primary means of travel, and the downtown is characterized by a pedestrian scale. This scale is preserved by height limits inherent in the development intensity assigned to the downtown on Hapeville's future development map and development standards of the arts district overlay. A sense of place will be maintained by adherence to these height limits. Preservation of pedestrian scale is important as arts districts are typically designed to encourage walking to a variety of venues. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-7. - Additional uses encouraged in the arts district overlay. 
    Uses permitted by the underlying zoning are unaffected by adoption of the arts district overlay; the following uses shall be specifically permitted in the arts district overlay. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-7.1. - Arts uses. 
(a)  Art gallery. 
(b)  Artist studio. 
(c)  Artist studio workspace. 
(d)  Artist co-op to allow multiple artist spaces that are not bazaars, junk stores, specialty shops and flea markets, etc. 
(e)  Arts and crafts retail sales. 
(f)  Arts center. 
(g)  Arts related businesses and services such as craft shops, galleries and studios within which is conducted the preparation, display, or sale of art products such as antiques, collectibles, custom apparel, jewelry, paintings, photography, picture framing, pottery, sculpture, stained glass and similar arts, crafts merchandise, and activities such as set design and restoration of artwork. 
(h)  Arts supply store. 
(i)  Cabaret, concert hall or other performing arts space, dinner theater, legitimate theater or movie theater. 
(j)  Craftsman or artisan shop. 
(k)  Music store, musical instruments store. 
(l)  Performing arts ticket office or booking agency. 
(m)  Photographic studio. 
(n)  Recording studios, provided appropriate soundproofing is installed. 
(o)  Television and radio broadcast studio. 
(p)  Video and movie production. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-7.2. - Retail uses. 
(a)  Farmers market or green market. 
(b)  Framing shop. 
(c)  Pottery and ceramics shop. 
(d)  Growler shop. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-7.3. - Cultural and entertainment uses. 
(a)  Brew pubs, including outdoor seating. 
(b)  Microbreweries, subject to the provisions of chapter 5, "Alcoholic beverages," of this Code, and the development standards set forth in section 93-28-12 of this Code. 
(c)  City-sponsored and/or approved outdoor cultural events and performances that feature visual art, music, dance, theater, performance art, science, design or cultural heritage. 
(d)  Live entertainment, provided that all establishments hosting live entertainment shall comply with any and all applicable noise regulations and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-7.4. - Educational uses. 
(a)  Art school and other visual and performing arts instruction including school of dance, photography, filmmaking, music, writing, painting, sculpting and printmaking, but excluding adult entertainment and erotic dance. 
(b)  Educational or instructional activities, including training, vocational or craft schools, the arts and personal development. 
(c)  Libraries. 
(d)  Museums. 
(e)  Social and philanthropic institutions. 
(f)  Training studios, including martial arts studios, gymnastics and yoga. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-7.5. - Residential uses. 
    Live-work and artist housing, subject to the following stipulations: 
(1)  The residential portion of a live-work unit shall contain sleeping areas, cooking facilities and complete sanitary facilities. 
(2)  The residential occupancy of a live-work unit shall include, at a minimum, one person who is an artist and is employed or carries out an occupation in the arts within the nonresidential portion of the unit. 
(3)  The nonresidential portion of a live-work unit shall be limited to two employees per shift, including the person living in the unit that is associated with the business. 
(4)  The "artist" occupant will be subject to qualification by a juried commission that will determine the eligibility for occupancy in live-work and artist housing units. Upon receiving an application for occupation of live-work and artist housing unit(s), the juried commission shall meet to review the application, and hear the applicant should the applicant wish to appear before the juried commission. Said meeting shall occur within thirty calendar days of receipt of said application by the juried commission. The juried commission shall then issue a written determination to the applicant within 14 calendar days of said meeting. If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision of the juried commission, the applicant may appeal the decision to the mayor and council of the city within seven calendar days of receipt of said decision. The mayor and council shall then hear the appeal within 30 calendar days of receipt of said appeal and shall issue a written final determination within 14 calendar days of said appellate hearing. Applications for live-work and artist housing may be acquired by contacting the city clerk. 
(5)  The minimum floor area of a live-work and artist housing unit shall be 320 square feet, exclusive of kitchen and bathroom floor area. 
    The maximum number of dwelling units in a single building shall not be limited, provided that no development shall exceed 50 units. The parking requirement for such uses shall be one space for each dwelling unit. No minimum lot area shall apply in the arts district overlay provided all other development standards of this article are met. 
    No residential use shall front on a public street, sidewalk or alley at the ground floor or street level. All ground level uses fronting on a public street, sidewalk or alley shall be non-residential uses. 
    Single-family detached units, duplexes and triplexes are prohibited as incompatible with such higher density settings in recognition of the urban character of the arts district overlay and the need to preserve land for arts and entertainment uses. 
    Nothing contained in this section is intended to remove or restrict the potential of other residential uses for property within the arts district overlay that may be permitted or authorized pursuant to the city's zoning code. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-8. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses shall be prohibited in the Arts District Overlay: 
(1)  Any drive-through facility. 
(2)  Any outdoor storage of materials or any outdoor processing, fabricating or repair work with the exception of work performed with hand tools or small power tools. 
(3)  Use of any structure primarily for storage (meaning no more than 25% of the total interior space of said structure may be used for storage of goods, materials, or equipment). 
(4)  Car wash. 
(5)  C-Store selling fuel. 
(6)  Gas station. 
(7)  Motor vehicle service or repair. 
(8)  Tire stores. 
(9)  Any use that involves the outdoor storage of materials or products. The production of offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effect shall also be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-9. - Accessory uses. 
(a)  Kilns, subject to the development standards in section 93-28-12. 
(b)  Outdoor display of artwork and merchandise during hours of operation of the primary business or activity on the property. 
(c)  Power tools. The use of hand tools is encouraged; the use of small power tools is allowed. All tools shall be used in compliance with the noise regulations and ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Street performers, subject to the development standards in section 93-28-12. 
(e)  Food trucks, in designated food truck courts only, and subject to the development standards in section 93-28-12. 
(f)  Consignment stores and thrift stores, subject to the development standards in section 93-28-12. 
(g)  Makerspaces, subject to the development standards in section 93-28-12. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015; Ord. No. 2015-19 , § 2, 2-2-2016; Ord. No. 2016-03 , § 1, 3-1-2016) 
Sec. 93-28-10. - Building and site design. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-10.1. - Building design. 
    Non-traditional structures such as re-use of shipping containers, subject to approval by the design review committee, and other structures, subject to approval by the design review committee, shall be permitted. 
    Any structure constructed out of a shipping container must include: 
(1)  Wiring and connection for permanent electrical utility service. 
(2)  No less than one HVAC (heating, ventilation, and air conditioning) system. 
(3)  Insulation in the form of closed cell spray foam insulation. 
(4)  Exclusive of any end cargo doors, a door measuring at least 19.5 square feet and one or more windows measuring at least six square feet each. 
    No more than 25 percent of a shipping container or other such structure in the arts district overlay shall be used for the storage of any goods, materials, or equipment. 
    New construction materials such as polished metal, corrugated metal, metal roofing, glass and concrete facades shall be permitted. 
    All building elevations visible from a public right-of-way shall be treated with materials, finishes and architectural details appropriate to primary street-facing facades. All elevations shall be similar and compatible with the front elevation; concrete masonry units, whether parged or not, shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-10.2. - Site design. 
(a)  No overhead service doors or bays shall face the primary street serving the property. Loading and service areas shall be internal to the development and accessed via service alleys and not pedestrian-oriented streets. 
(b)  Entrances to the building, including entrances to shops and the main lobby, shall be separated by no more than 40 feet along the front of the building. 
(c)  Pedestrian and main entrances shall be located on the primary street serving the property. Curb cuts should be located on a side street where possible. 
(d)  Parking shall not be the dominant visual element of the site along the primary frontage. Parking shall be designed as smaller, multiple parking lots separated by landscape and buildings, or placed behind buildings. 
(e)  The parking space standard in the arts district overlay shall be eight and one-half feet by 18 feet. No loading space requirement shall apply to the arts district overlay. In most instances, the short term loading needs of the business can be met in the vehicle parking area. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-11. - Public art. 
    Placement or installation of outdoor sculpture and other art forms on private property intended to be viewed from a public right-of-way or other public property shall not be subject to setback standards of the applicable zoning district and shall not require a permit, provided that: 
(1)  The art is not offered for sale; 
(2)  The art does not constitute an advertisement; and 
(3)  The placement does not impede the flow of pedestrian, bicycle or vehicle traffic or block motorist visibility at intersections, alleys or driveways. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-12. - Use specific standards. 
    The following standards shall control the development and manner of operation of the following uses within the arts district overlay: 
(1)  Food truck court. 
a.  Food truck courts may be established in free-standing commercial parking lots accessory to an operating, permitted use provided that (a) the lot has been designated for food truck courts, (b) the property is zoned C-1, C-2, D-D, V, N-C, RMU or U-V, and (c) parking supply exists in excess of that required by ordinance or Code for uses or commercial space existing on the site and two off-street parking spaces shall be reserved for the exclusive use of customers of each food truck vendor. Such designation shall be subject to review and approval by the code enforcement officer who shall maintain the following database: 
1.  Property address and number of spaces designated as a "food truck court." 
2.  Site sketch depicting the building, parking spaces and parking spaces so designated. 
3.  Dimensions and color photos (front, both sides and rear) of the dispensing vehicle. 
4.  A copy of all lease agreements between the property owner and/or landlord and any food truck vendor, including the specific space being leased which shall be marked on the ground. 
5.  Proof of compliance with all Fulton County Health Department regulations. 
6.  An occupational tax permit issued by the city, which permit shall be posted in the front window of the food truck vendor vehicle or trailer while in use. 
b.  Food trucks shall not be permitted on the premises before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. 
c.  Each food truck vendor shall obtain an annual transient merchants license prior to operating in any area designated as a food truck court. 
d.  No minimum or maximum number of food trucks shall be established; food truck courts need not be contiguous and may be designated in several locations within a single lot. 
e.  No wastes of any kind shall be discharged from a food truck. Trash receptacles shall be provided by the food truck vendor for customers to dispose of food wrappers, food utensils, paper products, cans, bottles, food and other such waste. Such receptacles shall be located no more than ten feet from the food truck. The food truck vendor shall be responsible for removing all trash, litter and refuse from the site at the end of each business day. 
f.  No LED strip lighting shall be used in conjunction with any food truck court. 
g.  No loudspeakers shall be used for announcements or hawking of products in conjunction with any food truck court. 
h.  The property owner and/or landlord may provided limited seating on the food truck court to customers of the food truck vendor(s). Canopies for the protection of customers from the elements may also be provided by the property owner and/or landlord or the food truck vendor(s). Such canopies shall be temporary, located within three feet of the food truck, not exceed an area of 144 square feet and shall be subject to approval by the code enforcement officer. 
i.  A minimum distance of 100 feet shall be maintained between any food truck and the entrance to any restaurant. 
j.  The food truck shall not be located within any required setback, any sight distance triangle or required buffer. Access aisles sufficient to provide emergency access to any food truck shall be provided subject to approval by the fire marshal. 
k.  Sales of articles other than food shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Kilns. 
a.  The total volume of kiln space shall not exceed 24 cubic feet and no individual kiln shall exceed eight cubic feet. 
b.  Kilns may be located outside. Outside kilns shall be set back a minimum of 25 feet from any boundary common to property zoned residential or in residential use. 
(3)  Street performers. 
a.  Street performers shall obtain a permit from the city. 
b.  Performers shall operate only in designated areas. 
c.  No street performer shall impede movement along a public sidewalk; a minimum sidewalk width of five feet, independent of the performance area, shall be maintained throughout any performance. 
(4)  Microbreweries. 
a.  The production of beer shall not exceed 50,000 gallons per year (absent special approval of mayor and council), provided a restaurant or tasting room is open to the public on a regular basis. 
b.  No trucks larger than a 24-foot box truck shall be used in delivery to or shipment from the microbrewery. 
c.  Shipments or deliveries shall not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
d.  All operations by the microbrewery shall be conducted within an enclosed building. Production space shall not exceed 15,000 square feet. If "free tastings" are to be provided by a microbrewery pursuant to article 6.4, "Microbreweries," of chapter 5, "Alcoholic beverages," of this Code, then said microbrewery must have a tasting room encompassing a minimum floor area of 1,500 square feet for conducting said "free tastings." 
e.  No fumes, vapors, odor, smoke, dust or other particulate matter or offensive vibration, noise, heat, humidity, glare or other objectionable effect generated by the operation shall be perceptible at the property boundary of the microbrewery. 
f.  A landscaped buffer having a minimum horizontal dimension of 40 feet shall be established along any property boundary common to a residential zoning district. Alternate compliance may be achieved with berming to a minimum height of three feet affording a reduction in buffer width to 30 feet. Landscaping shall achieve nearly opaque screening of the microbrewery operation from adjacent residential districts throughout the year. 
g.  All microbreweries operating within the arts district overlay must comply with those regulations set forth in article 6.4, "Microbreweries," of chapter 5, "Alcoholic beverages," of this Code. 
(5)  Makerspaces. 
a.  Makerspaces may only open and/or operate on either of the following two streets in the city: 
1.  Dogwood Drive, and 
2.  That portion of Virginia Avenue from South Central Avenue to Doug Davis Drive. 
(6)  Consignment stores and thrift stores. 
a.  Consignment stores and thrift stores may only open and operate on the following two streets in the city: 
1.  Dogwood Drive, and 
2.  That portion of Virginia Avenue from South Central Avenue to Doug Davis Drive. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Sec. 93-28-13. - Signs. 
    Signs with lights and movable elements that contribute to the unique character of the district shall be permitted. Such signs shall be subject to approval by the design review committee. 
(Ord. No. 2015-13 , § 1, 7-7-2015) 
Appendix A - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Material from chapter 5 of title 2 of the 1981 Code of Ordinances, previously omitted, has herein been republished. 

ARTICLE A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 2-5-1. - Personnel rules and regulations (reserved). 
Editor's note- Personnel rules and regulations for city employees dated January 1, 1980, are included as Appendix B to this Code. 
Sec. 2-5-2. - Travel expenses. 
(a)  Travel and related expenses incurred by officials and employees of the city when traveling on official business after proper authorization shall be reported on voucher expense forms furnished for that purpose by the city clerk. 
(b)  Request for travel expenses for other than department heads shall be submitted to the employee's department head for approval. Department heads shall submit requests for their travel expenses to the mayor and council for approval. 
(c)  Upon approval of the mayor, the city clerk shall be authorized to issue advance payment on the basis of vouchers for anticipated expenses in amounts of such anticipated expenses of contemplated travel authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5-2) 
Sec. 2-5-3. - Group insurance for employees authorized; voluntary participation; deductions. 
(a)  The mayor and council are hereby authorized to contract with an insurance company or companies to provide group life insurance, health and accident insurance, hospitalization insurance and disability insurance for its eligible hourly and classified, past or present, employees, the mayor and council and any qualified appointed position approved by the mayor and council. The city shall pay the full cost of premiums for employee coverage, except the city shall not pay the costs of premiums for the present or future mayor and council or of any qualified appointed position. Employees may select additional optional and dependent coverage and pay the full cost thereof; however, the city may participate in the payment of certain additional optional and dependent coverage for designated qualified employees, exclusive of the present or future mayor and council and qualified appointed positions. 
(b)  The city clerk is authorized, by participation in optional programs by the employee, to deduct such payments due from the employee for the employee's share of such premiums from the employee's wages and remit the same to the insurance company or companies contracting to furnish such insurance coverage to the city. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5-3; Ord. No. 85-2, 6-18-1985; Ord. No. 88-3, 6-7-1988) 
Sec. 2-5-4. - Joint municipal employee's retirement system. 
(a)  An ordinance adopted in 1956 establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the City of Hapeville, Georgia, as amended, and especially the ordinances enacted February 3, 1959, April 19, 1960, June 7, 1966, March 22, 1971, February 6, 1979, April 1, 1980, as amended, are hereby further amended by substituting in lieu thereof this new ordinance establishing a new retirement plan for the employees of the city and setting forth a joint trust agreement and a contract for administration of said plan by the city and the joint municipal employees' retirement system, as provided by Georgia Laws 1965, page 421, as amended, hereinafter contained as Articles I through XV and Appendix A. 
(b)  The rights and obligations of persons who retired prior to the effective date of this plan are fixed and shall be governed by the retirement or pension plan as it existed and was in effect at the time of such retirement and except as herein otherwise provided, the provisions of the retirement plan in effect prior to the effective date of this section shall be continued in effect for the purpose of payment of pensions to pensioners retired prior to such effective date and their beneficiaries, if any. 
(c)  The retirement benefits of any employee in the active employ of the city on the effective date of this section, who immediately prior thereto shall have been included in the superseded plan, who maintains his eligibility as a participant under such superseded plan, and who declines to waive his accrued pension benefits under the retirement plan that was in existence and which is expressly superseded by this section shall retain any entitlement to benefits originally provided under the superseded plan upon his actual termination of employment and/or attainment of his retirement date in accordance with the provisions of the superseded plan. Such benefit shall be based upon the provisions of the superseded plan, which, except as herein otherwise provided, shall be continued in effect for the purpose of the payment of pensions to employees declining to waive their pension benefits in favor of the benefits specified in the plan established by this section. Benefits afforded under the superseded plan to such employees will be determined in accordance with the superseded plan. 
(d)  A regular full-time employee of the city who immediately prior to the effective date of the plan shall have been included in the superseded plan shall not be deemed to be an eligible employee for the purpose of participating in the benefits provided by this plan unless, within 30 days following the effective date of this plan, he shall have delivered to the pension committee a waiver, in the form provided for such purpose, of the benefits to which he shall then be entitled under such superseded plan, in recognition of the benefits to which he shall be entitled under this plan. 
(e)  Each eligible employee employed in the services of the city on the effective date of this plan shall be included in this plan as of the effective date if, within 30 days following the effective date of this plan, he shall have delivered to the pension committee an application for participation, in the form provided for such purpose, and such other information as required by the committee. 
(f)  If a participant in this plan who was included in the superseded plan and who was a full-time employee on the effective date of this plan would, on retirement, be entitled to a larger benefit under the superseded plan than under this plan, he is entitled to receive the larger benefit. Upon termination of employment for any reason other than retirement of a participant who was included in the superseded plan, he may elect to receive the benefit which would have been payable under the superseded plan in lieu of any benefit payable under this plan; such election to be made at the time termination of employment actually occurs. The method of payment of any benefit under this section, any options with respect to such benefits and related matters are governed solely by the provisions of the superseded plan and the superseded plan shall be continued in effect for such purpose. A person who receives a benefit under this subsection (f) is not entitled to any benefit under this plan. 
(g)  The city hereby terminates the administration of the trust fund by the board of trustees established under the superseded plan and hereby terminates the tenure of office of the individual trustee members of the board and does herein appoint the board of trustees of the joint municipal employee's retirement system as the successor trustee. Such successor trustee shall have all the powers hereinafter contained. The board of trustees of the superseded plan herein terminated is empowered to transfer any and all assets, records and property to its successor without undue delay. The present board of trustees shall continue in the capacity of the pension committee and shall serve according to the terms thereof until the new pension committee can be elected and comply with the provisions of article IX of this new retirement plan. The continuation of the existing board of trustees of the pension committee shall be vested with all authorities as the pension committee hereinafter established shall be as if fully elected and composed as set forth hereinafter. 
(Code 1981, § 2-5-4) 
Editor's note- The ordinance of February 6, 1979, amended the city's retirement plan ordinance by substituting new Arts. I through XV, codified in Appendix A to this Code. The effective date of this amendment was July 1, 1979. New employees are eligible for participation in the plan following one year of continuous service. See App. A, Art. III, Sec. III(b). 
Secs. 2-5-5-2-5-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE B. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 2-5-11. - City policy and purpose declared. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the State of Georgia and the Federal Security Administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this appendix, the benefits of the system of old age and survivor's insurance as authorized by thereto. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 14A-1; Code 1981, § 2-5-11) 
Sec. 2-5-12. - Authority to execute agreements to extend benefits to city officers and employees. 
    The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia for coverage of employees and officials as provided for in section 2-5-11 hereof, to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by law provided. 
(Code 1959, § 14A-2; Code 1981, § 2-5-12) 
Sec. 2-5-13. - Salary withholdings authorized; disposition of funds. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 2-5-11 hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1959, § 14A-3; Code 1981, § 2-5-13) 
Sec. 2-5-14. - Appropriations of city funds. 
    There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to ensure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in section 2-5-12. Such funds shall be paid over to the Employee's Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by that agency. 
(Code 1959, § 14A-4; Code 1981, § 2-5-14) 
Sec. 2-5-15. - Records and reports. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 14A-5; Code 1981, § 2-5-15) 
Sec. 2-5-16. - Exclusion. 
    There is hereby excluded from this appendix any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1959, § 14A-6; Code 1981, § 2-5-16) 
Sec. 2-5-17. - Release of escrow deposits. 
(a)  The mayor (or other designated official) of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement amending the original plan and agreement with the Employee's Retirement System of Georgia, in substantially the form attached hereto as Exhibit "A" providing for the release of social security escrow deposits. 
(b)  The City of Hapeville, hereinafter referred to as the "city," agrees to abide by the rules and regulations of the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia, hereinafter called the "state agency," in regard to collection from city employees and making reports and payment to the state agency. 
(c)  The city hereby pledges an amount which it would receive in state grant funds as security for assurance that it will make collections from its employees, submit required reports, and remit payments to the state agency as agreed to in its plan of coverage of employees for social security benefits. The city further agrees that if the amount of state grant funds which it is entitled to receive in a calendar year is less than its annual payment to the state agency, as may be determined by the state agency, then the city shall deposit in escrow, when so notified in writing by the state agency and in accordance with its rules and regulations, an amount which, when added to the city, state grant funds would total an amount sufficient to meet its obligations of reporting and remitting collections to the state agency. 
(Code 1959, § 14A-7; Code 1981, § 2-5-17) 
Editor's note- Exhibit "A" is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Appendix B - CITY OF HAPEVILLE EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK[1] 
ISSUE DATE: 11-1-1994 
INTRODUCTION 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to provisions of Ord. No. 94-27, adopted November 11, 1994, former App. B, Personnel Rules and Regulations, has been stricken and a new App. B pertaining to similar subject matter has been set out in lieu thereof. 

§ 080. - Positions covered. 
    These rules and regulations shall cover all city employees. Elected officials, appointed officers, members of boards, commissions and committees, and consultants are not covered by, and their conduct shall not be governed or regulated by, these rules. 
§ 081. - Administration. 
    The mayor and council shall appoint a personnel director to administer these rules and regulations. 
    The phrase "appointing authority" shall refer to the mayor and council or to their designee, usually a department head. 
EMPLOYMENT 
§ 101. - Nature of employment. 
    Except as provided below, employment with the city is voluntarily entered into, and the employee is free to resign at will at any time, with or without cause. Similarly, the city may terminate the employment relationship at will at any time, with or without cause and without review. 
    However, regular full-time employees who are dismissed for cause are entitled to the benefits of § 801 et seq. Except for financial, nonperformance-related reasons, regular full-time employees may only be dismissed for cause. 
    Policies set forth in this handbook are not intended to create a contract, nor are they to be construed to constitute contractual obligations of any kind or a contract of employment between the city and any of its employees. The provisions of the handbook have been developed at the discretion of the mayor and council and may be amended or canceled at any time, at the city's sole discretion. 
    These provisions supersede all existing policies and practices and may not be amended or added to without the express written approval of the mayor and council. No promise, representation, practice, action, inaction or comment by any city employee, officer, elected official or agent shall work to amend the provisions of these rules. 
§ 102. - Employee relations. 
    The city believes that the work conditions, wages, and benefits it offers to its employees are competitive with those offered by other employers in this area. If employees have concerns about work conditions or compensation, they are encouraged to voice these concerns openly and directly to their supervisors. 
    Our experience has shown that when employees deal openly and directly with supervisors, the work environment can be excellent, communications can be clear, and attitudes can be positive. We believe that the city tries to demonstrate its commitment to employees by responding effectively to employee concerns. 
    To protect and maintain direct employer/employee communications, we will resist organization, within applicable legal limits, and protect the right of employees to speak for themselves. 
§ 103. - Equal employment opportunity. 
    In order to provide equal employment and advancement opportunities to all individuals, employment decisions at the city will be based on merit, qualifications, and abilities. Except where required or permitted by law, employment practices will not be influenced or affected by an applicant's or employee's race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disability, or any other characteristic protected by law. 
    The city will make reasonable accommodations for qualified individuals with known disabilities unless doing so would result in an undue hardship. This policy governs all aspects of employment, including selection, job assignment, compensation, discipline, termination, and access to benefits and training. 
    Any employees with questions or concerns about any type of discrimination in the workplace are encouraged to bring these issues to the attention of their immediate supervisor or the personnel director. Employees can raise concerns and make reports without fear of reprisal. Anyone engaging in any type of unlawful discrimination will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
§ 104. - Hiring of relatives. 
    The employment of relatives in the same department of any organization may cause serious conflicts and problems with favoritism and employee morale. In addition to claims of partiality in treatment at work, personal conflicts from outside the work environment can be carried into day-to-day working relationships. 
    Relatives of elected or appointed officials or of persons currently employed by the city may be hired only if they will not be working in the same department, will not be directly supervising a relative, and will not occupy a position in the same line of authority within the organization. This policy applies to any relative, higher or lower in the organization, who has the authority to [review] employment decisions. City employees cannot be transferred into such a reporting relationship. 
    If the relative relationship is established after employment, the individuals concerned will decide who is to be transferred. A transfer is contingent upon a substantially similar position being available. If that decision is not made within thirty (30) calendar days, management will decide based upon the needs of the organization which employee is transferred and where if a substantially similar position is available to accommodate a transfer. If there is no substantially similar position, the employee to be transferred may be released from duty. 
    In cases where a conflict or the potential for conflict arises, even if there is no supervisory relationship involved, the parties may be separated by reassignment or terminated from employment based upon the needs of the organization. If no substantially similar position is available and transfer is required, the employee to be transferred may be released from duty. 
    For the purposes of this policy, relatives are deemed to include spouses, parents, children, brothers, sisters, brothers and sisters-in-law, fathers and mothers-in-law, nieces and nephews, stepparents, stepbrothers, nieces and nephews, stepparents, stepbrothers, stepsisters, and stepchildren. 
(Ord. No. 2000-20, § 1, 8-1-2000) 
§ 105. - Employee medical examinations. 
    To help ensure that employees are able to perform their duties safely, medical examinations may be required. 
    After an offer has been made to an applicant entering a designated job category, a medical examination may be performed at the city's expense by a health professional of the city's choice. The offer of employment and assignment to duties is contingent upon satisfactory completion of the exam. 
    Information on an employee's medical condition or history will be kept separate from other employee information and maintained confidentially. 
§ 106. - Immigration law compliance. 
    The city is committed to employing only United States citizens and aliens who are authorized to work in the United States and does not unlawfully discriminate on the basis of citizenship or national origin. 
    In compliance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, each new employee, as a condition of employment, must complete the Employment Eligibility Verification Form I-9 and present documentation establishing identity and employment eligibility. Former employees who are rehired must also complete the form if they have not completed an I-9 with the city within the past three (3) years, or if their previous I-9 is no longer retained or valid. 
    Employees with questions on immigration law issues are encouraged to contact the personnel director. Employees may raise questions or complaints about immigration law compliance without fear of reprisal. 
§ 107. - Conflicts of interest. 
    Employees have an obligation to conduct business within guidelines that prohibit actual or potential conflicts of interest. This policy establishes only the framework within which the city wishes the business to operate. The purpose of these guidelines is to provide general direction so that employees can seek further clarification on issues related to the subject of acceptable standards of operation. 
    An actual or potential conflict of interest occurs when an employee is in a position to influence a decision that may result in a personal gain for that employee or for a relative as a result of the city's business dealings. For the purposes of this policy, a relative is any person who is related by blood or marriage, or whose relationship with the employee is similar to that of persons who are related by blood or marriage. 
    No "presumption of guilt" is created by the mere existence of a relationship with outside firms. However, if an employee has any influence on transactions involving purchases, contracts, or leases, it is imperative that he or she discloses to an officer of the city as soon as possible the existence of any actual or potential conflict of interest so that safeguards can be established to protect all parties. 
    Personal gain may result not only in cases where an employee or relative has a significant ownership in a firm with which the city does business but also when an employee or relative receives any kickback, bribe, substantial gift, or special consideration as a result of any transaction or business dealings involving the city. 
    The materials, products, designs, plans, ideas, and data of the city are the property of the city and should never be given to an outside firm or individual except through normal channels and with appropriate authorization. Any improper transfer of material or disclosure of information, even though it is not apparent that an employee has personally gained by such action, is unacceptable conduct. Any employee who participates in such a practice will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including possible termination of employment. 
    An employee shall not accept gifts, gratuities or loans from organizations, business concerns, or individuals with whom he has official relationships on business of the city government. These limitations are not intended to prohibit the acceptance of any articles, which are distributed free of charge to the general public, traditional holiday gifts of a nominal value nor public or private awards for meritorious service. 
§ 108. - Outside employment. 
    Employees may hold outside jobs as long as they meet the performance standards of their job with the city. Employees should consider the impact that outside employment may have on their health and physical endurance. All employees will be judged by the same performance standards and will be subject to city scheduling demands, regardless of any existing outside work requirements. 
    If the city determines that an employee's outside work interferes with performance or the ability to meet the requirements of the city as they are modified from time to time, the employee may be asked to terminate the outside employment if he or she wishes to remain with the city. 
    Outside employment that constitutes a conflict of interest is prohibited. Employees may not receive any income or material gain from individuals outside the city for materials produced or services rendered while performing their jobs. 
    Department heads may, at their discretion, require preapproval of outside employment. 
§ 109. - Nondisclosure. 
    While most of the information in city hall may be public records, it is imperative that employees follow proper procedures for the release of such information. The protection of city records and information is vital to the interests of the city. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the following examples: 
Personnel files 
Public records 
Individual compensation data 
Customer lists 
Financial information 
Labor relations strategies 
Pending projects and proposals 
    All employees may be required to sign a nondisclosure agreement as a condition of employment. Any employee who discloses information, without proper authorization or following established city procedures, will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including possible termination of employment and legal action, even if he or she does not actually benefit from the disclosed information or if the information may be legally available through proper channels. 
§ 110. - Employment opportunities. 
    The recruitment, selection, appointment and promotion of employees shall be conducted in such a manner as to promote equal employment opportunity for all persons without regard to race, age, color, creed, sex, national origin, or political affiliation. 
§ 111. - Vacant positions. 
    Department heads shall be responsible for notifying the personnel director of vacant, or soon to be vacant, authorized positions in their department. The notification shall include the class title and salary range. As far as practical, vacancies may be filled by promotion of employees of the city. Notice of vacancies is routinely announced to city employees; a vacancy announcement should be posted for at least three (3) workdays in a specified location. 
§ 112. - Recruitment for vacant positions. 
    All full-time vacancies should be publicized by the personnel director, by posting announcements and by other means as necessary to ensure obtaining well-qualified candidates for the positions. The announcement should specify the title and salary range of the vacant position, any minimum qualification requirements, manner of making application, the final date on which applications shall be received, and other pertinent information. Every reasonable effort shall be made to publicize vacancies, so that all interested persons are informed and qualified persons are attracted to compete. 
§ 113. - Application forms. 
    Applications shall be made on the city application forms. Such forms shall include information covering training, experience and other pertinent factors. All applications shall be signed by the person applying. 
§ 114. - Disqualification. 
    Applicants may be removed from further consideration by the personnel director if the applicant: 
(1)  Does not meet the minimum qualifications established for the position; 
(2)  Has a disability for which reasonable accommodation cannot be made that would prevent satisfactory performance of the duties of the position; 
(3)  Has made false statements of material fact, or practiced deception in his application; 
(4)  Is addicted to the habitual use of drugs or intoxicating liquors; 
(5)  Has an unsatisfactory employment record of such a nature as to demonstrate unsuitability for employment; 
(6)  Has been convicted of infamous, criminal or notoriously disgraceful conduct; or 
(7)  Has failed to submit or properly complete an application within the prescribed time limit. 
§ 115. - Selection and appointment. 
    The personnel director shall review all applications for employment to determine whether the applicant meets the established standards for employment. Such information may be required as is necessary to make such determination. When appropriate, examinations may be used which may be written or oral or a combination of these. Such tests should be practical in character and should relate to the duties and responsibilities of the position for which the applicant is being examined. 
    Within thirty (30) days of receiving notice of a vacant position, the personnel director, using the methods cited above, shall provide the appointing authority with a list of certified eligibles. 
    The appointing authority shall continue the selection process from this list. The appointing authority shall conduct its selection process in an unbiased fashion, giving due consideration to the totality of circumstances, and in all cases attempt to employ the most qualified candidate. 
    The appointing authority shall report its preferences to the relevant department chairman, who shall concur with the appointment prior to the extension of any offer of employment. 
§ 116. - Emergency appointment. 
    When an emergency involving the serious impairment of the public business makes it impossible to fill a vacant position by normal procedure, the department head, with the approval of the personnel director, may appoint any qualified person to such position on a temporary basis to prevent stoppage of public business or loss, or serious inconvenience to the public. Such an appointment shall be for a period not to exceed thirty-one (31) days, during which time the normal selection procedures would be followed to fill the position permanently. 
EMPLOYMENT STATUS AND RECORDS 
§ 201. - Employment categories. 
    It is the intent of the city to clarify the definitions of employment classifications so that employees understand their employment status and benefit eligibility. These classifications do not guarantee employment for any specified period of time. Accordingly, except as otherwise specified herein, the right to terminate the employment relationship at will at any time is retained by both the employee and city. 
    Each employee is designated as either nonexempt or exempt from federal and state wage and hour laws. Nonexempt employees are entitled to overtime pay under the specific provisions of federal and state laws. Exempt employees are excluded from specific provisions of federal and state wage and hour laws. 
    In addition to the above categories, each employee will belong to one other employment category: 
    Department heads are the city administrator, the director of public services, the director of public safety, the chief of police, the chief of the fire department, the director of buildings and grounds, and director of recreation. Generally, they are eligible for the city's benefit package, subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of each benefit program. Employees in this category are not regular full-time employees, as that term is defined herein. This definition shall apply only to these rules and shall not affect or control actual administrative responsibility or authority. Nothing herein requires the city to fund or fill any of these positions. Department heads are not eligible for personnel board appeals of employment decisions and are at-will employees who may be terminated with or without cause by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
    Regular full-time employees are those who are not in a temporary or probationary status and who are regularly scheduled to work the city's full-time schedule. Generally, they are eligible for the city's benefit package, subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of each benefit program. In addition, if they are dismissed for cause, they are entitled to appeal rights as provided in § 801 and the following sections. 
    Part-time employees are those who are not assigned to a temporary or probationary status and who are scheduled to work less than thirty (30) hours per week. While they do receive all legally mandated benefits (such as Social Security and workers' compensation insurance), they are ineligible for all of the city's other benefit programs. 
    Probationary employees are those whose performance is being evaluated to determine whether further employment in a specific position or with the city is appropriate. Employees who satisfactorily complete the probationary period will be notified of their new employment classification. 
    Temporary employees are those who are hired as interim replacements, to temporarily supplement the workforce, or to assist in the completion of a specific project. Employment assignments in this category are of limited duration. Employment beyond any initially stated period does not in any way imply a change in employment status. Temporary employees retain that status unless and until notified in writing of a change. While temporary employees receive all legally mandated benefits (such as workers' compensation insurance and Social Security), they are ineligible for all of the city's other benefit programs. 
    Casual employees are those who have established an employment relationship with the city but who are assigned to work on an intermittent and/or unpredictable basis. While they receive all legally mandated benefits (such as workers' compensation insurance and Social Security), they are ineligible for all of the city's other benefit programs. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 1, 3-7-2000) 
§ 202. - Access to personnel files. 
    The city maintains a personnel file on each employee. The personnel file includes such information as the employee's job application, resume, records of training, documentation of performance appraisals and salary increases, and other employment records. 
    Personnel files are the property of the city, and access to the information they contain is restricted. Generally, only supervisors and management personnel of the city who have a legitimate reason to review information in a file are allowed to do so. However, such records must be disclosed to interested parties under Georgia Law upon proper request. 
    Employees who wish to review their own file should contact the personnel director. With reasonable advance notice, employees may review their own personnel files in the city's offices and in the presence of an individual appointed by the city to maintain the files. You will have no right to remove any item from your file. 
§ 203. - Employment reference checks. 
    To ensure that individuals who join the city are well qualified and have a strong potential to be productive and successful, it is the policy of the city to check the employment references of all applicants. The personnel director will respond in writing only to those reference check inquiries that are submitted in writing. Responses to such inquiries will confirm only dates of employment, wage rates, and position(s) held. No employment data will be released without a written authorization and release signed by the individual who is the subject of the inquiry. 
§ 204. - Personnel data changes. 
    It is the responsibility of each employee to promptly notify the city of any changes in personnel data. Personal mailing addresses, telephone numbers, number and names of dependents, individuals to be contacted in the event of an emergency, educational accomplishments, and other such status reports should be accurate and current at all times. All official notices given by the city shall be sent to this address, and failure to keep the city advised of current address may result in notices being sent to the wrong address. 
§ 205. - Probationary period. 
    The probationary period is intended to give new employees the opportunity to demonstrate their ability to achieve a satisfactory level of performance and to determine whether the new position meets their expectations. The city uses this period to evaluate employee capabilities, work habits, and overall performance. Except as otherwise provided herein, either the employee or the city may end the employment relationship at will at any time during or after the probationary period, with or without cause or advance notice. 
    All new and rehired employees work on a probationary basis for the first one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after their date of hire. Employees who are promoted or transferred within the city must complete a second probationary period of the same length with each reassignment to a new position. Any significant absence will automatically extend a probationary period by the length of the absence. If the city determines that the designated probationary period does not allow sufficient time to thoroughly evaluate the employee's performance, the probationary period may be extended for a specified period, upon recommendation by the department head and concurrence by the personnel director. 
    In cases of promotions or transfers within the city, an employee who, in the sole judgment of management, is not successful in the new position can be removed from that position at any time during the second probationary period. If this occurs, the employee may be allowed to return to his or her former job or to a comparable job for which the employee is qualified, depending on the availability of such positions and the city's needs. 
    Upon satisfactory completion of the initial probationary period, employees shall be classified in one of the other employment classifications. 
    During the initial probationary period, new employees are eligible for those benefits that are required by law, such as workers' compensation insurance and social security. After completion of probation, they may also be eligible for other city-provided benefits, subject to the terms and conditions of each benefits program. Employees should read the information for each specific benefits program for the details on eligibility requirements. 
    Benefits eligibility are not changed during the probationary period that results from a promotion or transfer within the city. 
§ 206. - Employment applications. 
    The city relies upon the accuracy of information contained in the employment application, as well as the accuracy of other data presented throughout the hiring process and employment. Any misrepresentations, falsifications, or material omissions in any of this information or data may result in the city's exclusion of the individual from further consideration for employment or, if the person has been hired, termination of employment. 
§ 207. - Performance evaluation. 
    Supervisors and employees are strongly encouraged to discuss job performance and goals on an informal, day-to-day basis. Formal performance evaluations should be conducted at the end of an employee's initial period in any new position. This period, known as the probationary period, allows the supervisor and the employee to discuss the job responsibilities, standards, and performance requirements of the new position. Additional formal performance reviews are conducted to provide both supervisors and employees the opportunity to discuss job tasks, identify and correct weaknesses, encourage and recognize strengths, and discuss positive, purposeful approaches for meeting goals. 
    Merit-based pay adjustments may be periodically awarded by the city to recognize truly superior employee performance. The decision to award such an adjustment is dependent upon numerous factors, including the information documented by the performance review process. 
§ 208. - Classification plan; definitions. 
    The classification plan is the systematic grouping of positions into appropriate classes: 
(1)  A position is a group of currently assigned duties and responsibilities requiring the full-time or part-time employment of one (1) person. A position may be occupied or vacant. 
(2)  A class is a group of positions (or one (1) position) that: 
a.  Has similar duties and responsibilities; 
b.  Requires like qualifications; and 
c.  Can be equitably compensated by the same range of pay. 
(3)  The class title is the official designation or name of the class, and it shall be used on all personnel records and transactions. 
§ 209. - Use of class specifications. 
    Specifications should be interpreted in their entirety and in relation to others in the classification plan. Particular phrases or examples should not be isolated and treated as a full definition of class. Specifications are descriptive and explanatory of the kind of work performed and not necessarily inclusive of all duties performed. 
§ 210. - Maintenance of classification plan. 
    The personnel director, working with the mayor and council, shall maintain the classification plan, so that it will reflect the duties performed by each employee in the classified service. He should periodically review the entire classification plan and recommend appropriate changes in allocations or in the classification plan. 
§ 211. - Allocation of positions. 
    When a new position is established, or duties of an existing position change, the department head involved shall submit in writing a position description stating the duties and responsibilities of the position. The personnel director shall investigate the actual or proposed duties and recommend to the mayor and council the appropriate class allocation or the establishment of a new class. The mayor and council shall approve or change such recommendations and allocate the position to a class. 
§ 212. - Classification plan in effect. 
    The classification plan shall be considered a part of this section and shall have the same force and effect as these personnel rules and regulations. The plan is directory only and does not constitute a contract or promise to any employee to pay any increases scheduled therein. A copy of the classification plan shall be maintained by the personnel director. 
§ 213. - Pay plan. 
    The pay plan includes the adopted salary schedule, and the schedule of salary ranges, consisting of rates of pay for all classes of positions included in the classification plan. The plan is directory only and does not constitute a contract or promise to pay any employee any increase scheduled therein. The pay plan shall be considered a part of this section and shall have the same force and effect as these rules. 
Editor's note- The pay plan referenced in these sections is not set out at length herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the personnel director. 
§ 214. - Maintenance of the pay plan. 
    The pay plan is intended to provide fair compensation for all classes in the classification plan, considering range of pay for other classes, rates of pay for comparable services in private and public employment in the area, cost of living data, other benefits received by employees, the city's financial condition and policy, and other factors. The personnel director shall, when directed by the mayor and council, make or cause to be made comparative studies of all factors affecting the level of salary ranges. Based on conclusions reached through such studies, the personnel director should recommend to the mayor and council changes in salary ranges, as appropriate. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 213. 
§ 215. - Entrance salary. 
    The minimum rate established for the class is the normal hiring rate. An employee seeking a voluntary transfer from one position to another, which second position is of a lower class, shall be paid according to the scale of the class of the new position, as modified by the step increases received by virtue of prior uninterrupted service. Appointments, under special conditions and subject to the prior approval of the mayor and council, may be made above the minimum rate when such action is determined to be necessary in the best interest of the city. Approval will be based on such conditions as shortage of qualified applicants available at the minimum step; qualifications of the applicant being in excess of the requirements for the class. 
§ 216. - Promotion. 
    An employee who is promoted should have his salary raised according to years of service, to the lowest step of the range for the class of his new position which will effect an increase in his salary at least as great as a full step in his previous salary range. 
§ 217. - Demotion. 
    When an employee is demoted, he shall be paid at a rate which is within the range of the lower position. The rate of pay shall be set by the appointing authority, taking into consideration the circumstances surrounding the reasons for the demotion, as well as the employee's length of service, and service record with the city. 
§ 218. - Salary reviews. 
    When funds have been specifically allocated in the budget for such purposes, salary increases may be granted to specific classes of employees, upon the recommendation of the personnel director and approval of the mayor and council. 
§ 219. - Pay plan in force. 
    The pay plan shall be considered a part of this section and have the same force and effect as these personnel rules and regulations. 
Note- See the editor's note following § 213. 
EMPLOYEE BENEFIT PROGRAM 
§ 301. - Employee benefits. 
    Eligible employees at the city are provided a wide range of benefits. Many of the programs (such as social security, workers' compensation, and unemployment insurance) cover all employees in the manner prescribed by law. 
    Benefits eligibility is dependent upon a variety of factors, including employee classification. Your supervisor can identify the programs for which you are eligible. Details of many of these programs can be found elsewhere in the employee handbook. 
    The following benefit programs may be available to eligible employees: 
Bereavement leave 
Credit union 
Holiday pay 
Jury duty leave 
Medical insurance 
Military leave 
Pension plan 
Sick leave benefits (shortterm disability) 
Vacation benefits 
Voting time off 
Witness duty leave 
    Some benefit programs require contributions from the employee, but most are fully paid by the city. The city reserves the right to expand or withdraw available benefits at any time. 
§ 302. - Vacation benefits. 
    Vacation time off with pay is available to eligible employees to provide opportunities for rest, relaxation, and personal pursuits. Employees in the following employment classifications are eligible to earn and use vacation time as described in this policy: 
Department heads 
Regular full-time employees 
    The amount of paid vacation time employees receive each year increases with the length of their employment as shown in the following schedule: 
VACATION EARNING SCHEDULE 
Years of 
Eligible 
Service Vacation 
Hours 
Biweekly Maximum 
Earned 
Days Vacation 
Weeks 
Annually, 
Fire Dept. 0 to 9 3.077 10 days 2 10 to 19 4.62 15 days 3 20 6.15 20 days 4  
(The column labeled "Maximum Earned Days" is illustrative only, and accrual calculation shall be determined biweekly. The column labeled "Vacation Hours Biweekly" shall not apply to the fire department.) 
    For the purposes of this section, for fire department employees, a "week" shall equal one (1) seven-day period, usually running from Monday to Monday. 
    The length of eligible service is calculated on the basis of a "benefit year." This is the twelve-month period that begins when the employee starts to earn vacation time. An employee's benefit year may be extended for any significant leave of absence except military leave of absence. Military leave has no effect on this calculation. (See individual leave of absence policies for more information.) Fire Department employees accrue time proportional to their length of service. 
    Once employees enter an eligible employment classification, they begin to earn paid vacation time according to the schedule. However, before vacation time can first be used, a waiting period of three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days must be completed. After that time, employees can request use of earned vacation time including that accrued during the waiting period. Only ten (10) days are available to employees during the second year. Vacation leave may only be used after accrual, and no employee shall utilize annual leave that has not yet been earned. 
    Except for the fire department, paid vacation time can be used in minimum increments of four (4) hours. Fire department employees may take vacation only in one-week increments, except for extraordinary circumstances as approved by the chief. To take vacation, employees should request advance approval from their immediate supervisors. Requests will be reviewed by department heads based on a number of factors, including business needs, seniority, and staffing requirements. 
    Vacation time off is paid at the employee's base pay rate at the time of vacation. It does not include overtime or any special forms of compensation such as incentives, commissions, bonuses, or shift differentials. 
    As stated above, employees are encouraged to use available paid vacation time for rest, relaxation, and personal pursuits. In the event that available vacation is not used by the end of the benefit year, employees may carry unused time forward to the next benefit year. If the total amount of unused vacation time reaches a "cap" equal to two (2) times the annual vacation amount of the employee in question, further accrual will stop. When the employee uses paid vacation time and brings the available amount below the cap, thereafter vacation accrual will begin again. 
    Upon termination of employment, employees will be paid for accrued unused vacation time that has been earned through the last day of work. 
    No employee shall be allowed to work with the city during vacation leave and receive additional pay therefor. 
    This leave shall only be earned while an employee is in service. Except for sick leave and vacation leave, employees utilizing other leave benefits shall not accrue vacation leave during the duration of the leave. 
§ 303. - Major medical insurance. 
    The city currently provides major medical insurance to eligible employees. 
    Eligible employees classification(s): 
Department heads 
Regular full-time employees 
    The terms and conditions of the currently available policy can be reviewed with the personnel director. 
    The city reserves the right, at any time, to change, modify or eliminate any coverage, terms, conditions or other items related to this benefit and no contractual right shall accrue to any employee for the continuation of any coverage or level of coverage, deductible amount, copay amount or type of coverage, as the city reserves the right to amend or modify such at its discretion. 
§ 304. - Holidays. 
(a)  The city will grant holiday time off to all employees on the holidays listed below: 
(1)  New Year's Day (January 1); 
(2)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Day (January 15); 
(3)  Good Friday (Friday before Easter); 
(4)  Memorial Day (last Monday in May); 
(5)  Independence Day (July 4); 
(6)  Labor Day (first Monday in September); 
(7)  Veterans' Day (November 11); 
(8)  Thanksgiving (fourth Thursday in November); 
(9)  Day after Thanksgiving; 
(10)  Christmas Eve (December 24); 
(11)  Christmas (December 25); 
(12)  Personal Day (see below). 
(b)  According to applicable restrictions, the city will grant paid holiday time off to all eligible employees immediately upon assignment to an eligible employment classification. Holiday pay will be calculated based on the employee's straight-time pay rate (as of the date of the holiday) times the number of hours the employee would otherwise have worked on that day. 
(1)  Eligible employee classification(s): 
a.  Department heads. 
b.  Regular full-time employees. 
(2)  A recognized holiday that falls on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding Friday. A recognized holiday that falls on a Sunday will be observed on the following Monday. 
(3)  If a recognized holiday falls during an eligible employee's paid absence (e.g., vacation, sick leave), the employee will be ineligible for holiday pay. Employees may, with advance arrangements, schedule vacations around holidays. 
(4)  If an eligible employee works on a recognized holiday, he or she will receive compensatory time off or wages at one and one-half (11/2) times his or her straight-time rate for the hours worked on the holiday at the discretion of the city. 
(5)  Each eligible employee who otherwise qualifies to utilize vacation pay shall be allowed, as a holiday, one (1) day during each calendar year for a personal holiday. The use of this day shall be under the same restrictions as other "vacation" time." 
(Ord. No. 97-02, 6-3-1997; Ord. No. 2000-07, § 1, 3-7-2000) 
§ 305. - Workers' compensation insurance. 
    The city provides a workers' compensation insurance program. This program covers injury or illness sustained in the course of employment that requires medical, surgical, or hospital treatment, pursuant to the requirements of Georgia Law. Subject to applicable legal requirements, workers' compensation insurance provides benefits after a short waiting period or, if the employee is hospitalized, immediately. 
    Employees may utilize, at the employee's discretion, any accrued annual, sick, or personal leave during any waiting period. The employee's choice must be given to the personnel director, in writing. Absence of election by the employee shall be assumed to mean that the employee does not wish to utilize accrued leave. 
    Employees who sustain work-related injuries or illnesses must inform their supervisor immediately. No matter how minor an on-the-job injury may appear, it is important that it be reported immediately. Failure to promptly report any injury will not only jeopardize coverage, but will, in most instances, result in disciplinary action. This will enable an eligible employee to qualify for coverage as quickly as possible. 
    Neither the city nor the insurance carrier will be liable for the payment of workers' compensation benefits for injuries that occur during an employee's voluntary participation in any off-duty recreational, social, or athletic activity sponsored by the city. 
§ 306. - Sick leave benefits. 
    The city provides paid sick leave benefits to all eligible employees for periods of temporary absence due to illnesses or injuries resulting from causes beyond the employee's control; or for medical or dental examinations or treatments for which arrangements cannot be made outside working hours. 
    Eligible employee classification(s): 
Department heads 
Regular full-time employees 
Eligible employees may accrue sick leave benefits at the rate of up to ninety-six (96) hours per year (four (4) hours for every biweekly period of service). For fire department employees, twelve (12) twenty-four-hour "days," accrued at one-half (0.5) twenty-four-hour days per biweekly period of service, may be earned. Sick leave benefits are calculated on the basis of a "benefit year," the twelve-month period that begins when the employee starts to earn sick leave benefits. 
    Except as provided below, employees may accumulate sick leave up to a maximum of one thousand forty (1,040) hours, after reaching that amount, no sick leave shall accrue until after the total account balance shall have been reduced to less than one thousand forty (1,040) hours. 
    No sick leave shall accrue during any biweekly period in which the employee is absent the entire period and utilizing sick leave benefits. 
    Paid sick leave can be used in minimum increments of one (1) hour. Eligible employees may use sick leave benefits for an absence due to their own illness or injury or that of a family member who resides in the employee's household provided that such illness or injury reasonably obligates the employee to be elsewhere. 
    Employees who are unable to report to work due to illness or injury should notify their direct supervisor before the scheduled start of their workday if possible. Failure to do so may be cause for denial of sick leave with pay for that day and for each subsequent day that prior notification has not been given. Special consideration will be given for emergency situations. 
    The direct supervisor must also be contacted on each additional day of absence. Supervisors may, under proper circumstances, relieve employees from the obligation to make such contact for extended sicknesses. 
    If an employee is absent for two (2) or more consecutive days due to illness or injury, a physician's statement must be provided verifying the disability and its beginning and expected ending dates. Physician statements must also be provided for sick leave requests of any length if the employee has been notified that, due to frequent or habitual use of sick leave, such will be henceforth required. Such verification may be requested for other sick leave absences as well and may be required as a condition to receiving sick leave benefits. 
    Before returning to work from a sick leave absence of thirty (30) calendar days or more, an employee must provide a physician's verification that he or she may safely return to work. 
    Sick leave benefits will be calculated based on the employee's base pay rate at the time of absence and will not include any special forms of compensation, such as incentives, commissions, bonuses, or shift differentials. 
    Unused sick leave benefits will be allowed to accumulate as stated below. 
    Sick leave benefits are intended solely to provide income protection in the event of illness or injury, and may not be used for any other absence. Misrepresentations about the use of this leave is a serious matter and will result in disciplinary action. 
    Unused sick leave benefits will not be paid to employees while they are employed or upon termination of employment. 
    Transitory rules: 
(1)  Any employee with unused sick leave at the end of his or her tenure with the city will be allowed one (1) of the following options: 
a.  Take early retirement equivalent to the amount of unused sick leave; or 
b.  Add unused sick leave to years of service for retirement computations; 
provided, however, all employees with an employment date of on or after January 3, 1990, may not choose option a. 
(2)  Eligible employees hired before September 1, 1994, shall be allowed an unlimited accrual of sick leave. 
    During the time frame provided herein, all full-time employees shall be temporarily eligible for an incentive bonus procedure based on sick leave benefits used. This experimental incentive bonus shall terminate on November 30, 2001, unless the Mayor and Council of the City of Hapeville, Georgia, elect to continue the program. 
    Eligible employees will receive an incentive bonus, for which they qualify, to be paid on the first or second work Friday in the month of December during each year the program is in place. 
    Payments shall be made based on sick leave benefits used as follows: 
Number Sick Days Used this Period Hours To Be Paid May 1, 2000 thru November 30, 2000 0 
1 
2 
3 40 
32 
24 
16 December 1, 2000 thru November 30, 2001 0 
1 
2 
3 40 
32 
24 
16  
    Eligible employees who have properly scheduled time off from work may use earned compensatory time or vacation time during a period of illness for which the employee is absent from work due to personal or family illness. 
(Ord. No. 2000-15, § 1, 5-2-2000) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2000-15, § 1, adopted May 2, 2000, is an experimental incentive bonus program (sick leave) that will terminate on November 30, 2001, unless the mayor and council of the city elect to continue the program. 
§ 307. - Time off to vote. 
    The city encourages employees to fulfill their civic responsibilities by participating in elections. Generally, employees are able to find time to vote either before or after their regular work schedule. If employees are unable to vote in an election during their nonworking hours, the city will grant up to two (2) hours of paid time off to vote. 
    Employees who know that they will be required to remain on duty for the protection of health, life, or safety of the public during the entire time the polls are to be open should apply for an absentee ballot to avoid the need to miss work. Employees who can't make other arrangements should request time off to vote from their supervisor at least two (2) working days prior to the election day. Advance notice is required so that the necessary time off can be scheduled at the beginning or end of the work shift, whichever provides the least disruption to the normal work schedule. 
§ 308. - Bereavement leave. 
    If an employee wishes to take time off due to the death of an immediate family member, the employee should notify his or her supervisor immediately. 
    Up to three (3) consecutive calendar days of paid bereavement leave for each qualifying death will be provided to eligible employees in the following classifications: 
Department heads 
Regular full-time employees 
    Bereavement pay is calculated based on the base pay rate at the time of absence and will not include any special forms of compensation, such as incentives, commissions, bonuses, or shift differentials. 
    Approval of bereavement leave will occur in the absence of unusual operating requirements. Any employee may, with the supervisor's approval, use any other available paid leave, except sick leave, for additional time off as necessary. 
    The city defines "immediate family" as the employee's spouse, parent, child, sibling; the employee's spouse's parent, child, or sibling; the employee's child's spouse; grandparents or grandchildren. Special consideration will also be given to any other person whose association with the employee was similar to any of the above relationships. 
§ 309. - Jury duty. 
    The city encourages employees to fulfill their civic responsibilities by serving jury duty when required. Any compensation received from the courts or a party during this period must be remitted to the city. 
    Jury duty pay will be calculated on the employee's base pay rate times the number of hours the employee would otherwise have worked on the day of absence. Employee classifications that qualify for paid jury duty leave are: 
    Department heads 
Regular full-time employees 
    Employees must show the jury duty summons to their supervisor as soon as possible so that the supervisor may make arrangements to accommodate their absence. Of course, employees are expected to report for work whenever the court schedule permits. 
    Either the city or the employee may request an excuse from jury duty if, in the city's judgment, the employee's absence would create serious operational difficulties. 
    The city will continue to provide health insurance benefits for the full term of the jury duty absence. Vacation, sick leave, and holiday benefits, will continue to accrue during jury duty leave. 
§ 310. - Witness duty. 
    The city encourages employees to appear in court for witness duty when subpoenaed to do so. 
    If employees have been subpoenaed as witnesses by or on the behalf of the city or by any party in a criminal proceeding, they will receive regular paid time off for the entire period of witness duty. 
    Otherwise, employees will be granted a maximum of sixteen (16) hours of paid time off per calendar year to appear in court as a witness. Any compensation received from the court or other party during this period must be remitted to the city. If under subpoena, employees will be paid at their base rate and are free to use any remaining paid leave benefits (e.g., vacation leave) to receive compensation for any period of witness duty absence that would otherwise be unpaid. 
    The subpoena should be shown to the employee's supervisor immediately after it is received so that operating requirements can be adjusted, where necessary, to accommodate the employee's absence. 
    The employee is expected to report for work whenever the court schedule permits. This section shall not apply to certified employees of the police department who shall follow the rules of the police department. 
§ 311. - Benefits continuation (COBRA). 
    The federal Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) may give employees and their qualified beneficiaries the opportunity to continue health insurance coverage under the city's health plan when a "qualifying event" would normally result in the loss of eligibility. Some common qualifying events are resignation, termination of employment, or death of an employee; a reduction in an employee's hours or a leave of absence; an employee's divorce or legal separation; and a dependent child no longer meeting eligibility requirements. 
    Under COBRA, the employee or beneficiary pre-pays the full cost of coverage at the city's group rates plus an administration fee. Failure to pre-pay premium amounts shall result in a loss of coverage and the city shall have no obligation to pay these amounts on the employee's behalf. 
    The city provides each eligible employee with a written notice describing rights granted under COBRA when the employee becomes eligible for coverage under the city's health insurance plan. The notice contains important information about the employee's rights and obligations. 
§ 312. - Disability and retirement. 
    An employee may be separated for disability when he cannot perform the required duties, or when continuance on the job is a danger to himself or others. 
    Action may be initiated by the employee at his expense, or the city at its expense, but in all cases it must be supported by medical evidence acceptable to the personnel director and social security per Joint Municipal Employees Benefit System requirement. When an employee meets the conditions set forth in the Joint Municipal Employees Benefit System, he may retire and shall receive compensation due in accordance therewith. 
    The mandatory retirement age for employees in the city is set at seventy (70). Employment may be extended beyond seventy (70), if recommended by the personnel director and approved by the mayor and council. Standards for a recommendation of extension shall be based on such things as: necessity, in order to accomplish recruitment or training of personnel to fill the vacancy and/or to maintain or increase operations productivity. Prior to reaching a decision to extend employment, a physical examination, at the city's expense, may be required. 
§ 313. - Participation in Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System-Terminated. 
(1)  Effective date of termination. The city's participation in the GMEBS Retirement Trust Fund shall terminate as of June 30, 2007, except as otherwise provided in subsection (11) below. 
(2)  Successor group annuity contract. Effective July 1, 2007, and except as otherwise provided in subsection (11) below, MassMutual Financial Group ("successor group annuity contract") shall assume from the GMEBS board of trustees fiduciary responsibility for investing plan assets and satisfying plan liabilities with respect to funds transferred pursuant to subsection (6) below. 
(3)  Restated plan. Effective July 1, 2007, and except as otherwise provided in subsection (11) below, the defined benefit retirement plan for employees of the City of Hapeville, as set forth in the GMEBS master plan, trust agreement, adoption agreement and addendum, as amended, shall be repealed and replaced with a new defined benefit plan for employees of the City of Hapeville ("restated plan"). Such plan will be established and maintained as a qualified defined benefit plan pursuant to Internal Revenue Code section 401(a). On and after July 1, 2007, the rights and obligations of city employees and members of the governing authority with respect to retirement and death benefits shall be determined in accordance with the restated plan. On and after July 1, 2007, employees and former employees of the city, current and former members of the governing authority, and their beneficiaries, heirs, and assigns shall have no further right, title, or interest under the GMEBS master plan or the city's adoption agreement and addendum, provided that the vested retirement rights of plan participants existing as of the termination date will not be impaired under the restated plan. 
(4)  Termination of GMEBS' administrative responsibilities. On and after July 1, 2007 GMEBS and GMA shall have no further responsibility or obligation to administer the City's retirement plan, including but not limited to issuing retirement, death, or disability checks after July 1, 2007, direct deposit of benefit payments after said date, completing the annual actuarial valuation of the plan, processing applications for retirement or death benefits, preparing benefit estimates, and responding to participant and beneficiary inquiries concerning the plan. However, GMEBS will issue tax reports (1099's) no later than January 31, 2008, reflecting benefit payments made for the period January to June 30, 2007. GMEBS is authorized and directed to forward to the city and/or to the successor plan administrator designated by the city any records held by GMEBS that are specifically requested by the city or the plan administrator, provided that such records are reasonably necessary or useful in facilitating the transfer of administrative responsibilities and/or implementing administration of the successor plan. 
(5)  Valuation of assets. The value of the city's trust fund shall be determined as of June 30, 2007, based upon the value of the city's trust fund as reflected in the June 30, 2007, unaudited financial statements for the GMEBS retirement trust fund, subject to verification and reconciliation pursuant to the December 31, 2007, audit to be completed for the GMEBS retirement trust fund, as provided in subsection (8) below. 
(6)  Transfer of assets; successor plan documents. The GMEBS board of trustees is hereby authorized and directed to transfer any and all assets held in the city's trust fund to the successor group annuity contract designated by the city, as provided herein. However, in no event will the transfer be effected until a restated plan (including a 401(a)-qualified plan document) has been adopted and executed in accordance with section 3 and a copy of said restated plan has been furnished to GMEBS, together with an IRS determination letter or attorney opinion letter confirming that the restated plan meets the IRC 401(a) tax qualification requirements applicable to governmental plans. The city will furnish such documents, together with an executed copy of a termination ordinance acceptable to GMEBS, custodial bank routing information, and other information reasonably requested by GMEBS for purposes of facilitating the termination and transfer of assets, on or before May 16, 2007. Assuming receipt of said documents and information by May 16, 2007, GMEBS will notify the city on or before June 1, 2007, whether the documents and information supplied by the city are sufficient to permit transfer of assets. In the event GMEBS requests changes, as long as the city resubmits the documents with the changes on or before June 27, 2007, the remaining timeline herein shall remain in effect. If GMEBS determines that the documents and information supplied by the city are sufficient to permit transfer of assets, then GMEBS will notify its investment managers on or before June 29, 2007, to commence liquidation of assets as necessary to facilitate the transfer of assets on or after July 1, 2007. However, if the city does not provide the above-referenced documents and information to GMEBS by May 16, 2007, (or June 27, 2007, in the case of revised documents) or if GMEBS determines and notifies the city on or before June 29, 2007, that the documents and information supplied by the city are not sufficient to permit transfer of assets, then the June 30, 2007, effective date for termination and valuation of assets referred to in subsections (1) and (5) above will be deferred as provided in subsection (11) below. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (11) below, GMEBS will initially transfer to the successor group annuity contract after July 1, 2007 an amount equal to 85 percent of the value of the city's trust fund as reflected in the then-most recently completed unaudited monthly financial statement for the GMEBS retirement trust fund. Prior to completion of the initial transfer, GMEBS is authorized to deduct from the city's trust fund a $5,000.00 fee for services provided in effecting the termination of the city's participation in GMEBS and the transfer of assets to the successor group annuity contract. The city may pay the termination fee directly in lieu of said deduction, provided payment is made on or before the initial transfer date. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (11) below, after completion of the GMEBS retirement fund unaudited financial statement for June 30, 2007, GMEBS will make a second transfer to the successor group annuity contract in an amount equal to the remainder of the city's trust fund assets, if any (city trust fund balance as reflected in GMEBS June 30, 2007, unaudited financial statements, minus initial transfer amount, plus any interest accrued on and after July 1, 2007). If the value of the city's trust fund as reflected in the June 30, 2007, unaudited financial statements decreases from that reflected in the most recently completed unaudited monthly financial statement prior to June 30, 2007, used to determine the initial transfer amount such that the 85% initial transfer amount is more than the value of city's trust fund as of June 30, 2007, as reflected in the most recent unaudited financial statements for June 30, 2007, then GMEBS will be reimbursed and may deduct any overpayment from funds remaining in the city's trust fund. Any remaining overpayment amount shall be reimbursed by the city immediately after the city receives notice of the overpayment from GMEBS. If the remaining overpayment amount is not returned within 30 days, interest shall be payable on such amount at the then current GMEBS valuation interest rate. 
(7)  Interest. On and after July 1, 2007, any funds remaining in the city's trust fund shall not share in the gains or losses of the GMEBS retirement trust fund, notwithstanding any provision of the GMEBS master plan or trust agreement to the contrary. Any investment gains or losses that would otherwise be credited to or debited from the city's trust fund after July 1, 2007, shall not be taken into account. For the period July 1, 2007, through completion of the transfer of assets, any amount remaining in the city's trust fund shall earn interest at the same rate as the GMEBS active cash management account. Said interest shall be credited monthly as of July 31, 2007, and as of the last day of each month thereafter up until the date that the transfer of assets is completed. 
(8)  Audit reconciliation. If the audit of the GMEBS retirement trust fund for the year ending December 31, 2007, reflects that the value of the city's trust fund as of June 30, 2007, was understated in the June 30, 2007, unaudited financial statements by more than $1,000.00 and that due to such understatement the amount transferred to the successor group annuity contract is at least $1,000.00 less than the amount that should have been transferred, then GMEBS shall immediately return the difference to the successor group annuity contract in a lump sum with interest. Said interest shall be calculated at the same rate as the GMEBS active cash management account and credited monthly as of the last day of each month following June 30, 2007, up until the date of the return payment. In the event that the December 31, 2007, GMEBS retirement trust fund audit shows that the value of the city's trust fund as of June 30, 2007, was overstated in the June 30, 2007, unaudited financial statements by more than $1,000.00 and that due to such overstatement the amount transferred to the successor group annuity contract is at least $1,000.00 more than the amount that should have been transferred, then the city shall immediately return the difference to the GMEBS retirement trust fund in a lump sum with interest calculated and paid in the same manner as provided above. This provision applies in addition to and not in lieu of the provision for return of overpayment amounts under subsection (6) above. 
(9)  City's right to audit. GMEBS will provide the city with reasonable access to GMEBS retirement trust fund records for the purpose of: 1) auditing the value of the city's trust fund, as reflected in the GMEBS June 30, 2007, financial statement; and 2) auditing the accuracy of monthly allocation calculations for the period January 2007 until the date that the second transfer of assets is completed. Any such audit shall be performed at the city's expense by certified public accountants designated by the city. Review and copying of GMEBS records in connection with the audit shall be performed in the presence of the custodian of said records or the custodian's designee. The results of any audit performed by the city shall be considered by the GMEBS auditor in good faith and in accordance with applicable professional standards in performing the audit reconciliation referred to in subsection (8) above, but said results shall not be binding on GMEBS. 
(10)  Outstanding checks. No later than August 5, 2007, GMEBS will provide the city with a register of all outstanding checks as of July 31, 2007, which will include the names and last known addresses of retirees with outstanding checks, so that the city or the successor administrator can notify affected retirees that GMEBS checks will be voided if they are not cashed by August 31, 2007. GMEBS will stop payment on any outstanding checks remaining on August 31, 2007, and transfer to the successor group annuity contract immediately thereafter the amount of said outstanding checks. 
(11)  Deferral of termination-valuation date, transfer dates, and other corresponding due dates. If the plan documents and other information referred to in subsection (6) are not provided by the city to GMEBS by May 16, 2007, (or June 27, 2007, in the case of revised documents) or if GMEBS determines and notifies the city on or before June 29, 2007 that the documents and information supplied by the city pursuant to subsection (6) are not sufficient to permit transfer of assets, then the June 30, 2007, effective date for termination and valuation of assets referred to in subsections (1) and (5) above will be deferred until July 31, 2007, and all references to June 30, 2007, in this section will be considered changed to July 31, 2007, notwithstanding any other provision of this section to the contrary. In such event, the July 1, 2007, initial transfer date referred to in subsection (6) will be deferred until on or after August 1, 2007, and all other references to July 1, 2007 in this section will be considered changed to August 1, 2007. All other corresponding action dates or due dates referred to in this section will be deferred by one month. If the termination date and other applicable due dates are deferred by one month by operation of this section, but the city does not furnish to GMEBS the documents and information referred to in this section by July 15, 2007, or if GMEBS notifies the city on or before July 25, 2007, that such documents or information are insufficient to permit transfer of assets, then the effective date of termination and valuation of assets will be deferred again until the last day of the month in which GMEBS reasonably determines and provides notice to the city that it has received all documents and information from the city necessary to permit the transfer of assets. In such case, the initial transfer date and other corresponding action dates or due dates will also be deferred accordingly, so that the time intervals between the deferred termination date and the deferred action or due dates will be the same as those reflected in this section. 
(12)  Termination of trust agreement; restated plan liability. Upon completion of the transfer of assets referred to in subsection (6), the GMEBS board of trustees shall have no further fiduciary responsibility for investment of the city's trust fund assets or payment of liabilities, except as provided in sections (7) and (8) above, and the city's participation under the GMEBS Trust Agreement shall be considered terminated. 
(13)  a.  [Severability.] It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this section are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be fully valid, enforceable and constitutional. 
b.  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor or council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section is mutually dependent upon any other section paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this section. 
c.  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this section shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of the section and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of the section shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(14)  [Penalties.] Penalties, where applicable, provided for violations of this Ordinance are set out in section 1-1-8 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Hapeville, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2007-10, §§ 1-14; Ord. No. 2007-10-A, §§ 1-14, 7-17-2007) 
TIMEKEEPING; PAYROLL; SEPARATION 
§ 401. - Timekeeping. 
    Accurately recording time worked is the responsibility of every nonexempt employee. Federal and state laws require the city to keep an accurate record of time worked in order to calculate employee pay and benefits. Time worked is all the time actually spent on the job performing assigned duties. 
    The city does not intend to indicate that dedication to your job is not appreciated. However, federal overtime laws mandate that overtime must be paid, thus having an impact on budget projections. As a consequence, it is important that you comply with these rules. 
    Nonexempt employees should accurately record the time they begin and end their work, as well as the beginning and ending time of each meal period. They should also record the beginning and ending time of any split shift or departure from work for personal reasons. 
    Overtime work must always be approved before it is performed. Failure to receive authorization to work overtime may result in disciplinary action. Overtime for certain situations may be preapproved by your supervisor. 
    Altering, falsifying, tampering with time records, or recording time on another employee's time record may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
    Except for police employees, who shall follow the instructions of the shift commander, nonexempt employees should not report to work prior to their scheduled starting time nor stay after their scheduled stop time without expressed, prior authorization from their supervisor. 
§ 402. - Paydays. 
    All employees are paid weekly and biweekly, depending on employment status. 
    In the event that a regularly scheduled payday falls on a day off (e.g., a weekend or holiday), employees will normally receive pay on the last day of work before the regularly scheduled payday. 
§ 403. - Employment termination. 
    Termination of employment is an inevitable part of personnel activity within any organization, and many of the reasons for termination are routine. Below are examples of some of the most common circumstances under which employment is terminated: 
    Discharge: Employment termination initiated by the city. 
    Layoff: Involuntary employment termination initiated by the city for nondisciplinary reasons. 
    Medical termination: Employment termination initiated by the employee or by the city when an employee is unable, for health reasons, to continue to work. 
    Resignation: Employee termination initiated by an employee who chooses to leave the city voluntarily. 
    Retirement: Voluntary retirement from active employment status initiated by the employee. 
    The city will generally schedule pretermination interviews preceding or on the same day as employment termination. The interview will afford an opportunity for the employee and department head or other supervisor to discuss such issues as: reason for termination, if any; employee defenses or reasons for employee conduct; employee factors in mitigation; employee benefits; benefit conversion privileges; repayment of outstanding debts to the city; and/or return of city-owned property as may be relevant. Suggestions, complaints, and questions can also be voiced. Further, COBRA and the continuation of other benefits postseparation shall be discussed at a postseparation exit interview in accordance with § 711. 
(Ord. No. 2002-02, § 1, 2-5-2002) 
§ 404. - Severance pay. 
    The city does not grant severance pay to employees whose employment is terminated. However, the city reserves the right to make exceptions to this policy in its sole and absolute discretion. 
§ 405. - Pay advances. 
    Neither pay advances nor extensions of credit on unearned wages can be provided to employees. If a regular payday falls during an employee's vacation, the employee's paycheck will be available upon his or her return from vacation. 
§ 406. - Administrative pay corrections. 
    The city takes all reasonable steps to ensure that employees receive the correct amount of pay in each paycheck and that employees are paid promptly on the scheduled payday. 
    In the unlikely event that there is an error in the amount of pay, the employee should promptly bring the discrepancy to the attention of the city so that corrections can be made as quickly as possible. 
    Once underpayments are identified, they will be corrected as soon as possible, but usually no later than the next regular paycheck. 
    Overpayments will also normally be corrected in the next regular paycheck unless this presents a burden to the employee (where there is a substantial amount owed). In that case, the city will attempt to arrange a schedule of repayments with the employee to minimize the inconvenience to all involved. 
§ 407. - Pay deductions and setoffs. 
    The law requires that the city make certain deductions from every employee's compensation. Among these are applicable federal, state, and local income taxes. 
    Pay setoffs are pay deductions taken by the city, usually to help pay off a debt or obligation to the city or others. 
    If you have questions concerning why deductions were made from your pay check or how they were calculated, your supervisor can assist in having your questions answered. 
WORK CONDITIONS AND HOURS 
§ 501. - Safety. 
    To provide a safe and healthful work environment for employees, customers, and visitors, the city has established a workplace safety program. This program is a top priority for the city. The personnel director has responsibility for implementing, administering, monitoring, and evaluating the safety program. Its success depends on the alertness and personal commitment of all. 
    The city provides information to employees about workplace safety and health issues through regular internal communication channels such as supervisor-employee meetings, bulletin board postings, memos, or other written communications. 
    Employees and supervisors receive periodic workplace safety training. The training covers potential safety and health hazards and safe work practices and procedures to eliminate or minimize hazards. 
    Some of the best safety improvement ideas come from employees. Those with ideas, concerns, or suggestions for improved safety in the workplace are encouraged to raise them with their supervisor, or with another supervisor or manager, or bring them to the attention of the personnel director. Reports and concerns about workplace safety issues may be made anonymously if the employee wishes. All reports can be made without fear of reprisal. 
    Each employee is expected to obey safety rules and to exercise caution in all work activities. Employees must immediately report any unsafe condition to the appropriate supervisor. Employees who violate safety standards, who cause hazardous or dangerous situations, or who fail to report or, where appropriate, remedy such situations, may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
    In the case of accidents that result in injury, regardless of how insignificant the injury may appear, employees must immediately notify the personnel director or the appropriate supervisor. Such reports are necessary to comply with laws and initiate insurance and workers' compensation benefits procedures. 
§ 502. - Work schedules. 
    Work schedules for employees vary throughout our organization. Supervisors will advise employees of their individual work schedules. Staffing needs and operational demands may necessitate variations in starting and ending times, as well as variations in the total hours that may be scheduled each day and week. 
§ 503. - Use of phone and mail systems. 
    Personal use of telephones for outgoing calls, including local calls, should be kept to an absolute minimum, but in no event more than three minutes per call. No employee may incur toll or other charges on city phones for personal business. Employees shall be required to reimburse the city for any charges resulting from their personal use of the telephone. 
    The mail system is reserved for business purposes only. Employees should refrain from sending or receiving personal mail at the workplace. 
    To ensure effective telephone communications, employees should always use the approved greeting and speak in a courteous and professional manner. Please confirm information received from the caller, and hang up only after the caller has done so. 
§ 504. - Rest and meal periods. 
    All full-time employees except police, fire and emergency service employees are provided with one (1) meal period each workday. Supervisors will schedule meal periods to accommodate operating requirements. Employees will be relieved of all active responsibilities and restrictions during meal periods and will not be compensated for that time. 
§ 505. - Overtime. 
    When operating requirements or other needs cannot be met during regular working hours, employees may be scheduled to work overtime hours. When possible, advance notification of these mandatory assignments will be provided. All overtime work must receive the supervisor's prior authorization. Department heads may preapprove situations in which overtime may be required. Overtime assignments will be distributed as equitably as practical to all employees qualified to perform the required work. 
    Overtime compensation is paid to all nonexempt employees in accordance with federal and state wage and hour restrictions. As required by law, overtime pay is based on actual hours worked. Time off on sick leave, vacation leave, or any leave of absence will not be considered hours worked for purposes of performing overtime calculations. 
    Failure to work scheduled overtime or overtime worked without prior authorization from the supervisor may result in disciplinary action, up to and including possible termination of employment. 
§ 506. - Use of equipment and vehicles. 
    Equipment and vehicles essential in accomplishing job duties are expensive and may be difficult to replace. When using property, employees are expected to exercise care, perform required maintenance, and follow all operating instructions, safety standards, and guidelines. 
    Please notify the supervisor if any equipment, machines, tools, or vehicles appear to be damaged, defective, or in need of repair. Prompt reporting of damages, defects, and the need for repairs could prevent deterioration of equipment and possible injury to employees or others. The supervisor can answer any questions about an employee's responsibility for maintenance and care of equipment or vehicles used on the job. The improper, careless, negligent, destructive, or unsafe use or operation of city equipment or vehicles, as well as excessive or avoidable traffic and parking violations on city time, can result In disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
§ 507. - Emergency closings. 
    At times, emergencies such as severe weather, fires, power failures, or earthquakes, can disrupt city operations. In extreme cases, these circumstances may require the closing of a work facility. In the event that such an emergency occurs during nonworking hours, local radio and/or television stations will be asked to broadcast notification of the closing. If you are unclear about the status of your duty requirements, call city hall or the police department. 
    When operations are officially closed due to emergency conditions, the time off from scheduled work will be paid. Employees in essential operations may be asked to work on a day when operations are officially closed. In these circumstances, employees who work will receive regular pay. 
§ 508. - Business travel expenses. 
    The city will reimburse employees for reasonable business travel expenses incurred while on assignments away from the normal work location. All business travel must be approved in advance by the department head. 
    Employees whose travel plans have been approved should make all travel arrangements through the administration department. 
    When approved, the actual costs of travel, meals, lodging, and other expenses directly related to accomplishing business travel objectives will be reimbursed by the city. Employees are expected to limit expenses to reasonable amounts. 
    Any employee who is involved in an accident while traveling on business must promptly report the incident to the immediate supervisor. Vehicles owned, leased, or rented by the city may not be used for personal use without prior approval. 
    With prior approval, employees on business travel may be accompanied by a family member or friend, when the presence of a companion will not interfere with successful completion of business objectives. Generally, employees are also permitted to combine personal travel with business travel, as long as time away from work is approved. Additional expenses arising from such nonbusiness travel are the responsibility of the employee. 
    When travel is completed, employees should submit completed travel expense reports within ten (10) days. Reports should be accompanied by receipts for all individual expenses. 
    Employees should contact their supervisor for guidance and assistance on procedures related to travel arrangements, expense reports, reimbursement for specific expenses, or any other business travel issues. 
    Abuse of this business travel expenses policy, including falsifying expense reports to reflect costs not incurred by the employee, can be grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
§ 509. - Duties concerning litigation. 
    Many times during your employment you may have occasion to be involved, personally or tangentially, in litigation or other judicial proceedings. You have the following responsibilities: 
(1)  Any employee who receives a notice that he is being sued or subpoenaed for any issue that does or may relate to his city responsibilities must be reported immediately to the city administrator, who shall also be given a copy of any documents received. 
(2)  Employees, as a function of their job responsibilities, shall cooperate fully with any investigation conducted by the city or by its agents or lawyers. 
(3)  No employee shall make any statement to any adverse party, investigator, or agent concerning any matter in which the employee knows, or has reasonable cause to know, involves a matter concerning pending or threatened litigation or judicial proceedings, without giving notice to and receiving the approval of the city administrator. 
LEAVES OF ABSENCE 
§ 601. - Family and medical leave. 
    Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Eligible employee: An employee who has been employed by the city for twelve (12) months on a full-time basis. A "full-time" employee is determined to be one who has worked at least one thousand two hundred and fifty (1,250) hours during the preceding twelve-month period. 
(2)  Serious health condition: Any illness, injury, or physical or mental condition that involves inpatient care at a hospital or hospital facility or requires continuing treatment by a health care provider. 
(3)  Child: A son or daughter, whether a biological child, adopted child, foster child, stepchild or legal ward who is under eighteen (18) years old or who is over the age of eighteen (18) years but is unable to care for himself or herself due to a disability. 
    General provisions. 
    During a twelve-month period, each eligible employee shall be entitled to a maximum of twelve (12) weeks of unpaid leave due to the birth or adoption of a child or due to the serious health condition of the employee, employee's spouse, child or parent. For leave taken due to the illness of the employee, employee's spouse, child, or parent, the twelve-month period during which leave must be taken shall be measured forward from the date such leave is first taken. For leave taken due to the birth or placement of a child, the twelve-month period shall be measured forward from the date such child is born or placed. When a husband and wife are both eligible employees of the city, their right to leave shall be limited to an aggregate of twelve (12) weeks for leave taken due to the birth or placement of a child or the illness of a parent. Otherwise, their permissible leave shall remain unaltered. 
    The employee shall provide the personnel director with notice of the leave at least thirty (30) days in advance, unless medical necessity does not permit such a notice period. The employee shall be required to provide the personnel director with documentation from his or her health care provider to support the leave request. Leave granted without the thirty (30) days' advance notice shall be at the sole discretion of the personnel director. 
    Health insurance premiums shall be paid by the city during this absence. 
    For the birth or placement of a child, an eligible employee will be required to exhaust any accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave, other family leave or holiday leave that the employee is entitled to under the ordinances of the city prior to taking this leave without pay. For leave due to a serious health condition, an eligible employee will be required to exhaust any accrued paid vacation leave, personal leave, holiday leave or sick leave that the employee is entitled to under the ordinances of the city prior to taking this leave without pay. The aggregate of all leave, including leave without pay, shall not exceed twelve (12) weeks per year. In addition, any eligible employee who takes such medical or family leave without pay shall not be entitled to the accrual of any other leave. 
    If an employee does not return to work after the employee has taken medical or family leave without pay, the employee shall be required to reimburse the city for all health insurance premiums and costs incurred by the city during the time that the employee took the leave without pay. The only time in which an employee who does not return to work after leave is taken shall not be required to reimburse the city for health insurance premiums and costs will be when the failure to return is due to the continuation, recurrence or onset of a serious health condition or other such reason beyond the employee's control. 
    Intermittent leave. The city shall permit intermittent leave without pay for medical or family purposes only in situations of medical necessity. The employee must submit an application to the personnel director and such application must be supported by documentation from the employee's health care provider as to the medical necessity for such intermittent leave and the expected duration of the leave. When such leave is taken due to a serious health condition, the city reserves the right to move the employee to an alternative position with equivalent pay and benefits when the alternative position is more accommodating to the intermittent leave schedule. At no time shall the aggregate of intermittent leave time exceed twelve (12) weeks during a twelve-month period. 
    Certification. For leave due to a serious health condition, the city reserves the right to require periodic certification from the health care provider for continuation of authorized leave and further reserves the right to require additional independent medical examinations by a physician designated by the city for the purpose of determining continuing eligibility for such leave. 
    Reinstatement. All employees taking leave within the guidelines of this section shall be eligible to be reinstated to their position of employment upon their return except if an employee is among the highest paid ten (10) percent of the city's workforce and reinstatement would cause the city substantial and grievous economic injury and the city notifies the employee at the time this determination is made and, after receiving such notice, the employee elects not to return to work and remains on leave status. 
§ 602. - Personal leave. 
    The city may provide leaves of absence without pay to eligible employees who wish to take time off from work duties to fulfill personal obligations. Employees in the following employment classifications are eligible to request personal leave as described in this policy: 
Department heads 
Regular full-time employees 
    As soon as eligible employees become aware of the need for a personal leave of absence, they should request a leave from their supervisor. 
    Personal leave may be granted for a period of up to one hundred eighty (180) calendar days every one (1) year. If this initial period of absence proves insufficient, consideration will be given to a written request for a single extension of no more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. With the supervisor's approval, an employee may take any available sick leave or vacation leave as part of the approved period of leave. 
    Requests for personal leave will be evaluated based upon many factors, including anticipated workload requirements and staffing considerations during the proposed period of absence. 
    Subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of the applicable plans, health insurance benefits will be provided by the city until the end of the month in which the approved personal leave begins. At that time, employees will become responsible for the full costs of these benefits if they wish coverage to continue. When the employee returns from personal leave, benefits will again be provided by the city according to the applicable plans. 
    Benefit accruals, such as vacation, sick leave, or holiday benefits, will be suspended during the leave and will resume upon return to active employment. 
    When a personal leave ends, every reasonable effort will be made to return the employee to the same position, if it is available, or to a similar available position for which the employee is qualified. However, the city cannot guarantee reinstatement in all cases. 
    If an employee fails to report to work promptly at the expiration of the approved leave period, the city will assume the employee has resigned. 
§ 603. - Educational leave. 
    The city may provide educational leaves of absence without pay to eligible employees who wish to take time off from work duties to pursue course work that is applicable to their job duties with the city. Employees in the following employment classifications are eligible to request educational leave as described in this policy: 
Department heads 
Regular full-time employees 
    Eligible employees may request educational leave for a period of up to one hundred eighty (180) calendar days every one (1) year. If this initial period of absence proves insufficient, consideration will be given to a written request for a single extension of no more than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days. 
    Requests will be evaluated based on many factors, including anticipated workload requirements and staffing considerations during the proposed period of absence. 
    Subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations of the applicable plans, health insurance benefits will be provided by the city until the end of the month in which the approved educational leave begins. At that time, employees will become responsible for the full costs of these benefits if they wish coverage to continue. 
    When the employee returns from educational leave, benefits will again be provided by the city according to the applicable plans. 
    Benefit accruals, such as vacation, sick leave, or holiday benefits, will be suspended during the leave and will resume upon return to active employment. 
    When an educational leave ends, every reasonable effort will be made to return the employee to the same position, if it is available, or to a similar available position for which the employee is qualified. However, the city cannot guarantee reinstatement in all cases. 
    If an employee fails to report to work at the end of the approved leave period, the city will assume that the employee has resigned. 
§ 604. - Reserved. 
§ 605. - Military leave. 
    A military leave will be granted as required by law to employees, except those occupying temporary positions, to attend scheduled drills or training or if called to active duty with the U.S. Armed Services. 
    The leave will be unpaid, except as required by law. However, employees may use any available paid time off for the absence. Benefit accruals, such as vacation, sick leave, or holiday benefits, will be suspended during the leave and will resume upon the employee's return to active employment. 
    Employees on two-week active duty training assignments or inactive duty training drills are required to return to work for the first regularly scheduled shift after the end of training, allowing reasonable travel time. Employees on longer military leave must apply for reemployment in accordance with all applicable state and federal laws. 
    Every reasonable effort will be made to return eligible employees to their previous position or a comparable one. They will be treated as though they were continuously employed for purposes of determining benefits based on length of service, such as the rate of vacation accrual and job seniority rights. 
EMPLOYEE CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINARY ACTION 
§ 701. - Employee conduct and work rules. 
    To ensure orderly operations and provide the best possible work environment, the city expects employees to follow rules of conduct that will protect the interests and safety of all employees and the organization. 
    It is not possible to list all the forms of behavior that are considered unacceptable in the workplace. The use of common sense and good judgment is very important. 
    The following, while not an exhaustive list, are examples of infractions of rules of conduct that may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment: 
Theft or inappropriate removal or possession of property 
Falsification of records 
Working under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs 
Possession, distribution, sale, transfer, or use of alcohol or illegal drugs in the workplace, while on duty, or while operating employer-owned vehicles or equipment 
Fighting or threatening violence in the workplace, boisterous or disruptive activity in the workplace 
Negligence or improper conduct leading to damage of city-owned or other property 
Insubordination or other disrespectful conduct 
Violation of safety or health rules 
Smoking in prohibited areas 
Sexual or other unlawful harassment 
Possession of dangerous or unauthorized materials, such as explosives or firearms, in the workplace 
Abuse of sick leave 
Excessive absenteeism or any absence without notice (excessive absenteeism can exist even if sick leave is available) 
Unauthorized absence from workstation during the workday 
Unauthorized use of telephones, mail system, or other employer-owned equipment 
Unauthorized disclosure of confidential information 
Violation of standards set by personnel policies 
Unsatisfactory performance or conduct 
§ 702. - Drug and alcohol use. 
    It is the city's desire to provide a drug-free, healthful, and safe workplace. To promote this goal, employees are required to report to work in appropriate mental and physical condition to perform their jobs in a satisfactory manner. 
    While on the city premises and while conducting business-related activities off the city premises, no employee may use, possess, distribute, sell, or be under the influence of alcohol or engage in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensation, possession, or use of illegal drugs. Violations of this policy may lead to disciplinary action, up to and including immediate termination of employment, and/or required participation in a substance abuse rehabilitation or treatment program. Such violations may also have legal consequences. 
    The legal use of prescribed drugs is permitted on the job only if it does not impair an employee's ability to perform the essential functions of the job effectively and in a safe manner that does not endanger other individuals in the workplace. 
    Employees with questions or concerns about substance dependency or abuse are encouraged to discuss these matters with their supervisor or the personnel director to receive assistance or referrals to appropriate resources in the community. 
    The mayor and council may from time to time adopt a substance abuse and drug alcohol testing policy which you will be expected to abide by. Employees with drug or alcohol problems that have not resulted in, and are not the immediate subject of, disciplinary action may request approval to take unpaid time off to participate in a rehabilitation or treatment program. Leave may be granted if the employee agrees to abstain from use of the problem substance; abides by all the city policies, rules, and prohibitions relating to conduct in the workplace; and if granting the leave will not cause the city any undue hardship. 
    Under the Drug-Free Work Place Act, an employee who performs work for a government contract or grant must notify the city of a criminal conviction for drug-related activity occurring in the workplace. The report must be made within five (5) days of the conviction. 
    Employees with questions on this policy or issues related to drug or alcohol use in the workplace should raise their concerns with their supervisor or the personnel director without fear of reprisal. 
§ 703. - Drug testing. 
    The city is committed to providing a safe, efficient, and productive work environment for all employees. In keeping with this commitment, employees and certain job applicants may be asked to provide body substance samples (e.g., blood, urine) to determine the illicit use of drugs. The city will attempt to protect the confidentiality of all drug test results. Drug tests may be conducted in any of the following situations: 
Fitness-for-duty: This test may be required if significant and observable changes in employee performance, appearance, behavior, speech, etc., provide reasonable suspicion of the influence of drugs. A fitness-for-duty evaluation may include the testing of a body substance sample. 
Post-accident: Any current employee who is involved in a serious incident or accident while on duty, whether on or off the employer's premises, may be asked to provide a body substance sample. 
Preemployment: As a prequalification to assuming any position, prospective employees are required to provide a body substance sample for drug testing. This occurs in connection with the preemployment medical examination. 
Random: This test may be required of employees in safety sensitive areas. 
    Subject to any limitations imposed by law, a refusal to provide a body substance sample under the conditions described above may result in disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
    In cases where a positive drug test is confirmed, consideration will be given to available rehabilitation where appropriate. 
    An employee who tests positive and who successfully completes rehabilitation will be subject to unscheduled testing following reinstatement. 
    Questions concerning this policy or its administration should be directed to the personnel director. 
§ 704. - Sexual and other unlawful harassment. 
    The city is committed to providing a work environment that is free of discrimination and unlawful harassment. Actions, words, jokes, or comments based on an individual's sex, race, ethnicity, age, religion, or any other legally protected characteristic will not be tolerated. Sexual and other unwanted harassment (both overt and subtle) is a form of employee misconduct that is demeaning to another person, undermines the integrity of the employment relationship, and is strictly prohibited. 
    Any employee who wants to report an incident of sexual or other unwanted harassment should promptly report the matter to his or her supervisor. If the supervisor is unavailable or the employee believes it would be inappropriate to contact that person, the employee should immediately contact the personnel director. Employees can raise concerns and make reports without fear of reprisal. 
    Any supervisor or manager who becomes aware of possible sexual or other unlawful harassment should promptly advise the personnel director, who will handle the matter in a timely and confidential manner. 
    Anyone engaging in sexual or other unlawful harassment will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
§ 705. - Attendance and punctuality. 
    To maintain a safe and productive work environment, the city expects employees to be reliable and to be punctual in reporting for scheduled work. Absenteeism and tardiness place a burden on other employees and on the city. In the rare instances when employees cannot avoid being late to work or are unable to work as scheduled, they should notify their supervisor as soon as possible in advance of the anticipated tardiness or absence. 
    Poor attendance and excessive tardiness are disruptive. Either may lead to disciplinary action, up to and including termination of employment. 
§ 706. - Personal appearance. 
(1)  Public purpose. The City of Hapeville, Georgia, is a public employer providing public services that are often dangerous, require a presence on private property, and generally required to be fully open and accessible to the public. As such an entity, the city has a reasonable and legitimate public purpose in requiring personal appearance standards including clear guidelines for appropriate and safe attire. The governmental interest in protecting and improving the city's good name, reputation and public image by providing a dress code is a necessary means to promote the normal and effective operation of the business of the city. A reasonable dress code allows easy identification of City of Hapeville employees in the field, preventing imposters and trespassers from harming the public or city staff in the conduct of city duties, preventing distractions from work and preventing negative impact on employee relations between employees. 
(2)  General standard. Dress, grooming, and personal cleanliness standards contribute to the morale of all employees and affect the business image the city presents to customers and visitors. During business hours, employees are expected to present a clean and neat appearance and to wear appropriate attire according to the requirements of their positions as defined further herein. 
(3)  Uniforms generally. Appropriate attire shall include the use and proper care and maintenance of uniforms issued to employees. Whenever a uniform is provided by the city to an employee for use at work, the employee shall wear the uniform for their position during work hours. Office workers may wear uniforms or appropriate office attire as described herein below. Uniforms must not be visibly soiled, torn, ripped, worn through or frayed. If these conditions occur in/on the uniform, such conditions should be reported to the proper departmental official so that repair or replacement of the uniform can be scheduled. Shirts and blouses will be tucked in except where the shirt or blouse is specifically designed to be worn outside of and is incapable of being tucked into pants, skirts or other clothing. 
    Individual departments may provide additional uniform requirements in their internal policies and standard operating procedures. Such standards and operating procedures now existing or which may hereafter be adopted which are not inconsistent with the policies stated herein shall be and are fully incorporated as if they were set out fully herein. 
    Consult your supervisor or department head if you have questions about specific departmental uniform guidelines. 
(4)  Departmental standards. In accordance with this policy, departments may have specific requirements which you must follow. Future reorganization in department structures or divisions in departments shall not affect or repeal the requirements or applicability of this policy unless specifically repealed by ordinance. 
(a)  Police department. Uniform and other on-duty personal appearance standards applicable to law enforcement officials and police department office personnel may be found in the City of Hapeville Police Department Standard Operation Procedure Manual (SOP) specifically, Chapter 7 Uniform and Dress Code. The SOP is incorporated here by reference as to dress requirements only. Where the SOP does not otherwise specify a standard of appearance, then the general regulations herein apply. Where the SOP conflicts with this policy, the policy shall take precedence. 
(b)  Fire department. Uniforms and other on-duty personal appearance standards applicable to fire department officials and fire department office personnel may be found in the City of Hapeville Fire Department Policy and Procedures Manual (Manual), specifically the Personnel Appearance section. The manual is incorporated here by reference as to dress requirements only. Where the manual does not otherwise specify a standard of appearance, then the general regulations herein apply. Office staff which is not assigned field duties shall wear appropriate office attire as designated herein. Uniform tee shirts may be worn on occasions or for events designated by the fire chief where such occasion or event would involve field or manual work. Where the manual conflicts with this policy, the policy shall take precedence. 
(c)  Department of community service. The following departmental divisions shall wear uniforms issued by the city. Regulations governing uniforms shall be found in subsection (3) above: Persons who are designated as office staff shall wear appropriate attire as described in subsection (8) of these policies other specific guidelines are included below as item 7.: 
1.  Fleet maintenance. 
2.  Planning, zoning and building inspections. 
3.  Planning and construction. 
4.  Streets and sanitation. 
5.  Water and sewerage. 
6.  Parks, buildings, and grounds. 
7.  In each of the department of community service divisions there may be employees designated as field personnel. Field personnel include staff members who spend the majority of each workday in field activity as opposed to an office environment. Field personnel shall be allowed to wear uniform shirts assigned to them by the city, denim pants (jeans) and chino-type pants, boots and tennis shoes shall be considered appropriate footwear for field personnel. 
(d)  Recreation department. This department shall wear uniforms issued by the city. Regulations governing uniforms shall be found in subsection (3) above. Persons who are designated as office staff shall wear appropriate attire as described in subsection (8) of these policies. However, the recreation department field staff is expected to wear uniform clothing designed for physical, recreational activity and events. Thus, official city golf shirts, official city tee shirts, baseball style caps (for field use only), uniform shorts of a length specified by the department head and tennis or sports shoes and specific recreational event uniforms, are considered appropriate attire for field use. Specific guidelines are included in the City of Hapeville Recreation Department Policy and Procedures Manual (Recreation Manual), Chapter IV which is incorporated here by reference as to dress requirements only. Where the Recreation Manual conflicts with this policy, the policy shall take precedence. 
(5)  Hats and headgear. Employees may be assigned uniform hats or safety headgear or other headgear. Personal hats or headgear may be worn during work hours other than headgear assigned to the employee by the city where such hats or headgear are clean and maintained in a safe condition and do not include decals, stickers, badges, pins, print, or other accoutrements except those described in subsection (7), and allowed by the employee's department. Assigned hats and headgear should be clean, maintained in a safe condition, and should not include decals, stickers, badges, pins or other accoutrements except those described in subsection (7) and allowed by the employees' department. 
(6)  Safety clothing and equipment. Employees may be assigned official safety clothing or equipment such as but not limited to: work boots, hard hats, goggles, ear protection, lifting belts, bulletproof vests, helmets, gloves, fire retardant clothes, breathing apparatus or other equipment. The employee is responsible to inspect the condition of their safety clothing and equipment each workday before use of the equipment. Employees should report any wear, breakage, frays, rips, tears, holes or damage to safety clothes and equipment before use or immediately after damage occurs to the safety clothes or equipment to the appropriate departmental official. 
(7)  Pins, badges and accoutrements. Acceptable pins, badges, and accoutrements to be worn on uniforms include but are not limited to: years in service pins, badges awarded for official work related activities such as EMT badges on police uniforms and official city logo pins. 
(8)  Appropriate office attire. 
(a)  Office staff may wear uniforms assigned to them by the city. Uniforms will be deemed to include any official shirt excluding tee shirts that bear the City of Hapeville and/or the employees' department logo worn with pants, slacks, skirts or dresses described further below. 
(b)  Female office personnel: Appropriate attire includes: Dresses, pant suits, dress slacks, dress pants, chino-type pants, dress blouses (long or short sleeve), stirrup pants made of dress material (not thin material), skirts (the length of which shall be no higher than 2" above the middle of the wearer's knee cap when standing), sweaters, vests, dress jackets, and blazers. Shoes should be: high or low heels, dress flats, dress sandals (high heel), sandals with stockings, women's lightweight boots, or dress pumps. Should you have a particular question concerning specific apparel, you should ask your supervisor. Women should also wear stockings or socks with the above listed footwear. (Visible bare feet inside of shoes are not considered acceptable attire.) 
    Inappropriate/unacceptable attire includes: Shorts, jeans (no denim material of any kind including denim dresses, coveralls, or jumpers (an exception to this rule will be uniforms with city logos made of denim in use before the adoption of this policy such as denim uniforms, shirts)), halters (low cut or midriff), tee shirts with slogans or writing of any kind, see-through blouses, tube tops or tight fitting knit clothes, pullover jerseys, sweats, jogging suits, or leisure type wear that is designed for beach, fitness clubs or other outdoor functions. No tennis shoes, flip-flops or related recreational footwear. Shirts and blouses will be tucked in except where the shirt or blouse is specifically designed to be worn outside of and is incapable of being tucked into pants, skirts or other clothing. 
(c)  Male office personnel: Appropriate attire includes: Suits (optional), dress shirt (long or short sleeve), polo shirt or golf shirt with collar, dress slacks, trousers, or dress dockers, dress jacket (optional). Shoes must be worn with socks. Shoes include: dress loafers, dress lace-up, or other slip-on type shoes. 
    Men should be well-groomed, clean-shaven (trimmed moustache or beard are acceptable for non-law enforcement personnel while law enforcement personnel on special assignment will not be required to follow these regulations). 
    Inappropriate/unacceptable attire includes: Tennis shoes (such as: jogging, running shoes, high tops or low tops), sandals, no jeans (see the exception set out in subsection (8)(b) above), sweats, spandex, fatigues (except as designated as police, fire, and public works uniforms) or tight fitting stretch pants, tee shirts with slogans or writing of any kind, pullover jerseys, or any leisure type wear designed for beach, fitness club or other outdoor functions excluding collared polo and/or golf shirts. Men are not allowed to wear dresses, skirts or other clothing typically considered in the clothing industry as female clothing. Shirts and blouses will be tucked in except where the shirt or blouse is specifically designed to be worn outside of and is incapable of being tucked into pants, skirts or other clothing. 
(9)  Exceptions and special equipment. 
(a)  Medical exceptions. Prescribed medical devices and clothing may be worn as needed by employees. Employees will be required to notify their supervisors of their need for a medical exception to the standards provided herein. Employees may be required to provide evidence of medical necessity for an exception. 
(b)  Special occasions and events. Upon supervisor approval, for special projects specified or events, employees may be given the option to dress differently than the normally required dress code. 
(c)  Special equipment. Upon supervisor approval, for special projects specified, employers may be given the option to dress differently or use special equipment (such as using snake proof boots, walking boots, tennis shoes, industrial strength rubber gloves, etc.) than that normally required by the dress code. 
(d)  Casual day. Departments may designate one (1) day during an ordinary business week as a casual day where employees may wear denim pants, casual shoes, shirts with collars and tennis shoes. The other rules set out herein shall continue to apply and no employee shall dress more casually than as set forth herein. This exception shall not apply to personnel who routinely wear designated uniforms. 
(10)  Failure to adhere to policy. 
(a)  Employees who appear for work inappropriately dressed will be sent home and directed to return to work in proper attire. 
(b)  If an employee appears for work inappropriately dressed on a second occasion, the employee shall be subject to discipline under § 701 of this Handbook. 
(11)  Questions regarding proper attire. Consult your supervisor or department head if you have questions about what is appropriate attire. The director of finance and administration is designated with authority, applying the standards established herein, to determine appropriate attire if so required by an employee's supervisor or department head or in contravention of the supervisor's or department head's ruling, if necessary. 
(Ord. No. 2000-16, § 1, 6-6-2000) 
§ 707. - Return of property. 
    Employees are responsible for all property, materials, or written information issued to them or in their possession or control. Employees must return all the city property immediately upon request or upon termination of employment. Where permitted by applicable laws, the city may withhold from the employee's check or final paycheck the cost of any items that are not returned when required. The city may also take all action deemed appropriate to recover or protect its property. 
§ 708. - Resignation. 
    Resignation is a voluntary act initiated by the employee to terminate employment with the city. The city requests at least two (2) weeks' written resignation notice from all employees. Failure to give notice may affect your reemployment status. 
    Prior to an employee's departure, an exit interview will be scheduled to discuss the reasons for resignation and the effect of the resignation on benefits. 
    If an employee does not provide advance notice as requested, the employee will be considered ineligible for rehire. 
    Any employee who without valid reason fails to report to work for three (3) consecutive workdays without authorized leave shall be separated from the payroll and reported as a voluntary resignation. 
§ 709. - Security inspections. 
    The city wishes to maintain a work environment that is free of illegal drugs, alcohol, firearms, explosives, or other improper materials. To this end, the city prohibits the possession, transfer, sale, or use of such materials on its premises, except as may be allowed or required for public safety employees. The city requires the cooperation of all employees in administering this policy. 
    Desks, lockers, and other storage devices may be provided for the convenience of employees but remain the sole property of and under the sole control of the city. Accordingly, they, as well as any articles found within them, can be inspected by your immediate supervisor at any time. Reasonable attempts to notify you of such an inspection and allow you to attend shall be made by the inspecting agent. Elected officials shall not participate in such inspections. The routine practice of looking for office materials, files, supplies, etc., made during the normal course of affairs, shall not be considered an "inspection," and all employees should understand that contraband that may be found under such circumstances may be noted and acted upon. 
§ 710. - Solicitation. 
    To ensure a productive and harmonious work environment, persons not employed by the city may not solicit or distribute literature or merchandise in the workplace at any time for any purpose. 
    The city recognizes that employees may have interests in events and organizations outside the workplace. However, employees may not solicit or distribute literature or merchandise concerning these activities during working time without the permission of the department head of the employee. (Working time does not include lunch periods, work breaks, or any other periods in which employees are not on duty.) The department head should only authorize solicitation for charitable or nonprofit causes. 
    In addition, the posting of written solicitations on city bulletin boards is prohibited. Bulletin boards are reserved for official organization communications on such items as: 
Affirmative action statement 
Employee announcements 
Internal memoranda 
Job openings 
Organization announcements 
Payday notice 
Workers' compensation insurance information 
State disability insurance/unemployment insurance information 
§ 711. - Exit interview. 
    All employees being separated from the city service shall be required to have an exit interview with the personnel director, a report of which shall be made to the city administrator. 
§ 712. - Political activity. 
    Employees of the city are encouraged to exercise their right to vote, but no employee shall make use of city time or equipment to aid a political candidate, political party or political cause, or use a city position to persuade, coerce, or intimidate any person in the interest of a political candidate, political party, or political cause. 
§ 713. - Internet use policy. 
(a)  Statement of purpose of internet use policy. The internet is a worldwide network of computer systems connecting educational institutions, government agencies, businesses, industries, individuals, and other entities. Millions of people use the internet to communicate, conduct business, access information, socialize, and find entertainment. Most information available over the internet is of sound value. Unfortunately, a small portion of information available over the internet is considered questionable, offensive, pornographic, illegal, or otherwise objectionable. Additionally and as employees should be aware, certain uses of the internet may constitute improper or illegal activities including, but not limited to, sexual and other types of harassment and discriminatory conduct through use of e-mail, downloaded images, etc. Consequently and to ensure the proper use of the internet by its employees, the City of Hapeville, Georgia, adopts the following internet use policy (hereinafter referred to as the "policy"). 
(b)  Definition of "internet." For the purposes of this policy, the "internet" shall mean the city's computer network, intracity and internet electronic mail, the worldwide web, and any other information or means of communication accessed by a personal computer from a resource other than one of that computer's internal drives. 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  Employees shall not access the internet through a city computer without the written approval of their department head or the city administrator. Each employee granted such approval shall sign an internet and electronic mail use agreement and shall be assigned a personal internet account. 
(2)  Each employee using the internet will be held solely and fully responsible for any use of his or her account. Additionally, all employees shall assume full liability, legal, financial or otherwise, for their actions when accessing the internet with a city computer. 
(3)  In the event an employee uses the internet in violation of this policy and the city as a result incurs expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees, costs of litigation, and any judgment against the city, the employee shall indemnify the city for all such expenses. 
(4)  Employees shall familiarize themselves with and abide by the requirements of the policy. Any violation of any of the policy's requirements may result in disciplinary action, including but not limited to restriction or revocation of internet access privileges, or even termination of employment. 
(5)  Employees shall not, through their internet account or use of a city computer, use the internet to: 
a.  Engage in any activity prohibited by law. 
b.  Create, transfer, view, store or otherwise use any text, image, or sound recording that contains pornography, profanity, vulgarity, obscenity, or other language or images tending to offend or degrade others. 
c.  Intentionally use invasive or destructive software such as "viruses" or "worms." 
d.  Transfer, use, duplicate, or store materials in violation of copyright laws, license agreements, or intellectual property rights of others. 
e.  Access without permission another's folders, work, or files. 
f.  Interfere with the normal and proper operation of the internet. 
g.  Disturb others' use of the internet. 
h.  Deliberately harass, harm or offend others. 
i.  Store or transfer unnecessarily large files. 
_____
INTERNET AND ELECTRONIC MAIL USE AGREEMENT 
    I, _______, an employee of the City of Hapeville, do hereby affirm that I have received a copy of the City's Internet Use Policy contained in Section 713 of the City of Hapeville Employee Handbook, that I have read, understood, and familiarized myself with the terms contained therein. I acknowledge my awareness that some uses of the Internet, through e-mail, downloading images, etc., could constitute sexual harassment or other types of harassment or discriminatory conduct. 
    Further, I agree to abide by the Policy's terms when using my Internet account or any City computer, and I understand that my failure to abide by those terms could result in discipline as described in the Internet Use Policy. I also agree to reimburse the City for any expenses, including but not limited to attorney's fees, costs of litigation, and any judgment against the City, incurred by the City as a result of my use of the Internet in violation of the Internet Use Policy. 
      SIGNATURE:___________ 
      DATE:________ 
      EMPLOYEE'S NAME:___________ 
(Ord. No. 99-07, § 1, 7-6-1999) 
_____
APPEAL PROCESS 
§ 801. - Appeal of disciplinary action. 
    Any regular full-time employee who has been dismissed, suspended, demoted, or otherwise disciplined for cause, whereby he suffers any loss in salary, grade, or classification, shall have the right to appeal such action to the personnel board. This right must be exercised in writing at any time within three (3) working days from the date of his being notified of the action. The grounds for appeal to the personnel board shall be limited to those cases wherein the employee alleges a factual error or that the action was taken for personal, political or religious reasons. Department heads are not considered regular full-time employees for the purposes of appeals to the personnel board. Department heads are not eligible for personnel board appeals of employment decisions and are at-will employees who may be terminated with or without cause by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2000-09, § 2, 3-7-2000) 
§ 802. - Format. 
(1)  An appeals hearing before the personnel board is a quasijudicial proceeding. As such, it should be conducted at a place conducive to the maintenance of a judicial atmosphere. At the hearing, the conduct of the parties shall be dignified, both on and off the record. 
    Misconduct before the personnel board may be grounds for summary exclusion from the hearing. The hearing is intended to receive evidence either to refute or to substantiate specific charges which led to the appeal. It shall not be a forum for discussion of extraneous or irrelevant matters having no bearing on the charges, and the alleged misconduct of others who may have escaped discipline in the past shall serve as no defense to a charge of misconduct. All parties at action and witnesses shall be given ample time and opportunity to develop points, subject to the discretion of the personnel board. 
(2)  The personnel board, personnel director, and the attorney representing the personnel board shall not be advocates for or against either party. It shall be the duty of the personnel board to be impartial in its conduct and rulings, both on and off the record. The board may examine, call and question witnesses and may call for and introduce appropriate documentary evidence, being limited only by the relevance of the evidence to the issues. 
(3)  It should be recognized that the personnel board will be composed of private citizens. Accordingly, the board may not follow established legal procedures as might be expected in a court of law. However, in taking testimony and in considering the evidence, the personnel board shall follow accepted legal procedure insofar as is practicable. It shall not be bound by the technical rules of evidence observed in courts of law. The board may listen to hearsay testimony and may accept depositions and affidavits, if such testimony is material and relevant to the issues. 
§ 803. - Hearings. 
(1)  Each appeal shall be heard by the personnel board at the earliest practicable date following the receipt of an appeal request. 
(2)  The personnel director shall send out a written notice of the time, date and place of the hearing. This notice shall be sent to the employee appealing and/or his authorized representative and the appointing authority. 
(3)  The general policy of the personnel board concerning postponements shall be that cases set for hearings will be heard on the dates set, and that postponements will be granted only for good cause. Postponement of the opening date of a hearing shall be at the discretion of the chairman of the personnel board. 
§ 804. - Prehearing conference. 
(1)  If deemed appropriate to the circumstances of the case, either the appointing authority or the appellant may arrange a prehearing conference with the personnel director prior to the hearing in order to consider and determine the following elements: 
a.  Simplification of the issues. 
b.  Possible conciliation and settlement without a hearing. 
c.  Limitation on the number of witnesses. 
d.  Acceptance of evidence of deposition. 
e.  Stipulation as to any uncontested facts. 
f.  Other matters that may aid in the disposition of the appeal. 
(2)  An electronic recording of transactions may be made during prehearing conferences upon request of either party at interest. 
§ 805. - Witnesses. 
    The chairman of the board or the personnel board attorney shall administer the oath to witnesses. In the event that a prehearing conference has not limited the number of witnesses and the number of witnesses asked for seems to be excessive, in the discretion of the personnel board, the party requesting them may be required to justify his request before the personnel board. The board may decline to listen to numerous character witnesses or numbers of witnesses testifying to identical facts. The personnel board, through its personnel director, may subpoena witnesses, documents and records as necessary. 
§ 806. - Counsel or representation. 
    Appellants appearing before the personnel board may, if desired, be represented by legal counsel at their expense, or they may act as their own counsel and conduct their own hearings. Appointing authorities and the personnel board will be assisted by the city attorney and his staff, as requested. 
§ 807. - Transcripts. 
    A certified court reporter may, if desired, be employed by either party at interest, at their expense. 
§ 808. - Order of hearing. 
    The appointing authority shall make the initial presentation in an effort to prove that the action under appeal was taken for cause. The employee may rebut the appointing authority's allegations at the conclusion of the appointing authority's presentation and may attempt to show that the action was taken for personal, religious or political reasons or that the decision was based upon factual error. After the presentation of all evidence, the personnel board may hear closing arguments and shall then take the case under advisement and render a decision at the earliest practicable date. 
§ 809. - Board order. 
(1)  The personnel board may not weigh the sufficiency of the cause for adverse personnel action. The personnel board may reverse the decision of the appointing authority only on a finding that it was based on error of fact or was motivated by personal, religious or political reasons. Otherwise, it shall affirm the decision. 
(2)  If the personnel board finds in favor of the employee, he shall be reinstated to his prior condition, with no loss of pay. 
(3)  The personnel board, after reaching a decision in the case, shall cause an order to be prepared, setting forth their decision and directing appropriate remedies, if any, to resolve the appeal. Except as provided below, the decision of the personnel board in such cases shall be final and conclusive, in the absence of an appellant review in the courts (certiorari). Copies of the board order shall be made a matter of official record and shall be furnished to all parties at interest. 
(4)  If, in the opinion of the mayor, the personnel board has exceeded its legal authority by considering issues over which it has no jurisdiction or ordering relief in excess of its authorization, he may, within three (3) business days, veto the action of the personnel board. This veto may be overridden by a majority vote of the council at the next regular meeting. If a veto is overridden, the decision of the appointing authority shall stand. 
§ 810. - Transfers. 
    Any employee, regardless of status, may be transferred to any position within his department or to another department or facility at the sole discretion of the city. The city shall be the final arbitrator of all interdepartmental or intradepartmental transfers and the sole judge of the need, necessity, convenience or reason for such transfer. An interdepartmental or intradepartmental transfer shall not be construed to be a demotion or disciplinary action even if it results in a reduction of the employee's pay or a change in job responsibilities. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1959 CODE 
This table gives the location within the new Code of those sections of the 1959 Code that are included herein. 
1959 Code 
Section New Code  
Section 1-1 1-1-1 1-3-1-5 1-1-3-1-1-5 2-1, 2-2 2-2-1, 2-2-2 2-7, 2-8 17-3-1, 17-3-2 2-23-2-32 17-3-31-17-3-40 2-42 87-2-3 2-44 87-2-5 2A-1-2A-7 44-2-1-44-2-7 4-7 8-1-5 8-2-8-4 2-3-2-2-3-4 8-6 2-3-5 8-8-8-17 2-3-7-2-3-16 8-19-8-22 2-3-17-2-3-20 10-1 20-1-6 10-2-10-5 20-1-1-20-1-4 10-15 20-1-5 11-1-11-7 60-2-1-60-2-7 11-9-11-11 60-2-9-60-2-11 12-13, 12-14 66-1-1, 66-1-2 12-19, 12-20 66-1-7, 66-1-8 13-16-13-21 11-12-1-11-12-6 13-23-13-29 11-9-1-11-9-7 13-44-13-51 11-8-1-11-8-8 13-52-13-54 11-3-1-11-3-3 13-56 11-3-5 13-57 11-3-4 11-3-6 14-2, 14-3 26-2-2, 26-2-3 14-9 26-2-4 14-11, 14-12 26-2-5, 26-2-6 14-13 26-2-14 14-14.1 26-2-7 14-16.1 26-2-8 14-17, 14-18 26-2-9 14-21 26-2-10 14-23 26-2-11 14-27, 14-28 26-2-12, 26-2-13 14.1 41-1-12 14A-1-14A-7 2-5-11-2-5-17 17-1, 17-2 69-3-1, 69-3-2 17-4-17-6 69-3-4-69-3-6 19-9-19-11 17-4-4-17-4-6 19-41, 19-42 17-4-22, 17-4-23 19-44, 19-45 17-4-25, 17-4-26 20-2, 20-3 41-1-4, 41-1-5 20-21 41-1-7 20-22 41-1-9 20-28, 20-29 41-1-10, 41-1-11 20-30 41-1-11 20-31 41-3-1 20-40-20-43 41-3-3-41-3-6 20-50 41-3-7 20-53, 20-54 41-4-1, 41-4-2 20-96, 20-97 41-5-5, 41-5-6 20-100 41-5-8 20-102-20-105 41-6-1-41-6-4 20-108, 20-109 41-6-5, 41-6-6 20-113 41-7-3 20-160-20-164 41-2-1-41-2-5 20-172-20-185 41-2-6-41-2-19 20-187 41-2-20 21-1-21-5 44-3-1-44-3-5 21-6-21-18 44-3-7-44-3-19 21-19, 21-20 44-3-19, 44-3-20 21-21 44-3-20 22-2-22-7 69-2-1-69-2-6 22-9 69-2-8 22-11-22-19 69-2-10-69-2-18  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1981 CODE 
This table gives the location within the new Code of those sections of the 1981 Code, as supplement are included herein. 
1981 Code 
Section New Code  
Section 1-1-1-1-1-8 1-1-1-1-1-8 2-1-1-2-1-5 2-2-1-2-2-5 2-2-1-2-2-21 2-3-1-2-3-21 2-3-3 2-4-1 2-3-11 2-4-21 2-3-21 2-4-31 2-4-1-2-4-4 2-5-1-2-5-4 2-5-2-2-5-4 2-5-2-2-5-4 2-5-11-2-5-17 2-5-11-2-5-17 2-6-1-2-6-18 2-7-1-2-7-18 3-1-1-3-1-6 17-2-1-17-2-6 3-2-1, 3-2-2 17-3-1, 17-3-2 3-2-11-3-2-18 17-3-21-17-3-28 3-2-31-3-2-40 17-3-31-17-3-40 3-3-1-3-3-6 17-4-1-17-4-6 3-3-21-3-3-26 17-4-21-17-4-26 3-3-41-3-3-45 17-4-31-17-4-35 3-4-1-3-4-28 17-5-1-17-5-28 3-5-1-3-5-10 17-6-1-17-6-10 3-6-2-3-6-7 17-7-2-17-7-7 3-6-8 17-7-1 
17-7-8 3-6-9-3-6-12 17-7-9-17-7-12 4-1-1-4-1-6 23-1-1-23-1-6 4-2-1-4-2-4 20-1-1-20-1-4 4-2-14 20-1-5 4-2-17, 4-2-18 20-1-6, 20-1-7 4-4-1-4-4-5 8-1-1-8-1-5 4-4-11-4-4-16 8-2-1-8-2-6 4-4-21-4-4-26 8-2-21-8-2-26 5-1-1-5-1-26 35-1-1-35-1-26 5-1-30-5-1-34 35-2-1-35-2-5 5-2-1-5-2-12 60-2-1-60-2-12 5-2A-1-5-2A-3 60-3-1-60-3-3 5-3-1-5-3-11 66-1-1-66-1-11 6-1-1-6-1-18 69-2-1-69-2-18 6-2-1-6-2-6 69-3-1-69-3-6 6-2-11-6-2-32 69-3-21-69-3-42 7-1-1-7-1-4 29-1-1-29-1-4 8-1-1-8-1-5 87-2-1-87-2-5 8-2-81 84-2-1 8-4-1-8-4-6 90-1-1-90-1-6 8-5-1-8-5-3 93-1-1-93-1-3 8-5-11-8-5-19 93-2-1-93-2-9 8-5-21-8-5-23 93-2-10-93-2-12 8-5-25 93-2-13 8-5-28, 8-5-29 93-2-15, 93-2-16 8-5-31 93-2-17 8-5-41-8-5-51 93-3-1-93-3-11 8-5-61-8-5-63 93-3.1-1-93-3.1-3 8-5-71, 8-5-72 93-4-1, 93-4-2 8-5-73-8-5-75 93-5-1-93-5-3 8-5-75.1, 
8-5-75.2 93-5-4, 93-5-5 8-5-76 93-5-6 8-5-76.1, 
8-5-76.2 93-5-7, 93-5-8 8-5-77-8-5-80 93-5-9-93-5-12 8-5-81, 8-5-82 93-6-1, 93-6-2 8-5-85, 8-5-86 93-7-1, 93-7-2 8-5-91, 8-5-92 93-8-1, 93-8-2 8-5-101, 
8-5-102 93-9-1, 93-9-2 8-5-111, 
8-5-112 93-10-1, 93-10-2 8-5-115- 
8-5-117 93-11-1-93-11-3 8-5-121 93-12-1 93-24-1 8-5-122 93-12-2 8-5-124 93-12-3 8-5-131- 
8-5-133 93-13-1-93-13-3 8-5-141- 
8-5-144 93-14-1-93-14-4 8-5-151- 
8-5-154 93-15-1-93-15-4 8-5-161- 
8-5-164 93-16-1-93-16-4 8-5-170.2 93-17-2 8-5-170.3- 
8-5-170.9 93-18-1-93-18-7 8-5-171 93-22.1-1 8-5-172- 
8-5-174 93-19-1-93-19-3 8-5-176- 

8-5-180 93-19-4-93-19-8 8-5-180A-1- 
8-5-180A-3 93-20-1-93-20-3 8-5-181- 
8-5-185 93-22-1-93-22-5 8-5-191- 
8-5-208 93-23-1-93-23-18 8-5-222- 
8-5-229 93-24-2-93-24-9 8-5-241- 
8-5-248 87-3-1-87-3-8 8-5-251- 
8-5-254 93-3.2-1-93-3.2-4 8-5-261- 
8-5-268 93-25-1-93-25-8 8-5-281- 
8-5-284 93-26-1-93-26-4 8-6-1-8-6-10 32-2-1-32-2-10 8-7-1-8-7-13 51-1-1-51-1-13 8-7-21-8-7-24 51-2-1-51-2-4 8-7-31-8-7-34 51-3-1-51-3-4 8-8-1-8-8-16 63-1-1-63-1-16 8-9-1-8-9-14 38-2-1-38-2-14 8-9-16, 8-9-17 38-2-15, 38-2-16 8-10-1-8-10-8 41-5-21-41-5-28 9-3-1-9-3-19 44-3-1-44-3-19 9-3-20, 9-3-21 44-3-19, 44-3-20 9-3-22 44-3-20 9-4-1-9-4-7 44-2-1-44-2-7 9-4-21-9-4-27 11-3-1-11-3-7 9-4-71-9-4-79 11-8-1-11-8-9 9-4-91-9-4-97 11-9-1-11-9-7 9-4-111- 
9-4-116 11-12-1-11-12-6 9-4-138 11-12-7 9-4-171- 
9-4-175 35-3-1-35-3-5 9-4-181- 
9-4-186 11-10-1-11-10-6 9-4-187- 
9-4-193 11-6-1-11-6-7 9-4-210- 
9-4-214 11-5-1-11-5-5 9-4-221- 
9-4-227 11-2-1-11-2-7 9-4-250- 
9-4-252 11-13-1-11-13-3 9-5-1-9-5-37 38-3-1-38-3-37 9-6-1-9-6-13 17-8-1-17-8-13 10-1-1- 
10-1-7 41-1-1-41-1-7 10-1-8- 
10-1-10 41-1-9-41-1-11 10-1-11- 
10-1-13 41-1-11-41-1-13 10-1-21- 
10-1-27 41-3-1-41-3-7 10-1-41, 
10-1-42 41-4-1, 41-4-2 10-1-51- 
10-1-58 41-5-1-41-5-8 10-1-71- 
10-1-76 41-6-1-41-6-6 10-1-91- 
10-1-94 41-7-1-41-7-4 10-1-111- 
10-1-130 41-2-1-41-2-20 11-1-1-11-1-3 26-2-1-26-2-3 11-1-6 26-2-4 11-1-9-11-1-11 26-2-5-26-2-7 11-1-13, 
11-1-14 26-2-8, 26-2-9 11-1-17, 
11-1-18 26-2-10, 26-2-11 11-1-20, 
11-1-21 26-2-12, 26-2-13 11-1-23- 
11-1-25 26-2-14-26-2-16 11-1-27, 
11-1-28 26-2-17, 26-2-18 11-1-31, 
11-1-32 26-2-19, 26-2-20 11-1-33 26-2-30 11-2-1, 
11-2-2 54-1-1, 54-1-2 11-2-3, 
11-2-4 54-1-4, 54-1-5  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the new Code of those ordinances that are inluded in the new Code. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section New Code 
Section 75-3  4- 1-1975 87-3-5 93-1-2 93-2-7 93-3-5 93-6-2 93-8-2 93-9-2 93-10-2 93-12-1-93-12-3 93-13-3 93-14-3 93-22.1-1 93-23-11 79-3  4-10-1979 44-3-4 79-5  5-14-1979 23-1-5 79-6  5-14-1979 35-3-1-35-3-5 79-7  7- 3-1979 38-3-1-38-3-37 79-11 11- 6-1979 93-2-15 80-6  7-10-1980 11-3-7 80-7  7-10-1980 41-1-13 80-8  9- 2-1980 93-1-2 80-9 10- 7-1980 11-10-1-11-10-6 81-2  3- 3-1981 32-2-1-32-2-10 81-4  8- 4-1981 1 93-1-2 3 93-7-1, 93-7-2 4 93-11-1-93-11-3 5 93-22.1-1 81-5  9- 9-1981 1 26-2-1 81-6  9- 9-1981 26-2-18 2 26-2-17 82-1  4- 6-1982 66-1-9 82-3 11- 2-1982 23-1-6 44-3-7 82-4  4- 6-1982 44-2-7 82-7  5- 4-1982 93-7-2 82-11  9- 7-1982 93-1-2 82-12  9- 7-1982 8-1-4 66-1-10 11- 2-1982(Ord.) 8-1-4 66-1-10 83-1  1- 4-1983 60-3-1-60-3-3 83-5  5- 3-1983 93-7-2 83-7 10- 4-1983 20-1-7 83-8 10-18-1983 41-4-1 84-5  7- 3-1984 2-4-1 84-7  8- 7-1984 2-5-1 84-8 11- 6-1984 93-1-2 93-6-2 93-7-2 93-8-2 93-9-2 93-10-2 93-12-2 93-13-3 93-14-3 85-2  6-18-1985 App. A, § 2-5-3 86-1  1- 7-1986 93-2-7 86-4  4- 1-1986 87-2-2 86-5  7- 1-1986 93-3-5 86-7 10-21-1986 66-1-10 86-8 10-21-1986 54-1-1 86-9 10-21-1986 93-23-11 86-12 11-18-1986 38-3-7-38-3-37 87-1  1- 6-1987 17-4-21, 17-4-22 87-4  2- 3-1987 87-3-5 87-6  2- 3-1987 60-2-12 87-14  5- 5-1987 93-2-16 87-15  5- 5-1987 93-12-1-93-12-3 87-17  5- 5-1987 93-9-2 87-18  5- 5-1987 93-10-2 87-16  5-5-1987 93-22.1-1 87-20  7- 7-1987 93-3-5 88-1  4- 5-1988 2-2-5 88-3  6- 7-1988 App. A, § 2-5-3 88-5  8- 2-1988 93-22.1-1 88-6 12- 6-1988 2-3-21 88-7 12- 6-1988 1 8-1-5 3 8-2-1 8-2-3-8-2-6 4 8-2-21-8-2-26 89-2  2- 7-1989 44-3-7 89-3  3- 7-1989 1 93-10-2 2 93-12-2 3 93-14-3 4 93-23-18 5 93-24-8 89-7  1- 2-1990 20-1-1 20-1-6 90-2  2- 6-1990 69-2-9, 69-2-10 69-2-17 90-6 11- 6-1990 41-4-1 90-8 12- 4-1990 11-5-1-11-5-5 91-2  2- 5-1991 44-3-10 91-5  2- 5-1991 41-1-1 91-6  3- 5-1991 2-5-1 91-7  4- 2-1991 93-2-8 91-14  7- 2-1991 2-3-2, 2-3-3 92-2  4- 7-1992 87-2-3 92-3  5- 5-1992 1 20-1-1 92-4  6- 2-1992 17-2-1 92-5  6-15-1992 69-2-10 92-6  9- 9-1992 60-2-2, 60-2-3 92-8 12- 1-1992 69-2-15 69-2-17 93-1  1- 5-1993 2-5-3 93-4  1- 5-1993 2-5-1 93-7  2- 2-1993 11-8-1 93-8  4- 6-1993 60-2-4 93-10  7- 6-1993 69-2-10 69-2-17 93-16 10- 5-1993 2-3-5 94-1  2- 1-1994 60-2-12 94-14  5- 3-1994 17-4-2 94-18  8- 2-1994 1 26-2-19 94-21  8- 2-1994 17-3-21-17-3-24 17-3-27, 17-3-28 94-23  8-11-1994 1 93-18-1-93-18-7 94-24  9- 6-1994 1 63-1-1-63-1-8 63-1-10-63-1-16 94-28 11- 1-1994 2-5-1 17-3-25, 17-3-26 94-29 11- 1-1994 1 26-2-20 94-31 11- 1-1994 2-5-4 94-33 12- 6-1994 2 54-1-4 94-34 12- 6-1994 1 26-2-30 95-02  2- 7-1995 1 69-2-2 2 69-2-7 3 69-2-11 4 69-3-3 95-05  7-11-1995 1 26-2-12 95-06  7-11-1995 2 11-2-1-11-2-7 95-10 11- 7-1995 93-1-2 93-14-4 95-07 12- 5-1995 1 17-5-1-17-5-8 17-5-10-17-5-28 96-02  7- 9-1996 1 2-7-1-2-7-18 96-05  7- 9-1996 1 17-8-1-17-8-13 96-07  8- 6-1996 1 60-2-5 2 60-2-12 96-08 10- 1-1996 1 38-2-1-38-2-16 2 93-1-2 97-02  6- 3-1997 App. B, § 304 97-05  7- 8-1997 1 93-25-1 93-25-3-93-25-8 97-06  7- 8-1997 1 93-5-1-93-5-12 97-08  7- 8-1997 1 66-1-4 98-03  1- 6-1998 1 60-2-5 98-05  3- 3-1998 1 93-2-17 98-06  3-19-1998 1 11-8-1 98-07  4- 7-1998 1 11-13-1-11-13-3 98-08  4- 7-1998 1 93-14-4 98-09  4- 7-1998 1 29-1-1-29-1-4 98-10  4- 7-1998 1 41-4-1 98-11  5- 5-1998 1-3 38-2-1-38-2-3 4 38-2-6 5, 6 38-2-8, 38-2-9 6(A) 38-2-10 7-9 38-2-11-38-2-13 98-12  6- 2-1998 1 54-1-1 3 54-1-4 98-15  9- 1-1998 1 35-1-1-35-1-22 35-1-24-35-1-26 35-2-1-35-2-5 99-04  3- 2-1999 1 1-1-6 2 2-2-5 99-05  4- 6-1999 1 87-3-3 2 87-3-5 99-07  7- 6-1999 1 App. B, § 713 99-09  8- 3-1999 1 93-2-16 99-12  9- 7-1999 1 93-1-2 3 93-19-1, 93-19-2 93-19-4-93-19-8 4 93-22.1-1 5 93-24-9 99-14 10- 5-1999 I 17-5-17 99-16 10- 5-1999 1 54-1-4 99-17 10- 5-1999 2 84-2-1 99-18 12- 7-1999 1 87-2-2 2, 3 87-2-3 4 87-3-2 99-19 12- 7-1999 1 41-5-21-41-5-28 2000-01  1- 4-2000 1 93-14-4 2 93-22.1-1 2000-03  3- 7-2000 1 20-1-7 2000-05  3- 7-2000 1 93-15-4 2 93-16-4 3 93-22.1-1 2000-07  3- 7-2000 1 App. B, § 304 2000-08  3- 7-2000 1 11-6-1-11-6-7 2000-09  3- 7-2000 1 App. B, § 201 2 App. B, § 801 3 2-5-4 2000-10  4- 4-2000 1 93-14-3 2000-11  4- 4-2000 1 93-14-4 3 93-22.1-1 2000-12  4- 4-2000 1 17-7-1-17-7-12 2000-13  4- 4-2000 1 17-6-1-17-6-10 2000-15  5- 2-2000 1 App. B, § 306 2000-16  6- 6-2000 1 App. B, § 706 2000-17  6- 6-2000 1 11-8-9 2000-18  7-11-2000 1 17-7-1-17-7-12 2000-20  8- 1-2000 1 App. B, § 104 2000-21  8- 1-2000 1 93-20-1-93-20-3 2000-23 10- 3-2000 1 1-1-5 2001-02  2- 6-2001 1 93-2-5 2001-03  3- 6-2001 1-3 11-2-4-11-2-6 2001-04  4- 3-2001 1(8-5-27) 93-2-14 2001-05  4- 3-2001 1(8-5-285)- 
1(8-5-292) 93-3.3-1-93-3.3-8 1(8-5-293)- 
1(8-5-298) 93-3.3-9-93-3.3-14 2001-09  5- 1-2001 1 41-1-8 2001-10  6- 5-2001 1 69-2-19 2001-11  6- 5-2001 1(10-1-59) 41-5-9 2001-12  6- 5-2001 1, 2 93-3.3-2, 93-3.3-5 2001-13  6- 5-2001 1 2-2-7 2001-18 11- 6-2001 1(8-2A-1)- 
1(8-2A-8) 57-1-1-57-1-9 2001-19 12- 4-2001 1 1-1-6 2 2-2-5 2002-01  1- 8-2002 1 84-3-1 2002-02  2- 5-2002 1 App. B, § 403 2002-03  5- 7-2002 2       Added Ch. 38, Art. 4, §§ 38-4-1-38-4-20 2002-05  3- 5-2002 1 93-3.2-1-93-3.2-4 2002-06  3- 5-2002 1 93-12-3 2002-07  3- 5-2002 1 93-1-3 2002-08  4- 2-2002 1(2-7-1)-1(2-7-11) 2-6-1-2-6-11 2002-09  5- 7-2002 1, 2 93-19-3 2002-14 10- 1-2002 1(9-1-7)- 
1(9-1-9) 5-2-1-5-2-3 1(9-1-10)- 
1(9-1-12) 5-3-1-5-3-3 1(9-1-12) 5-3-16 1(9-1-13)- 
1(9-1-24) 5-3-4-5-3-15 1(9-1-26)- 
1(9-1-44) 5-4-1-5-4-19 1(9-1-45)- 
1(9-1-62) 5-5-1-5-5-18 1(9-1-63)- 
1(9-1-85) 5-6-1-5-6-23 1(9-1-86)- 
1(9-1-103) 5-7-1-5-7-18 2002-17 11-12-2002 1(9-1-8) 5-2-2 2 5-3-8 3 5-7-1, 5-7-2 5-7-5 5-7-8-5-7-10 5-7-13-5-7-15 2003-01  1- 7-2003 1 54-1-2 2003-02  1- 7-2003 1(11-2-3) 54-1-3 1(11-2-4)- 
1(11-2-8) 54-2-1-54-2-5 2003-03  1- 7-2003 1(8-3-1)-1(8-3-6) 81-1-1-81-1-6 2003-04  2- 4-2003 1 93-3.1-1 2(8-5-180B-1)- 
2(8-5-180B-6) 93-21-1-93-21-6 3 93-9-2 2003-06  3- 4-2003 1 51-1-1-51-1-13 51-2-1-51-2-4 51-3-1-51-3-4 2003-07  3- 4-2003 1 87-3-5 2(8-5-249) 93-24-10 2003-08  6- 3-2003 1(9-4-131)- 
1(9-4-134) 11-11-1-11-11-4 2003-10  7- 1-2003 93-3.1-2 2004-01  1- 6-2004 1 5-6-3 2004-02  1-27-2004 1-3 5-3-2 4 5-4-15 5 5-5-15 6-8 5-6-5 9 5-6-20 2004-03  5- 4-2004 1 2-2-6 2 2-5-1 2004-04  7- 6-2004 1(8-5-286) 93-3.3-2 2(8-5-288) 93-3.3-4 3(8-5-292) 93-3.3-8 2004-06  7- 1-2004 1(8-2A-1)- 
1(8-2A-9) 57-1-1-57-1-9 2004-09  8- 3-2004 1(5-2-2) 60-2-2 2004-10  8- 3-2004 1(8-2A-13)- 
1(8-2A-43) 63-2-1-63-2-31 2004-11  8- 3-2004 1(8-2A-44)- 
1(8-2A-58) 63-3-1-63-3-15 2004-12  8- 3-2004 1(8-5-180A-4)- 
1(8-5-180A-6) 93-20.1-1-93-20.1-3 2004-13  8- 3-2004 1, 2 2-6-8 3, 4 2-6-9, 2-6-10 5 2-6-10 2004-14 10- 5-2004 1(8-5-120C) 93-11.1-1 1(8-5-120D) 93-11.1-2 1(8-5-120E) 93-11.1-3 1(8-5-120F) 93-11.1-4 1(8-5-120G) 93-11.1-5 2004-15 10- 5-2004 1(8-5-120A) 93-11.3-1 1(8-5-120B) 93-11.3-2 2004-16 10- 5-2004 1(8-5-118)- 
1(8-5-120) 93-11.4-1-93-11.4-3 2004-17 10- 5-2004 1(8-5-118)- 
1(8-5-120) 93-11.4-1-93-11.4-3 2004-18 10- 5-2004 1 93-22.1-1 2004-19 11- 2-2004 1       84-3-3, 84-3-4 2004-20 11- 2-2004 1(8-5-62) 93-3.1-2 2004-21 12-21-2004 1(3-2-15) 17-3-25 2(3-2-31)- 
2(3-2-33) 17-3-31-17-3-33 2(3-2-38)- 
2(3-2-40) 17-3-38-17-3-40 2004-22 12-21-2004 2-2-3 2004-24 12-21-2004 1(9-1-8) 5-2-2 2(9-1-17) 5-3-8 3(9-1-10), 
3(9-1-11) 5-3-1, 5-3-2 3(9-1-40) 5-4-15 3(9-1-59) 5-5-15 3(9-1-67) 5-6-5 3(9-1-82) 5-6-20 4(9-1-65) 5-6-3 2004-25 12-21-2004 1(8-5-61) 93-3.1-1 2004-26 12-21-2004 1(8-5-298), 
1(8-5-299) 93-27-1, 93-27-2 2004-27 12-21-2004 2(8-5-286) 93-3.3-2 3(8-5-287) 93-3.3-3 4(8-5-288) 93-3.3-4 5(8-5-289) 93-3.3-5 6(8-5-291) 93-3.3-7 7(8-5-292) 93-3.3-8 8(8-5-294) 93-3.3-10 9(8-5-296) 93-3.3-12 10(8-5-297) 93-3.3-13 2004-28 12-21-2004 1(8-3-2) 81-1-2 2(8-3-3) 81-1-3 3(8-3-4) 81-1-4 4(8-3-5) 81-1-5 5(8-3-6) 81-1-6 2004-29 12-21-2004 1(4-4-27)- 
1(4-4-52) 8-3-1-8-3-26 2005-01 12- 7-2004 1(8-5-15) 93-2-5 2(8-5-178) 93-19-6 2005-02  1- 4-2005 1(8-11-1) 41-5-41 2005-04  4- 5-2005 1(8-5-267) 93-25-7 2(8-5-268) 93-25-8 2005-05  4- 5-2005 1(8-5-265) 93-25-5 2(8-5-265) 93-25-5 2005-06  7- 5-2005 1(5-2-13- 
5-2-19) 60-2-13 2005-07  9- 5-2005 1(8-3-3) 81-1-3 2005-09 10- 4-2005 1(9-1-24) 5-3-15 2(9-1-67) 5-6-5 2005-10 10- 4-2005 1(8-5-14) 93-2-4 2005-11 11-15-2005 1(8-5-61) 93-3.1-1 2(8-5-62) 93-3.1-2 3(8-5-120H) 93-11.2-1 3(8-5-120I) 93-11.2-2 3(8-5-120J) 93-11.2-3 3(8-5-120K) 93-11.2-4 3(8-5-120L) 93-11.2-5 3(8-5-120M) 93-11.2-6 3(8-5-120N) 93-11.2-7 3(8-5-120O) 93-11.2-8 3(8-5-120P) 93-11.2-9 3(8-5-120Q) 93-11.2-10 3(8-5-120R) 93-11.2-11 2005-12 11- 1-2005 1(8-3-3) 81-1-3 2006-02  3- 7-2006 1       Added 2-8-1, 2-8-2 2006-03  3- 7-2006 1 93-3.1-2 2006-06  4-18-2006       Added 41-3-15-41-3-24 2006-08  6-13-2006 1       Added 5-2-1(d), (e) 2 5-3-1 3       Added 5-3-2(i)-(l) 4       Added 5-3-8(d)(1)-(4) 5 5-3-11(a), (b) 6 5-3-15 7 5-4-12(6)-(8) (10)-(12) 8       Added 5-4-13(a)(4) 9 5-6-21(b) 10 5-5-12(6)-(8) (10)-(12_ 11 5-5-13(a)(5) 12 5-6-2(a) 13 5-6-17(6)-(8) (10)-(12) 14 5-6-18(a)(2) 2006-08A  7-11-2006 1 5-3-2(a)(2) 2 5-3-15 3 5-4-16(b) 4 5-5-16(b) 5 5-6-20(b) 2006-09  7-11-2006 1-8 Adopting ord., p. xi 2006-10  7-11-2006 1 93-22.1-1 2006-11  7-11-2006 1 93-3.1-2 2006-12  7-11-2006 1       Added 85-1-1-85-1-14 2006-13  7-11-2006 1       Dltd 81-1-1-81-1-6       Added 81-1-1-81-1-7 2007-01  1- 2-2007 1 11-5-2 2 11-5-3 2007-02  1-26-2007 1 17-7-2 2007-03  2-20-2007 1       Added 93-2-18 2007-05  5- 1-2007 1 5-3-11(a) 2 5-4-1(c) 2007-09  7- 3-2007 1       Added 93-3-1.2 2007-10  7-17-2007 1-14       Added App. B, § 313 2007-10-A  7-17-2007 1-14 App. B, § 313 2007-11  7- 3-2007 1       Rpld 93-11.2-3(16), (17) 2       Added 93-11.2-5(9) 2007-12  7-17-2007 1 84-1-4(b) 2 85-1-5(a) 2007-13  7-17-2007 1 5-6-3(j) 2007-14  8- 7-2007 1       Added 20-1-8-20-1-14 2       Added 84-3-2 2007-15 10- 2-2007 1 5-14-16(b) 2 5-5-16(b) 3 5-6-20(b) 4 5-6-21(b) 2007-16 10- 3-2007 1       Added 81-1-8 2007-17 10- 2-2007 1       Dltd 5-6-23 1, 2 5-6-3(b), (c) 2007-18 12- 4-2007 1       Rpld 93-12-2(b)(7) 2008-01  2- 5-2008 1 20-1-8-20-1-14 2 84-3-2 2008-02  3- 4-2008 1       Dltd 44-3-1-44-3-20 2008-03  6- 3-2008 1 93-2-5 2008-06  6- 3-2008 1       Added 26-2-40 2008-08  6- 3-2008 1       Added 93-2-5(5)-(8) 2008-09  7- 1-2008 1 93-2-5(1) 2008-10  6-30-2008 1 69-2-15 2008-11 10- 7-2008 1 41-5-26(2)b., c. 2008-12  9- 2-2008 1 41-3-1 41-3-2 2       Added 41-3-8       Added 41-3-9 2008-13 11- 4-2008 1       Added 93-11.5-1-93.11.5-8 2008-14 10- 7-2008 1 41-4-1c. 2008-15 10- 7-2008 1       Added 8-1-6 2008-16 10-21-2008 1 5-3-1 2 5-3-2(i)(2)       Added (m), (n) 3 5-3-15 4 5-4-1(c) 5       Added 5-6-3(u) 2008-17 10-21-2008 1       Added 70-1-1-70-1-12 2       Added 70-2-1-70-2-6 2008-19  2-17-2009 1 81-1-1-81-1-9 2008-22  1- 6-2009 1 93-3-1.2 2008-23  1- 6-2009 1 93-22.1-1 2009-01  3- 1-2009 1       Added 41-8-1       Added 41-8-2 2009-02  2-17-2009 1       Dltd 93-11.2-10 2009-03  4- 7-2009 1       Added 84-4-1-84-4-3 2009-04  4- 7-2009 1       added 5-3-2(o) 2 29-1-4(a)(1)d. 2009-05  5- 5-2009 1 17-4-1(a) 2 17-4-2(b) 2009-06  6- 2-2009 1       Dltd 69-3-21-69-3-42       Added 69-3-21-69-3-32 2009-07  6- 2-2009 1 11-1-1-11-1-4       Added 11-1-5, 11-1-6 2009-08  6-16-2009 1 93-11.2-2 2       Added 93-11.2-13 2009-11  6-16-2009 1 69-2-15 2009-13  8-18-2009 1 2-6-8(a) 2 81-1-4(a) 3 87-2-2 4 87-3-1 2009-14 10- 6-2009 1 5-3-1 2-8 5-3-2(a)-(g) 9, 10 (k), (l) 11 (n) 12 5-3-3(b)(3) 13 5-3-8(b) 14, 15 (d)(1), (e) 16 5-3-9(b) 17 5-3-10 18, 19 5-3-11(b), (c) 20 5-3-12(a) 21 5-3-13 22 5-3-15 23 5-3-16 24, 25 5-4-1(e), (h) 26 5-4-3(a) 27, 28 5-4-5(2), (3) 29 5-4-8(a) 30 5-4-9 31 5-4-13 32, 33 5-4-15(a), (e) 34 5-4-16(b) 35       Rnbd 5-4-19       as 5-5-19 36, 37 5-5-1(f), (i) 38 5-5-3(a) 39, 40 5-5-5(2), (3) 41 5-5-8(a) 42 5-5-9 43 5-5-10 44 5-5-12(5) 45 5-5-13 46 5-5-15 47 5-5-16 48 5-5-17 49 5-6-2(a) 50, 51 5-6-3(a), (s) 52 5-6-4(a) 53       Dltd 5-5-6(a)(3), (4) 54 5-6-5(b) 55 (c)(2) 56 5-6-8(b) 57 5-6-10 58 5-6-13 59 5-6-14(b) 60 5-6-15 61 5-6-17 62 5-6-18 63 5-6-20 64 5-6-21 65       Added 5-6-23 2009-17 12- 1-2009 1 17-5-11(a) 2009-18 12- 1-2009 1 2-3-5(a) 2010-01  4- 6-2010 1 Ch. 11, Art. 11, §§ 11-11-1-11-11-5 2010-02  2- 2-2010 1 32-2-3 2010-03  2- 2-2010 1 81-1-4(a) 2010-08  7-20-2010 1 93-2-14 2010-09  7-20-2010 1       Rpld 26-2-30 2010-11  9- 7-2010 1 Ch. 57, §§ 57-1-1-57-1-9 2010-12  9- 7-2010 1       Added Ch. 41, Art. 9, § 41-9-1 2010-14 12- 7-2010 1       Added 11-8-1(d) 2 11-8-5 3 11-8-9 2011-01  2- 1-2011 1 17-5-11(a) 2011-02  2- 1-2011 1 69-2-9 2011-04  5- 3-2011 1-4 41-8-2(a)(1), (2), (b), (e) 5-8       Added 41-8-2(f)-(i) 2011-05  6- 7-2011 1 11-11-3(a) 2011-07  9-20-2011 1(Att. A) Ch. 93, Art. 3.3, §§ 93-3.3-1-93-3.3-26 2011-08  9- 6-2011 1 81-1-4(a) 2011-09  9- 6-2011 1       Added 26-2-21-26-2-26 2011-10  9-20-2011 1 93-11.2-3(3)f. 2011-11 10- 4-2011 1 69-2-9(a) 2011-12 10- 4-2011 1 17-7-1 2011-13 10- 4-2011 1 29-1-4(a)(1) 2011-14 12- 6-2011 1 5-4-1(c) 2 5-5-1(c) 2011-15 12-6-2011 1 5-2-1(b) 2 5-3-2(o) 3 5-3-8(b)(5) 4 5-3-15 5 5-6-3(b) 6       Added Ch. 5, Art. 6.1, § 5-6.1-1 2012-03  4-17-2012 1 11-11-1 2 11-11-4(a) 3       Added 11-11-4(d) 2012-06  8- 7-2012 1       Added 93-12-2(b)(13)-(16) 2012-07  9-18-2012 1 41-4-1(c) 2012-09  2- 5-2013 1       Added 26-2-27 2013-02  3-19-2013 1 93-1-2(c) 2       Added 93-3.2-5, 93-3.2-6 2013-03  3- 5-2013 1       Rpld 17-7-1-17-7-12       Added 17-7-1-17-7-11 2013-04  4- 2-2013 1, 2 93-3-5, 93-3-6 3 93-3-10 4       Rpld 93-3-11       Added 93-3-11 5       Added 93-3-12 2013-05  4- 2-2013 1 93-3-2 2013-07  6- 4-2013 1, 2 11-6-1, 11-6-2 3, 4       Rpld 11-6-6, 11-6-7       Added 11-6-6, 11-6-7 5-8       Added 11-6-8-11-6-11 2013-08  7-16-2013 1 81-1-7(d)(1)a 2, 3 90-1-3(a) 4 93-23-5 5 93-23-10 6 93-23-11(a) 2013-10  9-17-2013 1       93-13-3(27) 2013-11  9-17-2013 1 8-2-1 2       Added 8-2-41 2013-12  9-17-2013 1       Added 8-2-7 2013-13  9-17-2013 1       Added 17-2-7 2013-14  1-21-2014 1 5-2-1(b) 2 5-3-3 3 5-3-11(a) 4 5-3-15 5       Added 5-6.2-1 2014-01  5- 6-2014 1       Added 5-8-1, 5-8-2 2014-02  2- 4-2014 1 26-2-17 2014-03  3- 4-2014 1 26-2-17(a) 2014-04  4-15-2014 1 5-2-1(b) 2 5-3-1 3 5-3-11(a) 4 5-3-15 5       Added 5-6.3-1-6-6.3-17 2014-05  5- 6-2014 1 93-3-5 2014-06  6- 3-2014 1 5-6-5(c) 2014-07  8-19-2014 1 Ch. 93, Art. 3.3 (title) 2       Added Ch. 93, Art. 3.3, Div. 1 (title) 3       Added Ch. 93, Art. 3.3, Div. 2, §§ 93-3.3-27-93-3.3-31 2014-08  9-16-2014 1 17-4-2(a) 2014-09 10- 7-2014 1       Added 93-2-19 2014-10  9-16-2014 1 93-1-2(c) 2 93-2-5 93-22.1-1 3 81-1-2(c) 4 81-1-7(h)4.h. 2014-11 10- 7-2014 1 Ch. 90, §§ 90-1-1-90-1-6 2014-12 10-21-2014 1 Ch. 93, Art. 3.3, Div. 1, §§ 93-3.3-1-93-3.3-26 2014-13 12- 2-2014 1       Added 17-4-7 2015-02  5- 5-2015 1       Added 5-3-2(p) 2 5-6-3(b) 2015-03  3-17-2015 1       Added 2-2-8 2015-04  6- 2-2015 1, 2 11-2-1, 11-2-2 3 11-2-3(1) 4, 5 11-2-4(i), (j) 6 11-2-5(c) 7 11-2-6(b) 2015-05  5-19-2015 1       Rpld 93-2-5(4)a. 2 81-1-6(c)7. 3 81-1-7(b)2. 4       Added Ch. 84, Art. 5, § 84-5-1 2015-06  4-21-2015 1       Rpld Ch. 51, Arts. 1-3 (Exh. A)       Added Ch. 51, Arts. 1-7 2015-07  5- 5-2015 1 5-6-3(o) 2015-11  7- 7-2015 1, 2 93-11.5-2 3 93-11.5-3(16) 4       Added 93-11.5-3(17) 2015-12  8- 4-2015 1 5-3-1       Added Ch. 5, Art. 6.4, §§ 5-6.4-1-5-6.4-18 2015-13  7- 7-2015 1       Added Ch. 93, Art. 28, §§ 93-28-1-93-28-13 2 93-3.1-1(20), (21)       Added 93-3.1-1(22) 2015-14  8- 4-2015 1 93-1-2(c) 2       Added 93-14-6 2015-15  8- 4-2015 1 93-1-2(c) 2, 3       Added 93-2-20, 93-2-21 4 93-3.2-5 5 93-4-2       Added 93-4-3 6 93-5-2       Added 93-5-3       Rnbd 93-5-3-93-5-12       as 93-5-4-93-5-13 7 93-6-2       Added 93-6-3 8 93-7-2       Added 93-7-3, 93-7-4 9 93-8-2       Added 93-8-3 10 93-9-2       Added 93-9-3 11 93-10-2       Added 93-10-3 12 93-11-2       Added 93-11-4 13 93-11.1-2, 93-11.1-3       Added 93-11.1-5       Rnbd 93-11.1-5       as 93-11.1-6 14 93-11.2-3, 93-11.2-4       Added 93-11.2-6       Rnbd 93-11.2-6-93-11.2-13       as 93-11.2-7-93-11.2-14 93-11.2-14(7)-(10) 15 93-11.3-2       Added 93-11.3-3 16 93-11.4-2, 93-11.4-3 17 93-11.5-3       Added 93-11.5-4, 93-11.5-5       Rnbd 93-11.5-4-93-11.5-8       as 93-11.5-6-93-11.5-10 18 93-12-2       Added 93-12-3, 93-12-4       Rnbd 93-12-3       as 93-12-5 19 93-13-3       Added 93-13-4, 93-13-5 20 93-14-3       Added 93-14-4       Rnbd 93-14-4       as 93-14-5       Added 93-14-6(1) 21 93-18-7 2015-17 11- 3-2015 1 11-2-1 2       Added 11-2-1.1 3 11-2-2 4 11-2-3(1) 5-8 11-2-4(d), (e), (i), (j) 9, 10 11-2-5(a)(8), (c) 11 11-2-6(b) 2015-19  2- 2-2016 1 11-5-1 2       Added 93-28-9 8. 2016-03  3- 1-2016       Rpld Ch. 11, Art. 5, §§ 11-5-1-11-5-6 1       Rpld 93-28-9 8. 2 93-1-2(c) 3       Added 93-2-22 4       Rpld 93-11.1-3(6) 5 93-11.2-3(9) 6       Rpld 93-11.2-4(6) 7 93-11.5-3(6) 8 93-13-3(27) 9 93-14-3(36) 10 93-18-2(7) 11 93-19-3(a)(7)       Rpld 93-19-3(b)(5) 2016-08  4- 5-2016 1       Rpld Ch. 93, Art. 3.3, Divs. 1, 2 (Exh. A)       Added Ch. 93, Art. 3.3, Divs. 1, 2 2016-10  5- 3-2016 1 23-1-5 2016-12  4- 5-2016 2 93-3-1.2 2016-14  6-21-2016 1       Added 5-6.3-2(j) 2       Added 26-2-20(d) 2016-18  8-16-2016 1-3 93-1-2(c) 4, 5       Added 93-2-23, 93-2-24 6 93-14-3(24) 7       Added 93-14-3(41) 8       Added 93-11.5-3(19) 9 93-11.5-2 10       Added 93-11.5-3(20) 11 93-12-2(b)(10), (11) 2016-19  8- 2-2016 1       Rpld 93-3.1-2 2       Rnbd 93-3-1.2       as 93-3.1-2 4 93-3.1-2 2016-20  8- 2-2016 1       Added Ch. 63, Art. 4, §§ 63-4-1-63-4-11 2016-21  7-19-2016 1 93-3.3-13 2 93-3.3-21(b) 2016-23  9-20-2016 1       Added 5-6.3-2(j) 2       Added 26-2-20(d) 2016-26 11- 1-2016 1 81-1-7(e)4. 2016-29  1-10-2017 1       Added 58-1-1-58-1-4 2016-33  1-10-2017 1       Rpld 93-23-5 2016-34  1-10-2017 1       Rpld 57-1-1-57-1-9 1       Added 57-1-1-57-1-10 2016-35  1-10-2017 1       Added 41-10-1-41-10-6 2016-36 12-14-2016 1 5-2 -1 2017-04  3-21-2017 1       Rpl 5-2-1-5-2-3 5-3-1-5-3-16 5-4-1-5-4-19 5-5-1-5-5-19 5-6-1-5-6-23 5-6.1-1, 5-6.2-1 5-6.3-1-5-6.3-17 5-6.4-1-5-6.4-18 5-7-1-5-7-18 5-8-1, 5-8-2       Added 5-1-1-5-1-17 5-2-1, 5-2-2 5-3-1-5-3-6 5-4-1-5-4-4 5-5-1-5-5-5 5-6-1-5-6-16 5-7-1-5-7-3 5-8-1-5-8-4 5-9-1, 5-9-2 5-10-1-5-10-6 5-11-1-5-11-19 2017-05  3- 7-2017 1       Added 69-2-20 2017-09  5- 2-2017 1, 2 58-1-1, 58-1-2(e) 3, 4 58-1-3, 58-1-4 2017-10  5-16-2017 1 26-2-40 2017-11  5-16-2017 1 26-2-19 2017-15  8- 1-2017 1       Added 5-4-5 2018-01  1- 9-2018 1 93-1-2(c) 2       Added 93-2-25 2018-03  5-15-2018 1       Added 11-14-1-11-14-9 2018-04  6- 5-2018 1 17-7-1 2 17-7-2 3 17-7-3 4 17-7-4 2018-06  6-19-2018 1       Added 5-6-3(12) 2018-07  7-17-2018 1 5-1-9, 5-1-13(c), 5-2-1, 
5-3-1-5-3-6, 
5-5-1-5-5-5, 
5-6-7(a) 2018-08  7-17-2018 1       Added 41-3-8(d) 2018-10  8-21-2018 1 26-2-17 2018-11  8-21-2018 1 26-2-4 2018-12  8-21-2018 5       Added 5-6-17 2018-13 10- 2-2018 1 2-2-1(a) 2018-14 11- 6-2018 1 2-2-5 2018-15 11- 6-2018 1 93-1-2(c) 2 93-11.2-3(9) 3 93-11.5-3(6) 4 93-13-3(27) 5 93-14-3(36) 6 93-18-2(7) 7 93-19-3(a)(7) 2018-16 11- 6-2018 1       Added 26-2-41 2018-18 12- 4-2018 1 5-2-1 2       Added 5-6-18 2018-20 12- 4-2018 1 5-6-3(3) 2 5-6-17 2018-21 12- 4-2018 1 5-4-4 2 5-5-5  
