CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF LaFAYETTE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
CONTAINING 
THE CHARTER 
AND 
GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Published in 1988 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: June 13, 1988 
Effective: June 13, 1988 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF LaFAYETTE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Lyle Jones 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ray Abney 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Max Morrison, Jr. 
Hill Pope, Jr. 
Bryan Hall Jackson 
Gary O'Bryant 
City Council 
____________ 
David Aldrich 
City Manager 
____________ 
Norman Fletcher 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Glenna Thomas 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of LaFayette of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, as supplemented through August 1975, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the third section of Chapter 4 is 4-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 4-1 and 4-2 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-1.1, 4-1.2 and 4-1.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officers and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. David Aldrich, City Manager, Ms. Glenna Thomas, City Clerk, and Mr. Ron Womack, Assistant City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 5-88 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of LaFayette, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of LaFayette, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 to 22, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before February 9, 1987, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance of the city shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisonment not to exceed ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the mayor and council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after February 9, 1987, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon adoption. 
    Passed and adopted at the regular June meeting of the Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette held on June 13, 1988, at City Hall, LaFayette, Georgia. 
/s/ Lyle Jones 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Glenna Thomas 
      City Clerk   Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette held on the 13th day of June, 1988, and same is still in force and effect and has not been repealed by action of the Mayor and Council. 
/s/ Glenna Thomas 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance 
Number Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supplement 
Number Ord. of 10-11-1976 Omitted 26 10-01  6-14-2010 Omitted 26 10-02  7-12-2010 Included 26 10-03  8- 9-2010 Included 26 10-04  8- 9-2010 Included 26 10-05 11- 8-2010 Omitted 26 11-01  1- 8-2011 Included 27 11-02  1-12-2011 Omitted 27 11-03  2-14-2011 Included 27 11-04  7-12-2011 Omitted 27 11-05  7-12-2011 Omitted 27 12-01  1-18-2012 Included 28 12-02  4- 9-2012 Included 28 12-03  9-10-2012 Included 28 12-04  9-10-2012 Included 28 12-05 10- 8-2012 Included 28 13-1  9- 9-2013 Included 29 13-2 10-14-2013 Included 29 13-3 10-14-2013 Included 29 14-1  1-13-2014 Included 29 14-2  1-13-2014 Included 29 14-3  2-10-2014 Included 29 14-4  9- 8-2014 Included 30 15-01  2- 9-2015 Included 31 15-02  3- 2-2015 Included 31 15-03  5-11-2015 Included 31 16-01  2- 8-2016 Included 32 17-01  1- 9-2017 Omitted 33 17-02  2-13-2017 Included 33 17-03  4-10-2017 Included 33 17-04  7-18-2017 Included 34 17-05 10- 9-2017 Included 34 17-06 11-13-2017 Included 35 18-01  1- 8-2018 Included 35 18-02  2-12-2018 Included 35 18-03  2-12-2018 Included 35 18-04  2-12-2018 Included 35 18-05  2-12-2018 Included 35 18-06  4- 9-2018 Included 35 18-07  4- 9-2018 Included 35 18-08  5-14-2018 Included 36 18-09  6-11-2018 Included 36 18-10 12-10-2018 Included 36 19-01  1-14-2019 Included 36 19-02  2-11-2019 Omitted 36 19-03  3-11-2019 Included 36 19-04  3-11-2019 Included 36  
PART I - THE CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the city adopted by the Legislature on March 26, 1969, being Georgia Laws 1969, p. 2298, effective April 30, 1969. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. 

CHAPTER I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION 

Section 1-10. - Incorporation. 
    The City of LaFayette, Georgia, in the County of Walker, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name and style of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. Under the name said City shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
Section 1-11. - City Boundaries. 
    The city boundaries of the City of LaFayette shall be as described and set forth in Appendix I hereto, and the City of LaFayette shall include all territory lying within said boundaries. 
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY 

Section 1-20. - Corporate Powers. 
    The Government of the City of LaFayette is hereby vested with all powers which municipal corporations are now, or may hereafter be, authorized or required to exercise under the Constitution and Laws of the State of Georgia. In addition thereto the Government of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, shall exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, morals, prosperity and general welfare of the Government of the City and of its inhabitants, and all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein. 
Section 1-21. - Additional Corporate Powers. 
    The Government of the City of LaFayette shall also have all additional corporate powers which are enumerated in all other parts of this Charter, and further in addition to the corporate powers enumerated in Section 1-20 of this Charter, and those corporate powers contained in other parts of this Charter, but without limiting the same in any manner, the Government of the City of LaFayette shall also have the following corporate powers, to wit: 
(a)  Property. To acquire, dispose of, lease, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, inside or outside the City. This power shall be subject to the limitations of any general law of the State of Georgia as now exists or as is duly enacted in the future and is also subject to any other limitations, if any there be, in this Charter. With regard to any lease of real property of the City, no such lease shall have a term which together with the term or terms of any option or options to renew or extend shall exceed a total of [twenty-five] 25 years. 
(b)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the City, for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the City Government, under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, and amendments thereto, or under any other applicable general law of the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Motor vehicle registration fees. To levy and to provide for the collection of registration fees on automobiles, trucks, and all other motor vehicles of all types whatsoever owned by residents of the City, and also on automobiles, trucks, and all other motor vehicles owned by nonresidents and operated within the City with regularity. Such registration fees on automobiles, trucks, and other motor vehicles may be graduated according to their tonnage capacities, weight or horsepower. 
(d)  Public utilities. To regulate the rates and services of public utilities insofar as not in conflict with regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission or other similar State or Federal Agency having jurisdiction in such matters. 
(e)  Sidewalks. To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition, the sidewalks adjoining their lots or land; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which said repairs and maintenance shall be carried out, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so. 
(f)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(g)  Provide for the general welfare. To define, regulate and prohibit any acts, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, morals, safety, security, peace, convenience, or general welfare of inhabitants of the City. 
(h)  City prisoners, commitment. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the recorder's court shall work out such sentences in any public works of the City or City Jail as provided by ordinance, and to provide for the commitment of City prisoners to any County Work Camp, or Jail, by agreement with the appropriate County officers. 
(i)  Regulate animals and fowl. To regulate and license or prohibit, the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift or humane killing, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance. The City Government may enter into such contract or agreement with the County, other municipalities, or any agencies or departments thereof which may be necessary or desirable to carry out such powers. 
(j)  Regulate vehicles for hire. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the City; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in amounts prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces and public ways for the use of such vehicles insofar as not in conflict with any regulation of the Georgia Public Service Commission or other similar State or Federal Agencies having jurisdiction in such matters. 
(k)  Punishment for violations. To provide the punishment to be imposed for violation of any ordinance, rule, regulation or order of the Government of the City of LaFayette. 
(l)  Public service corporation structures. To compel any and all public service corporations operating or doing business in said City to remove and replace and readjust at their own expense all tracks, poles, conduits, wires and other appurtenances and structures owned and/or used by them in the prosecution of their business functions, whenever the same may, in the discretion of the City Government, be necessary to carry out any ordinance or plan of the City Government of the City of LaFayette, or to the best interest of the City or its inhabitants. 
(m)  Railroad crossings. To require the railroads or street railroads running through said town or any portion thereof to make and repair such public crossings for pedestrians or vehicles over or across their several roads whenever or in such a manner as said City Government may deem necessary; to place or repair such crossings, or to open or keep open any street in said town crossing them, and the City Government may pass any ordinance needful for carrying out the provisions of this Section. And in case any railroad or street railroad shall fail or refuse to make such crossings within fifteen (15) days or to repair the same within twenty-four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by said City, the City Government shall have the power to create and make the same across the railroad or street railroad, and to repair the same at the expense of said railroad or street railroad, and may issue execution therefor, and levy and collect the same as in the case of tax executions. 
(n)  Use general funds for advertising the City and for gifts to eleemosynary institutions. To make appropriations and payments from the general funds of the City for the purpose of advertising said City and its advantages and resources so as to bring new capital and commercial and manufacturing and other enterprises into the City and Walker County, and also for making contributions to any Board of Trade or Chamber of Commerce or like body in said City, or in Walker County, Georgia, which may have for its object any of the above stated public purposes, and also to make payment from the general revenues and funds of the City for the support of public hospitals, libraries, charities and other eleemosynary institutions in the City. 
(Ga. Laws 1983, p. 4274, § 1) 
Section 1-22. - Exercise of Power. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the Mayor and Council and as provided by the pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1-23. - Prior Ordinances, Still Valid. 
    All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the City of LaFayette, not inconsistent with this Charter, are hereby declared valid and of force until amended or repealed by the Mayor and Council. 
CHAPTER II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2-10. - Composition and Election. 
    The legislative authority of the Government of the City of LaFayette shall be vested in a Mayor and five Councilmen, who shall be elected in the manner provided by Chapter VI of this Charter and any other appropriate provisions of this Charter. 
Section 2-11. - Terms and Qualifications of Office. 
    The Mayor and Members of the Council shall serve for terms of two (2) years and until their successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be qualified or eligible to seek election as Mayor or Councilman unless he is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, shall have resided in the City continuously for one (1) year immediately preceding his election, and shall be registered and qualified to vote in the municipal elections for offices in the City of LaFayette. Councilmen must further meet the qualifications as contained in Section 2-13 and other appropriate sections of this Charter. 
Section 2-12. - Division of City into Wards. 
    For the purpose of electing four (4) of the five (5) Council Members of the City, the City is hereby divided into four (4) wards, which shall be composed of the following territory, to-wit: 
Ward one: All portions of said City lying (1) East of Ward Four described hereinafter; (2) North and East of Ward Three described hereinafter and (3) North of Ward Two described hereinafter. 
Ward two: All portions of said City lying (1) South of East Villanow Street, also known as Georgia State Highway 136 and (2) East of the following described line: Beginning at the point of intersection of the center line of Duke Street with the center line of East Villanow Street; thence along the center line of Duke Street in a Southerly direction to its intersection with the center line of South Main Street (U. S. Highway 27); thence Northerly with the center line of South Main Street to its intersection with the center line of Crane Street; thence in a Southerly direction with the center line of Crane Street to its intersection with the center line of Colerain Street; thence in a Westerly direction with the center line of Colerain Street to its intersection with the center line of Cherokee Street; thence Southerly with the center line of Cherokee Street to its intersection with the center line of McLemore Street; thence Westerly with the center line of McLemore Street to its intersection with the center line of Chattanooga Street; thence Southerly with the center line of Chattanooga Street to its intersection with the West City Limits of said City; thence Southerly with the West City Limits of said City to the southern most point of said West City Limits of said City. 
Ward three: All portions of said City lying (1) North of the North boundary line of Ward Two, as described above; (2) West and South of the following described line: Start at the intersection of the center line of Chattanooga Street and the West City Limits of said City; thence Northerly with the West City limits of said City to its intersection with the center line of West Main Street (also known as Ga. State Highway 193), the point of beginning; thence Easterly with the center line of West Main Street to its intersection with the center line of Magnolia Street; thence Northerly with the center line of Magnolia Street to its intersection with the center line of Henderson Street; thence Easterly with the center line of Henderson Street to its intersection with the center line of Chattanooga Street; thence Northerly with the center line of Chattanooga Street to its intersection with the center line of West Villanow Street; thence Easterly with the center line of West Villanow Street to its intersection with the center line of Spring Creek; thence Northerly with the center line of Spring Creek to its intersection with the center line of Indiana Street; thence Easterly with the center line of Indiana Street to its intersection with the center line of Main Street (U. S. Highway 27); thence Southerly with the center line of Main Street to its intersection with the centerline of East Villanow Street; thence Easterly with the center line of East Villanow Street to its intersection with the center line of North Duke Street; and (3) West of the West boundary line of Ward Two, as described above. 
Ward four: All portions of said City lying (1) West of the following line: Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Spring Creek and the center line of Probasco Street; thence Southerly with the center line of Spring Creek to its intersection with the centerline of West Villanow Street; and (2) North of the following described line: Beginning at the intersection of the center line of Spring Creek and the centerline of West Villanow Street; thence Westerly with the center line of West Villanow Street to its intersection with the center line of Chattanooga Street; thence Southerly with the center line of Chattanooga Street to its intersection with the center line of Henderson Street; thence Westerly with the center line of Henderson Street to its intersection with the center line of Magnolia Street; thence Southerly with the center line of Magnolia Street to its intersection with the center line of West Main Street (Ga. State Highway 193); thence Westerly with the center line of West main Street to its intersection with the West City Limits of said City, same being West of Hillsdale Road (Burnt Mill Road). 
The aforesaid described Wards are shown on a certain map prepared from the 1990 U.S. Census P.L. 94-171 Population Counts, dated 3/9/1993 and prepared by Reapportionment Services Office, Suite 470, Legislative Office Building, Atlanta, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, 4-12-1993, 5-19-93) 
Editor's note- At the request of the city, § 2-12 of this Charter was recodified in Supplement No. 25 due to scrivenor's errors in the original Ord. No. 93-2, § 1, adopted Apr. 12, 1993. The corrected Ord. No. 93-2 bore two adoption dates, Apr. 12, 1993 and May 19, 1993. To preserve the accuracy of this Charter, both dates have been recorded in the history note for § 2-12 and in the Charter Comparative Table. 
Section 2-13. - Election of Councilmen by Wards; at Large. 
    One (1) Councilman shall be elected from each of the four (4) wards described in Section 2-12 of this Charter, which Councilman must be a resident of said ward at the time of his qualification and election, and one (1) Councilman at large shall be elected from the City as a whole. 
Section 2-14. - Councilmen, Mayor to be Elected by Voters of Entire City. 
    All Councilmen and the Mayor shall be elected by the voters of the entire City. 
Section 2-15. - Vacancy in Elected Offices. 
    The office of Mayor or the office of Councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, forfeiture of his office, or when he ceases to reside within the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette, or when a Councilman who was elected from a specific Ward no longer resides within the bounds of said Ward. If said vacancy occurs and is also officially declared by the governing body of the City of LaFayette within a period of twelve (12) months or less prior to the normal expiration date of the term of the person whose office has been declared to be vacant, then and in that event the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, by appointment by a majority vote of the Council. Any person eligible to hold such office under the terms of this Charter shall be eligible for said appointment. Any other vacancy in office shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by election. If such vacancy occurs within two (2) months prior to the regular general election to be held in that calendar year, then and in that event such vacancy shall be filled by election at the general election of said year; otherwise, said vacancy shall be filled at a duly called special election for the purpose, which election shall be called within sixty (60) days from the date such vacancy occurs and is officially declared by the governing body of the City. The person so appointed or elected to fill such unexpired term shall take office immediately upon taking the oath of office. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 1) 
Section 2-16. - Compensation; Expenses. 
    The Mayor shall receive as compensation for his services a sum not to exceed three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) per month and not less than ten dollars ($10.00) per month, as fixed by ordinance of the Council, and each Councilman shall receive as compensation for his services a sum not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month and not less than ten dollars ($10.00) per month, as fixed by ordinance of the Council. The Mayor and Councilmen may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties, as provided by ordinance of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 04-5, § 1, 3-8-2004) 
Note- (Ga. Laws 1983, p. 4274, § 2; Ga. Laws 1969, p. 2298) 
Section 2-17. - Oath of Office. 
    Each newly elected or appointed Mayor or Councilman, before entering upon the duties of his or her office, shall take and subscribe before the City Clerk, City Attorney, or before some judicial officer or the Mayor, the following oath: 
    "I do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of Mayor (or Councilman, as the same may be) of the City of LaFayette, to the best of my skill and ability, and as to me shall seem to be the best interest and welfare of the City, without fear, favor or affection, and that I will uphold the Constitution and laws of the United States of America and of the State of Georgia and that I will further uphold the Charter and ordinances of the City of LaFayette, so help me God." 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 2) 
Section 2-18. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Holding other office. Except as authorized by law, neither the Mayor nor any member of the Council shall hold any other City office or City employment during the term for which he was elected, and no former Mayor or Councilman shall hold any compensated appointive City office or City employment until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected to office. 
(b)  Personal interest. Neither the Mayor or any member of the Council shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
Section 2-19. - Forfeiture of Office. 
    The Mayor, Recorder, or any member of the Council shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)  Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualification of the office as prescribed by this Charter or by law; 
(2)  Violates any expressed prohibition of this Charter; 
(3)  Is convicted of or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or is convicted of or enters a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any felony; or 
(4)  Violates his or her oath of office. A violation of his or her oath of office shall not be construed to include the violation of any traffic law or traffic ordinance unless the same constitutes a crime involving moral turpitude or unless the same results in felony punishment. 
(Ga. Laws 1983, p. 4274, § 3; Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 3) 
Section 2-20. - Judge of Qualifications. 
    The Mayor and Council shall be the judge of the election and qualifications of its members and of the grounds for forfeiture of their offices and for that purpose shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, administer oaths and require the production of evidence, by subpoena or otherwise. A member charged with conduct constituting grounds for forfeiture of his office shall be entitled to a public hearing on demand, and notice of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least one (1) week in advance of said hearing. Decisions made by the Mayor and Council under this Section shall be subject to the review of the Courts. 
Section 2-21. - Inquiries and Investigations. 
    The Mayor and Council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the City and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof. The initial such inquiry or investigation shall be made by a committee appointed by the Mayor, or in his absence or disability, by the Mayor Pro Tem. Said committee shall consist of not more than two (2) elected officials and such other persons as the Mayor may designate, including, but not limited to, the City Attorney, City Clerk, or City Manager. Any such committee so appointed shall report its findings to the Mayor and Council for any such action as said governing body shall deem fit including the purpose of authorizing and making further inquiry and investigation. For the aforesaid purposes any committee so appointed by the Mayor may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence by subpoena duces tecum, notice to produce or otherwise. Likewise, when the Mayor and Council is acting as a board of inquiry or as an investigative body for the aforesaid purposes such governing body may also subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence by subpoena duces tecum, notice to produce or otherwise. Any person, firm, or corporation who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by such committee or by the Mayor and Council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 4) 
Section 2-22. - Independent Audit. 
    The Mayor and Council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all accounts of the City of LaFayette and may provide for such more frequent audits as it deems necessary. Such audit shall be made by certified public accountant or firm of such accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the physical affairs of the City or of any of its officers. The Mayor and Council may, without requiring competitive bids, designate such accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding three (3) years, provided that the designation for any particular fiscal year should be made no later than thirty (30) days after the beginning of such fiscal year. 
Section 2-23. - General Power and Authority of Mayor and Council. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the Mayor and Council shall be vested with all of the powers of government of the City of LaFayette as granted by its Charter. 
(b)  In addition to other powers conferred upon it by law, the Mayor and Council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, the Constitution and General Laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, morals, prosperity and well being of the inhabitants of the City of LaFayette and may enforce such ordinances by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)  The Mayor and Council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish and consolidate offices, agencies, and departments and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies and departments expressly provided for by this Charter. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR 

Section 2-30. - Duties and Powers. 
    The Mayor shall be the official spokesman for the City and the chief advocate of policy. He shall preside at all meetings of the Council, shall sign ordinances and resolutions on their final passage, shall sign deeds, bonds, contracts, and other instruments or documents authorized to be executed on behalf of the City, and shall appoint all committees, including, but not limited to, working committees, support committees, and committees created for the purpose of inquiries and investigations. The Mayor shall be an ex officio member of all such committees. The Mayor shall perform such other duties imposed by this Charter or by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 5) 
Section 2-31. - Mayor Pro Tem. 
    During the absence or disability of the Mayor for any cause, the Mayor Pro Tem, or in his absence or disability for any reason, any one of the Councilmen chosen by the Council shall be clothed with all of the rights and privileges of the Mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of Mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. 
ARTICLE III. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Section 2-40. - Organizational Meeting. 
    The Mayor and Council shall meet for organization on the first business day in January following each regular election. For the purposes of this section, New Year's Day shall not be considered a business day and Saturday and Sunday shall not be considered business days. The meeting shall be called to order by the City Clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members. Following the induction of members, the Mayor and Council by a majority vote of all of the members thereof shall elect one (1) of their number to be Mayor Pro Tem, who shall serve for a term of one (1) year. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 6) 
Section 2-41. - Regular and Special Meetings. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council shall hold regular meetings at least once in every month on the second Monday of said month at City Hall. If the second Monday of the month is a legal holiday, the meeting will be held the Tuesday immediately following said second Monday. Said day, time and place for the regular meeting may be changed by the Mayor and Council by ordinance. The Mayor and Council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meeting on any weekday or hour they may fix. They may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)  Special meetings of the Mayor and Council may be held on call of the Mayor or shall be held when requested in writing by a majority of the members of the Council and, except in the case of emergency, upon no less than twenty-four (24) hours' notice to each member. Notice of any special meeting shall be waived in writing and attendance at the meeting shall be a waiver of notice of any special meeting. The time and place of said special meeting must be specified in the notice. 
(c)  All meetings of the Mayor and Council shall be public; provided, however, they may recess for the purpose of discussion in a closed session limited to their own members, any matter which would tend to defame or prejudice the character or reputation of any person. 
(Ord. No. 14-3, § 1, 2-10-2014) 
Section 2-42. - Quorum; Voting. 
    The Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tem, if he is presiding, and a majority of the duly qualified and acting Councilmen shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tem, if he is presiding, shall be entitled to vote only in the case of a tie. A majority of the votes cast shall determine all questions except as otherwise provided in this Chapter. Voting, except on procedural motions, shall be by voice and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the Minutes, but any member of the Council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. 
Section 2-43. - Veto Power of Mayor. 
    The Mayor shall have the power to veto any act of the Council in passing any ordinance or resolution by signifying his disapproval of such Act of said Council, and having the same entered in the Minutes of said Council. The right of veto must be exercised by the Mayor within ten (10) days from the time of passage by the Council or the same shall be forever considered as approved. If the Mayor approves any such action of the Council by written approval or by voice vote of approval at the meeting recorded in the Minutes, said veto power shall be waived and said approval cannot be withdrawn. The veto of said Mayor to any Act of the Council may be overridden by the affirmative vote of four (4) members of the Council at the next regular meeting of the Mayor and Council following the veto of said Act. 
ARTICLE IV. - LEGISLATIVE PROCEDURE 

Section 2-50. - City Legislation. 
    Any action of the Council, having a regulatory or penal effect, or required to be done by ordinance under this Act, shall be done only by ordinance. Each resolution and ordinance shall be in written form before being introduced. The affirmative vote of at least a majority of the duly elected and qualified members of the Council shall be required to pass any resolution or ordinance. After adoption of ordinances, the same shall be signed by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem, if the Mayor is not present, and by the City Clerk, and the City Clerk shall number said ordinances consecutively, in the order of their final adoption, and shall copy them into a permanent record book used solely for this purpose; and the City Clerk shall do likewise for resolutions, using a separate series of numbers and a separate record book. The original copies of all ordinances, resolutions and motions shall be filed and preserved by the City Clerk. 
Section 2-51. - Legislative Procedure. 
    The Mayor and Council may establish rules of procedure for the introduction and passage of ordinances and resolutions, and if such procedure is adopted, the same shall be followed in all instances until specifically changed by said Mayor and Council; provided, however, such rules of procedure are not in conflict with this Charter or any General Act of the State of Georgia. 
CHAPTER III. - ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Section 3-10. - Administrative Departments; Creation. 
    The Mayor and Council shall establish such City Departments, offices or agencies in addition to those created by this Charter as they shall deem necessary to administer the affairs and Government of the City. They shall prescribe the functions and duties of any such departments, offices and agencies created, except that no function assigned by this Charter to a particular department, office or agency may be discontinued or, unless the Charter specifically so provides, assigned to any other. 
Charter cross reference- See §§ 2-23(c), 3-11. 
Section 3-11. - Consolidation, Transfer and Merger of Departments and Functions. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein by Section 3-10 of this Charter, the Mayor and Council may abolish, merge or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the City; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment and may transfer or change the functions and duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the City. 
Charter cross reference- See §§ 2-23(c), 3-10. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY MANAGER 

Section 3-20. - City Manager Appointment. 
    The Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette shall select and appoint a City Manager for the City of LaFayette, who shall, subject to the control, direction and supervision of the Mayor and Council, be the head of the administrative branch of the municipal government of the City of LaFayette and responsible for the efficient administration of all departments of said municipal government. The City Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of ability, training and experience. At the time of his appointment he need not be a resident of the City or State, but during his tenure of office he shall reside within the City. 
Section 3-21. - City Manager; Term; Compensation. 
    The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and shall hold office until he shall be removed as provided in this Article. He shall receive such salary and expense allowances as the Mayor and Council shall fix. The Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette may remove the City Manager at any time within one (1) year after his appointment and qualification at the will of the Mayor and Council, but the City Manager shall not thereafter be removed from office until served with written charges and given a public hearing before the Mayor and Council. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 7) 
Section 3-22. - Acting City Manager. 
    The Mayor and Council may designate a person or persons to perform the functions and duties of the City Manager during his suspension, absence or disability. Vacancies in the office of City Manager shall be filled by the Mayor and Council as early as practicable, and until such vacancy is filled, the Mayor and Council shall have full authority to make a temporary appointment or to perform the functions and duties of the office. 
Section 3-23. - Powers and Responsibilities of City Manager. 
    The City Manager shall devote such time and attention to the affairs of the City as necessary to perform his duties and shall be responsible to the Mayor and Council for the efficient administration of all of the affairs of the City over which he has jurisdiction. 
    Subject to the control, direction and supervision of the Mayor and Council, the City Manager shall have power and it shall be his duty: 
(1)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced; 
(2)  To see that the business and affairs of the City are efficiently organized and handled; 
(3)  To exercise administrative control over all regular departments, agencies and divisions of the City; 
(4)  To recommend to the Mayor and Council for appointment all officers which said Mayor and Council may have authority to appoint. Such appointees shall appoint and remove all subordinate officers and employees in their respective offices and departments with the approval of the City Manager and the City Council. Upon failure of such appointees and/or the City Manager to act in making such appointments and removals, the Mayor and Council shall have full power and authority to act. Nothing herein shall prevent the Mayor and Council from creating, abolishing, consolidating, altering or modifying departments; 
(5)  To suspend any City employee including department heads until the next regular meeting of the City Council. It shall be the duty of the City Council at the next regular meeting following the suspension of any City employee by the City Manager to either affirm or reject the action of the City Manager. In the event that the City Council shall affirm the action of the City Manager, such employee shall be considered to have been dismissed from City employment as of the date of his suspension by the City Manager. In the event that the City Council shall reject the action by the City Manager, the City employee shall be reinstated with all the former benefits of his employment, including the right to be paid his regular compensation from the date of his suspension; 
(6)  To attend the meetings of the Mayor and Council, with the right to take part in all discussions, but having no vote; 
(7)  To recommend to the Mayor and Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary or expedient; 
(8)  To prepare and submit to the Mayor and Council an annual budget; 
(9)  To keep the Mayor and Council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City; 
(10)  To make and execute all lawful contracts on behalf of the City of LaFayette as to matters within his jurisdiction, except such as may be otherwise provided by law or by ordinance or resolution of the Mayor and Council; provided, however, that no contract, purchase or obligation, involving more than eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00) shall be valid or binding upon the City until approved by the Mayor and Council, and the City Manager shall in a timely manner notify the Mayor and Council of any contract, purchase or obligation the City Manager approves between three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) and eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00); and provided further that without the approval of the Mayor and Council neither the City Manager nor any other officer or employee shall in any calendar month expend or obligate for any purpose any sum or sums in excess of the monthly budget, or one-twelfth of the annual budget, therefor as fixed by the Mayor and Council, and provided further that no department head of the City of LaFayette shall make any purchase on behalf of the City without a written purchase order signed by the City Manager; 
(Ga. Laws 1983, p. 4274, § 4) 
(11)  To make to the Mayor and Council monthly written reports showing his acts and doings, the operations of the City, and all City disbursements, purchases, contracts and obligations, such report to be in the form prescribed by the Mayor and Council; 
(12)  To perform such other duties as may be required by ordinance or resolution of the Mayor and Council; 
(13)  To give bond in the penal sum fixed by the Mayor and Council, with surety approved by the Mayor and Council, payable to the City of LaFayette and its successors and assigns, for the benefit of said City of LaFayette and for the use and benefit of the public, by reason of his default, misfeasance, malfeasance, and/or nonfeasance in the performance of his duties. The premiums for such bond shall be paid by the City of LaFayette. 
(Ord. No. 14-4, § 1, 9-8-2014) 
ARTICLE III. - CITY ATTORNEY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter cross reference- See § 2-30 of Charter. 

Section 3-30. - City Attorney; Appointment; Qualifications; Term; Compensation. 
    The Mayor and Council shall appoint a City Attorney who shall be an attorney at law licensed to engage in the practice of law in the Superior Courts and Appellate Courts of the State of Georgia and who shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia and who shall be a resident of Walker County, Georgia, during his tenure. The City Attorney shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and Council and shall receive such compensation as they shall determine. 
Section 3-31. - Additional Counsel. 
    Whenever in the judgment of the Mayor and Council it shall be deemed advisable to employ additional counsel to assist the City Attorney, authority to do so is hereby conferred upon the Mayor and Council. Such additional counsel shall receive such compensation as may be determined by the Mayor and Council. There shall be no residency requirements of said additional counsel. 
Section 3-32. - Duties of the City Attorney. 
    It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to prosecute and defend suits for and against the City; to serve as legal advisor to the Mayor, Councilmen and City Manager and other City Officials, if so directed by the Mayor and Council, with respect to the affairs of the City; to draw all legal documents relating to the affairs of the City when requested to do so; to draw proposed ordinances when requested to do so; to inspect and pass on the legality in form of all agreements, contracts, franchises and other instruments with which the City may be concerned; to attend meetings of the Mayor and Council, and to perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as City Attorney by said Mayor and Council. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter cross reference- See § 2-50 of Charter. 

Section 3-40. - City Clerk. 
    The Mayor and Council shall appoint an officer who shall be designated as City Clerk who shall perform the duties of the City Clerk and who shall keep a Minute Book of the proceedings of the City Council and maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the City, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the Mayor and Council may direct. Said Clerk shall be the custodian of all official records of the City. 
Section 3-41. - Tax Collector. 
    The Mayor and Council may appoint a tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the City, subject to the provisions of this Charter and ordinances of the City, and the Tax Collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all ordinances of the City of LaFayette and applicable laws of the State of Georgia relating to the collection and sale, foreclosure of taxes. 
Section 3-42. - Additional Administrative Officers. 
    The Mayor and Council may from time to time appoint such additional administrative officers as they may deem necessary for the proper management of the City affairs and to prescribe such duties, functions and compensation for said officers as they see fit. 
ARTICLE V. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Section 3-50. - Position Classification and Pay Plans. 
    The City Manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan for monthly salaried employees which shall be submitted to the Mayor and Council for approval. The Mayor and Council may by ordinance provide that said plans may apply to all employees of the City of LaFayette and to any of its agencies and offices. When a pay plan has been adopted, the Mayor and Council shall not increase nor decrease the salaries of individual employees except by amendment of said pay plan. 
Section 3-51. - Personnel Policies. 
    The Mayor and Council may adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan; 
(3)  Hours of work; vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, retirement, and the manner in which lay off shall be effected; and 
(4)  Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of LaFayette. 
Section 3-52. - Prohibitions. 
    Neither the City Manager nor any other officer or employee of any department under him shall campaign or solicit votes for or contract any money towards the election or nomination of any person as Mayor or Councilman of the City, except to answer such questions as may be put and that they may desire to answer. Any violation of this Section shall subject the offender to removal from office. 
CHAPTER IV. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 
ARTICLE I. - TAXATION 

Section 4-10. - Property Taxes. 
    All property subject to taxation for State or County purposes, assessed as of January 1st of each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the City. All property subject to taxation in the City shall be returned for taxes each year on or before the 1st day of April. 
Section 4-11. - Tax Assessor, Duties. 
    The Mayor and Council shall appoint a Tax Assessor whose duty will be to value and assess all property in said City subject to taxation by said City. He shall prepare and make a final return of the assessments made by him to the City Manager at such times as are prescribed by the Mayor and Council. He shall also have such further duties as may be prescribed by the Mayor and Council. 
Section 4-12. - Notice of Increased Value; Arbitration. 
(a)  Increased valuation; notice. If the City Tax Assessor raises the valuation on property which is returned by the property owner, or if the City Tax Assessor raises the valuation on property not returned to an amount greater than the valuation placed thereon during the preceding year, he shall give written notice thereof to the owner at his last known address, or in the case of unreturned property written notice of said increased value to the last known owner of said property at his last known address. 
(b)  Arbitration. If any property owner is dissatisfied with the valuation made on his property by the City Tax Assessor, such property owner shall within ten (10) days after written notice thereof has been mailed by said City Tax Assessor, file written notice with the City Clerk of his dissatisfaction, and shall name in said notice one (1) arbitrator, who shall be a freeholder of said City, to represent him in fixing the value of his property. Upon such notice being filed with said Clerk, it shall be the Clerk's duty to notify the City Tax Assessor of that fact, and it shall be the duty of the City Tax Assessor within three (3) days after said notice has been filed with the Clerk to name an arbitrator, who shall be a freeholder of the City, to represent said City in fixing the value of the property in dispute; the two (2) arbitrators so selected shall be notified by mail by the City Clerk of their selection within seven (7) days of the filing of said notice by the property owner. Said two (2) arbitrators shall select a third arbitrator who shall also be a freeholder of the City. In the event the two (2) arbitrators fail to name the third arbitrator within ten (10) days after the arbitrator of the City has been appointed, said third arbitrator shall be named by the Judge of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, most senior in term of office, which selection is to be made within ten (10) days from the time he is given written notice of such duty by the City Clerk. 
(c)  Authority of arbitrators. The Board of Arbitrators so constituted shall proceed within ten (10) days from the date of the naming of the third arbitrator to meet and make their decision as to the value of said property, which decision shall be returned in writing to the City Clerk and shall be final on both the City and the taxpayer for the tax year. 
(d)  Written notice; defined. Written notice as used in this Section is hereby defined as notice in writing addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address, as indicated by the City Records, if he is a taxpayer or registered voter, which notice is either to be mailed by regular United States mail or to be served personally by any policeman of the City, at the option of the City. 
Section 4-13. - Tax Levy. 
    The Mayor and Council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax not to exceed twenty (20) mills on each dollar of taxable value on all property subject to taxation within the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette for the purpose of raising revenue to pay the costs of ordinary current expenses and for any other purpose now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Georgia, but not including principal and interest on general obligation bonds. In addition thereto the Mayor and Council shall be authorized to levy such annual ad valorem tax on each dollar of taxable value of such property as may be necessary to produce amounts required and sufficient to provide a sinking fund for the purpose of paying the principal of and interest on the bonded indebtedness of said City as required by law. 
Section 4-14. - Tax Due Dates and Tax Bills. 
    The Mayor and Council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes of the City shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes shall be paid. The Mayor and Council may provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the City in installments, or in one (1) lump sum, and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the payment of taxes prior to the time when due and to give reasonable discounts for early payment of taxes, but such discounts shall not exceed two (2) percent of the gross amount of such taxes. The terms and methods of payment and collection of City taxes shall be in the manner as the Mayor and Council may determine by ordinance. 
(Ga. Laws 1983, p. 4274, § 5) 
Section 4-15. - Tax Execution, Interest, Costs. 
    If said City taxes are not paid by the date the same become delinquent, the execution shall be issued in the name of the City by the City Clerk. Said tax execution shall bear interest from said delinquent date at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum. A cost fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for issuance of the execution is hereby authorized which cost shall be added to said execution. 
Section 4-16. - Collection of Delinquent Taxes. 
    The Mayor and Council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by distress warrants issued by the Clerk for the sale of goods and chattels to be executed by any police officer of the City under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from a Justice of the Peace, or by the City Attorney acting in accordance with general laws providing for the collection of delinquent city or county taxes, or by any of the foregoing methods, and by the use of any available legal processes and remedies provided by State Law. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment day of the first day of January of each year, which shall be superior to all other liens except that it shall have equal dignity with those of the Federal, State or County taxes. 
Section 4-17. - City Marshal. 
    The Chief of Police of the City of LaFayette or the acting Chief of Police, if there be no Chief of Police, shall also serve as Marshal of the City of LaFayette and shall be vested with all the duties and powers imposed upon him by this Charter, ordinance and by the Laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 4-18. - Additional Powers of Mayor and Council Regarding Tax Levy, Tax Assessment, and Collection of Taxes. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the power to enact all ordinances which may be necessary in order to effectively provide for the assessment, taxation, and collection of taxes not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter and the Laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 4-19. - Licenses and Occupational Taxes. 
    The Mayor and Council by ordinance shall have full power to levy such license and specific or occupation taxes upon residents of the City of LaFayette, both individual and corporate, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business therein, or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, as the Mayor and Council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit, convenience, or advantage of the City; to classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to require such persons to procure licenses; to compel the payment of such licenses by execution or any other lawful manner; and to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred, and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. 
Charter cross reference- See § 5-20 of Charter. 
Section 4-20. - Sewer Service Charges; Lien. 
    The Mayor and Council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewerage facilities of said City. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for County and City property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for City property taxes. 
Section 4-21. - Sanitary and Health Service Charge; Lien. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the City, from all individuals, firms and corporations residing in or doing business in said City benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classifications of property and/or sanitary service or services provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed, and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except liens for County and City property taxes, and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for City property taxes. 
Section 4-22. - Special Assessments; Lien. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, draining, or improving any public ways, streets, sidewalks, sewers, or utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, and to provide a method of payment of such assessments and penalties for nonpayment, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for County and City property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided herein or by ordinance for City property taxes. 
ARTICLE II. - BORROWING 

Section 4-30. - General Obligation Bonds. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this Charter and the Constitution and Laws of the State of Georgia. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issues by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Section 4-31. - Revenue Bonds. 
    Revenue Bonds may be issued by the Mayor and Council as now or hereafter provided by the Laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE III. - ACCOUNTING AND BUDGETING 

Section 4-40. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the City Government shall begin on the first day of October of each year and shall end on the thirtieth day of September next following. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency and activity of the government, unless otherwise provided by State and Federal Law. The beginning date of the fiscal year may be changed by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-13-76, § 1) 
Section 4-41. - Preparation of Budgets. 
    The Mayor and Council shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating and a capital improvement budget. 
Section 4-42. - Scope of Annual Operating Budget. 
(a)  The annual operating budget shall contain with respect to each of the operating funds of the government of the City of LaFayette to which they are applicable: 
(1)  An estimate of the unencumbered fund balance or deficit at the beginning of the ensuing fiscal year, and the amount of any reserve for designated purposes or activities includable in the operating budget. 
(2)  A reasonable estimate of revenues to be received during the ensuing year classified according to source; provided, however, the estimated revenues from current and from delinquent property taxes shall not exceed the percentage collected of the total receivable from each such source during the last completed fiscal year, or the current fiscal year whichever is greater. 
(3)  Proposed expenditures detailed by each department, board, commission, office, agency and activity in accordance with an established classification of accounts, including those capital outlays which are to be financed from the revenues of the ensuing year, and including all debt service requirements in full for such fiscal year payable from such fund. 
(4)  Work programs and performance date in justification of proposed expenditures for each department, board, commission, office or agency. 
(5)  Such other information as may be considered necessary or desirable or requested by the Mayor and Council. 
(b)  In no event shall the total proposed expenditures from any fund exceed the total anticipated revenues plus the estimated unappropriated surplus, or fund balance, and applicable reserves and less any estimated deficit at the end of the current fiscal year. 
Section 4-43. - Submission of Budget to Mayor and Council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the Mayor and Council but not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall submit to the Mayor and Council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the City Manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the City, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. A sufficient number of copies of the City Manager's message shall be reproduced to furnish a copy to any person desiring one (1), and a copy of the budget in full shall be filed with the Council and furnished to the Mayor and each Councilman. A summary of the budget shall be published in one (1) newspaper of general circulation within the City of LaFayette. The operating budget and the capital improvement budget hereinafter provided for, the budget message and all supporting schedules shall be filed in the Office of the City Clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
Section 4-44. - Action by Mayor and Council on Budget. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council may amend the operating budget proposed by the City Manager except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues, constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. If the Mayor and Council fail to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for current operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the Mayor and Council adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by source and making appropriations according to fund and by organized unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit, purpose or activity shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise encumbered balance of the appropriation, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable, except as provided in section 4-46 of this Charter. 
Section 4-45. - Property Tax Levies. 
    As the next order of business following the adoption of the operating budget, the Mayor and Council shall levy by ordinance an annual tax on all real and personal property within the City of LaFayette which is subject to ad valorem tax. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimate of revenues from such levy shall be at least sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated. 
Section 4-46. - Additional Appropriations. 
    The Mayor and Council may by ordinance make supplemental appropriations from revenues in excess of those estimated in the budget or make revisions in the operating budget at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose. 
Section 4-47. - Lapse of Appropriations. 
    All unencumbered balances of appropriations in the current operating budget shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year. 
Section 4-48. - Capital Improvements Budget. 
(a)  On or before a date fixed by the Mayor and Council but not later than forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall submit to the Mayor and Council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The Mayor and Council shall have power to accept with or without amendments or reject the proposed programs and proposed means of financing. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the fifteen (15) days prior to the beginning date of each fiscal year. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided the City Manager shall submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations thereon. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by the Mayor and Council. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROCUREMENT AND PROPERTY MANAGEMENT 

Section 4-50. - Contracting Procedures. 
    The Mayor and Council shall prescribe by ordinance such rules and regulations as may be necessary to govern the authorization and execution of contracts which shall bind the City of LaFayette, except the City Manager shall have such power as provided in Chapter III, Article II, Section 3-23 (10) of this Charter. All contracts and all ordinances or resolutions making contracts, or authorizing the same, shall be drawn by the City Attorney or shall be submitted to him before authorization by the Mayor and Council. Except where otherwise provided by law, or by this Charter or by ordinance of the Council, all contracts of the City shall be signed by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem or by some person designated by the Mayor and Council and shall be authenticated by the City Clerk. 
Section 4-51. - Centralized Purchasing. 
    The Mayor and Council may by ordinance set forth procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City of LaFayette. 
Section 4-52. - Sale and Disposition of Property. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council are hereby authorized to sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of LaFayette for governmental or other purposes, which is declared obsolete, surplus or unusable; at public or private sale, with or without advertisement, for such consideration as said Mayor and Council shall deem equitable and fair to the City; provided, however, no public utility owned or operated by the City of LaFayette shall be sold by the Mayor and Council unless such sale shall first be approved by a majority vote of the electors of the City of LaFayette voting in a special election called and held for the purpose. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council may quit claim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the City Manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public purposes and that the interest of the City has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place in the City, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the City, the Mayor and Council may authorize the execution and deliverance in the name of the City a deed conveying said cutoff or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way, of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the City has in such property, notwithstanding no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(d)  The Mayor and Council may by ordinance provide a method of closing streets, disposition of said streets, by sale or otherwise, and all matters and procedures relative thereto. The Mayor and Council shall have the same authority and power regarding lanes and alleys not in conflict with the general law of this State. 
CHAPTER V. - MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND REGULATORY FUNCTIONS 
ARTICLE I. - MUNICIPAL SERVICES 

Section 5-10. - Streets. 
(a)  The Mayor and Council are hereby vested with the power and authority to open, lay out, grade, widen, construct, straighten, alter, relocate, pave, replace, curb, vacate, abandon, close and otherwise permanently improve any and all streets, sidewalks, alleys, ways and squares, and to maintain, relocate, repair, replace and remove streets, curbing, sidewalks, alleys, ways and squares, and to exercise complete control over the streets, alleys, ways, sidewalks and squares in the City of LaFayette. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council are further vested with the power and authority to provide for the removal and disposition of any and all obstacles and nuisances in regard to the streets, alleys, ways and sidewalks and other public places within the City and are hereby empowered with the authority to adopt appropriate ordinances to accomplish these purposes. 
Section 5-11. - Municipal Utilities. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, build, maintain, and operate a system of waterworks, electric lights, sewerage and gas distribution; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered to any of said systems; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain in regard to any of said systems, both within and without the corporate limits; and to furnish the services of any said systems to consumers outside the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette by contract or otherwise. 
Section 5-12. - Sewers and Drains. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the power and authority to provide for the establishment, extension and maintenance of a system of sewers and drains, together with a sewerage disposal system. This power includes the authority to extend said system beyond the corporate limits by contract or otherwise. For those purposes the City of LaFayette is granted the power of eminent domain within and without its corporate limits. The Mayor and Council may provide by ordinance for reasonable connection fees for tapping onto the water and sewer lines of said City and may compel citizens to tap onto the same when such service is made available. They may cause said connections to be made when the owners refuse, and issue executions for the amount so expended, which execution shall be special liens on the property connected with said water and sewerage systems from the date of the order of connection, and may be enforced and collected in the same manner as City Tax executions or any general execution as provided by State Law. 
Section 5-13. - Right-of-Way. 
    The City of LaFayette shall have the right, easement and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipe, conduits and drains for waterworks and sewerage system purposes and gas systems along the highways and county maintained roads in the County of Walker without cost; it shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be necessary to protect the water basin and water shed, from which the water supply or any portion thereof is taken, from contamination and to protect said waterworks and sewerage system and gas system including the mains, pipes, and conduits, whether the same be situated within or without the corporate limits of said City. Said City of LaFayette shall likewise have the same powers and privileges with regard to its electrical system and the erection and maintenance of poles, lines and other necessary apparatus in connection with said system. 
Section 5-14. - Eminent Domain. 
    The Mayor and Council are hereby empowered to acquire, construct, build, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, waterworks, impoundments for storage of water, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements or purposes, inside or outside the City, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted thereto or under any power or procedure of eminent domain now or hereafter provided by the General Assembly of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATORY FUNCTIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter cross reference- See § 4-19 of Charter. 

Section 5-20. - Power to Regulate and License. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the power and authority to provide by ordinance for the registration and licensing of any trade, business, occupation, vocation, personal gain or profit of whatever nature, engaged in or carried on within the limits of the City of LaFayette, regardless whether or not the subject has an office or establishment within said City. The Mayor and Council shall be authorized to fix the amount, terms, and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, provided that this authority is subject to the Constitutions and Laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police powers of the City and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the City government through the imposition of a tax or fee on the privilege of operating within the City. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations and their agents. 
Section 5-21. - Franchises 
    The Mayor and Council shall have authority to exercise control over the use of Streets of the City of LaFayette, The power is hereby conferred upon the Mayor and Council to grant franchises for the use of said City's streets and alleys, for the purpose of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, gas companies, electric companies, ambulance companies, taxicabs, community antenna television companies, and transportation companies. This franchise right extends to, but is not limited to, the erection of poles, stringing of wires, laying of pipe, lines and conduits both above and below the surface. The Mayor and Council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration of such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of thirty-five (35) years and no franchise shall be granted unless the City receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The Mayor and Council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the City Clerk in the Registration Book to be kept by him. The Mayor and Council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
(Ord. No. 96-15, § 1, 8-12-96) 
Section 5-22. - Planning and Zoning 
(a)  The Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette, may, in the interest of public health, safety, order, convenience, comfort, prosperity or general welfare, adopt by ordinance a plan or plans for the districting or zoning of the City for the purposes of regulating the location of trades, industries, apartment houses, dwellings, or other uses of property; or for the purpose of regulating the height of buildings, fences or other structures; or for the purpose of regulating the alignment of buildings or structures near street frontages. The zoning regulations may be based upon any one (1) or more of the purposes above described. The City may be divided into such number of zones or districts, and such districts may be of such shape and area as the Mayor and Council of said City shall deem best to accomplish the purposes of the zoning regulations; in the determination and establishment of districts and regulations, classifications may be based upon the nature or character of the trade, industry, or profession or other activity conducted or to be conducted upon the premises; the number of persons, families or other group units to reside in or use said building; the public, quasi public or private nature of the use of premises; upon any other base or bases relevant to the promotion of the public health, safety, order, morals, convenience, prosperity or welfare. 
(b)  The Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette may by ordinance elect to use the powers and authority granted in the General Laws of Georgia and any amendments thereto (General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, Ga. L. 1957, p. 420 as amended) for the preparation and amendment of overall plans for the orderly growth and development of said City; providing for the regulation of the subdivision of land; and for providing for the regulation of structures in mapped streets, public building sites, and public open spaces. 
Section 5-23. - Building, Electrical, Plumbing Regulations. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the power and authority to enact such reasonable rules and regulations as they may deem necessary or expedient, regarding the construction of buildings, remodeling of buildings, plumbing, gas installation, and electrical wiring and equipping of buildings in order to promote the safety and welfare of its citizens and to guard against fire or other property damage. This power may, in the discretion of the Mayor and Council, be exercised by adoption of any such standard building, electrical, gas and plumbing codes as may be deemed appropriate. The Mayor and Council shall be empowered to engage the necessary personnel to enforce such rules and regulations as adopted, and to charge reasonable fees for inspection and permits; and may require the obtaining of a permit as a condition precedent to any construction, building, gas, electrical or plumbing work. The Mayor and Council may enact all ordinances necessary to enforce such rules and regulations. 
Section 5-24. - Abatement of Nuisance. 
    The Mayor and Council are hereby empowered to define a nuisance in the City of LaFayette and to provide for its abatement. The Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette shall have jurisdiction of all nuisance abatement proceedings therein, unless under the ordinance said jurisdiction is granted to the Recorder of the City of LaFayette. The Mayor and Council may provide by ordinance for any building, structure, or condition maintained in violation of any law of this State or any ordinance of the City of LaFayette, to be adjudged a nuisance and for its abatement at the owner's expense upon his failure or refusal to abate the same within ten (10) days after written notice from said City to do so. The Mayor and Council may by ordinance provide for the issuance of an execution for the expense of abatement which shall be a lien upon the property on which said nuisance existed, which execution may be enforced and collected in the same manner as City executions or in the same manner as general executions may be enforced and collected under State Law. 
Section 5-25. - Additional Regulatory Functions. 
    The Mayor and Council shall further have the power to enact any and all ordinances pertaining to licensing, zoning and planning, and building, electrical and plumbing regulations, under the authority of any and all General Laws of this State, as are deemed necessary and beneficial for said City by the Mayor and Council. 
Section 5-26. - Penalties. 
    The Mayor and Council shall have the right to fix by Ordinance penalties for violations of any ordinances enacted under the authority of this Article and may also provide by ordinance methods of enforcing the same. 
CHAPTER VI. - ELECTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, OCGA Title 21. 

Section 6-10. - Regular Elections; Time for Holding. 
    The regular election for Mayor, Councilmen, or Recorder, as the case may be, shall be held on the first Tuesday in December of each year. Officials elected at any regular election shall take office at the organizational meeting provided for in Section 2-40 of this Charter. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 4106, § 8) 
Section 6-11. - Qualification of Electors. 
    Any person meeting the qualifications of an elector for members of the General Assembly under State Laws who has been a bona fide resident of the City of LaFayette for ninety (90) days next preceding the election in which he desires to vote, shall be qualified to register as an elector in every City Election held under this Charter. 
Section 6-12. - Qualification of Candidate. 
    Any person desiring to become a candidate in any City Election must file written notice of his candidacy at the City Hall with the Election Superintendent at least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date fixed for the holding of such election in case of a regular election. To be eligible to become a candidate a person must meet all the requirements of the position contained in this Charter. 
Section 6-13. - Qualification Fees. 
    The Mayor and Council may set reasonable qualification fees for candidates to help defray the cost of conducting the election. If such fees are set, said fees must be paid to the election superintendent at the time a candidate files his notice of candidacy. Said qualification fees must also be published in the election notice required under this Charter. 
Section 6-14. - Election Superintendent, Election Managers and Election Clerks. 
    The Mayor and Council shall appoint annually an Election Superintendent and at least fifteen (15) days prior to any election an Election Manager or Managers and an Election Clerk or Clerks to conduct such election. The qualifications of said poll officers and the powers and duties of said officers shall be as prescribed by the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
Section 6-15. - Conduct of Elections, Notice. 
    The Mayor and Council shall give notice of every regular election at least thirty (30) days prior to the election by advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The Notice shall contain the time and place of holding the election, the offices to be filled, the qualification fee, if any, and any other questions to be voted on. No additional notice is required of a runoff election. 
Section 6-16. - Time of Election, Ballots. 
    The polls shall be open from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. All voting shall be by ballot. 
Section 6-17. - Place of Election. 
    The place or places for holding elections shall be prescribed by [the] Mayor and Council in the election notice. 
Section 6-18. - Voter Registration; Registrar. 
    The City of LaFayette shall maintain its own voter registration. The Mayor and Council shall appoint a Chief Voter Registrar, who may be the Clerk of the City, and may also appoint such additional registrars as are deemed necessary by said Mayor and Council. 
Section 6-19. - Registration Cards. 
    All future registration will be done at the City Hall with the Chief Registrar, or with such other registrars as are appointed, on a registration card as specified by the Georgia Municipal Election Code. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Charter, any person who was qualified and registered to vote at the time of the enactment of this Charter shall not be required to reregister under the terms of this Charter unless such person should become disqualified to vote for reasons of having been purged from the list of electors, in which event, such person shall, in order to become registered to vote, reregister under the terms of this Charter. 
Section 6-20. - Purging of Electors' List. 
    The Registrar shall purge the list of electors in accordance with the terms and conditions and provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
Section 6-21. - Voter Registration; Deadlines for Elections. 
    If any person whose name is not on the Municipal Registration List desires to vote at any election, he shall at least fifteen (15) days prior to the election in which he desires to vote apply to be registered as an elector. The Registrar or Registrars, as the case may be, shall cease taking applications to qualify persons to vote in such election fifteen (15) days prior to such election. 
Section 6-22. - Absentee Voting. 
    The Mayor and Council may by ordinance provide for absentee voting in municipal elections held in the City of LaFayette. In the event the Mayor and Council do so elect to allow absentee voting, the rules, regulations and procedures therefor shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. 
Section 6-23. - Election by Majority; Runoff Elections. 
    All elective City officers must be elected by a majority of the votes cast for the particular office in the regular election. If no one receives a majority of the votes cast for a particular office in a regular election, there shall be a runoff election between the two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes. Such runoff election shall be held on the second Tuesday in December. 
Section 6-24. - Matters Not Covered Herein Pertaining to Elections. 
    At all times when the term "Georgia Municipal Election Code" is referred to in this Charter, it shall be construed to mean the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Ga. Laws 1968, p. 885 et seq., OCGA, Title 21, and all matters of procedure and rules governing municipal elections not specifically covered herein shall be governed by said Georgia Municipal Election Code and amendments thereto. 
CHAPTER VII. - RECORDER'S COURT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Court, Ch. 9. 

Section 7-10. - Creation. 
    There is hereby established a Court to be known and designated as the "Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette." 
Section 7-11. - Place and Time of Session. 
    Sessions of the Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette, shall be convened at the place designated by ordinance and at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary by the presiding officer to keep current the docket thereof. 
Section 7-12. - Recorder-Creation, Establishment of Office. 
    Sessions of the Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette, shall be presided over by the Recorder who shall be elected by the voters of the City and shall take office at the first regular meeting of the Mayor and Council in January of each year. In the absence or disability of the Recorder or during any vacancy of the office of Recorder, the Mayor shall serve as Recorder and shall be clothed with all of the rights, powers and privileges of the Recorder and shall perform the duties of the office of Recorder so long as such absence, disability or vacancy shall continue. 
Section 7-13. - Same-Qualifications. 
    The Recorder shall be a qualified voter of the City of LaFayette and shall have resided in the City of LaFayette at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of his election or appointment and shall continue to reside in the City of LaFayette during his term of office, and shall have attained the age of twenty-five (25) years. 
Section 7-14. - Same-Oath. 
    Before entering on the duties of his office, the Recorder shall take such oath as the Mayor and Council may prescribe by ordinance. 
Section 7-15. - Same-Term. 
    The Recorder shall serve for a term of two (2) years; and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
Section 7-16. - Same-Compensation. 
    The compensation of the Recorder shall be fixed by the Mayor and Council; however, the same shall not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. Any reduction in the compensation of the Recorder shall not be effective during the term in which said reduction is enacted. 
Section 7-17. - Same-Vacancy. 
    The office of Recorder shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law or forfeiture of his office, or when he ceases to reside within the Corporate Limits of the City of LaFayette. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor and Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Section 7-18. - Jurisdiction, Punishment and Penalties. 
    The Recorder shall have power to try all cases and violations against the laws and ordinances of the City of LaFayette and to punish offenders by imposing fines to an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), to imprison offenders for a period not more than six (6) months, or at labor on the roads and streets or [other] public works of the City of LaFayette for not more than six (6) months; and the Recorder shall have the power and authority to impose any one (1) or more of these punishments for each violation of any law or ordinance of the City of LaFayette when the Recorder shall find the facts of the case so justified. The Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette, is specifically invested with all jurisdiction and powers within the corporate limits of the city of LaFayette granted by State Laws generally to Mayors, Recorders and Police Courts except the Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette, shall have jurisdiction in respect to the trial and abatement of all nuisances in said City only when authorized by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90, § 1, Ord. No. 93-3, § 1, 5-19-93) 
Section 7-19. - Contempt. 
    The Recorder shall have authority to punish for contempt against his lawful authority whether in his presence or otherwise, and punishments may be inflicted at the discretion of the Recorder for contempt by fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding five (5) days, either or both, at the discretion of the Recorder. 
Section 7-20. - Summons, Subpoena. 
    The Recorder shall have authority to issue summons and subpoena for witnesses and to compel their attendance whether residents of the City or not; to issue subpoena duces tecum for witnesses and the production of books and papers whether in the City or not, and compel their production; and to punish, as for contempt, failure to obey his legal summons and subpoena and orders. 
Section 7-21. - Execution, Levy, Sale to Enforce Collection of Fine. 
    Whenever any person is convicted and sentenced to pay a fine or when the payment of a fine is a portion of the sentence, and said person fails to or refuses to pay said fine, the collection thereof shall be enforced by execution, levy and sale in the same way and manner as the collection of taxes is enforced in the City of LaFayette. 
Section 7-22. - Warrants. 
    The Recorder shall have authority to issue warrants for violations of the laws and ordinances of the City of LaFayette which are committed within the corporate limits of said City, which warrants may be executed by any police officer of said City. 
Section 7-23. - Appearance Bonds-Amount, Conditions, Effect. 
    The Chief of Police or any Policeman of the City shall release any person arrested for a violation of the laws and ordinances of the City, upon said persons giving a bond with good and sufficient security to be approved by the Chief of Police or Assistant Chief of Police or such other person as may be designated by ordinance to approve appearance bonds, payable to the Mayor of the City of LaFayette in [an] amount fixed by the person designated to approve said bonds, for the personal appearance of such person before the Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette, at the time and place therein specified, to answer the charges against him, and from time to time until the principal in such bond is tried and the case disposed of, and not to depart from the City of LaFayette except by leave of the Court. 
Section 7-24. - Same-Forfeiture. 
    In the event the principal fails to appear before the Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette, as stipulated in his appearance bond, said bond shall be forfeited in said Court and the presiding officer thereof shall have the power and authority to order the principal in said bond rearrested and placed in the City Jail or guardhouse or such other place as offenders are imprisoned by said City until his case may be tried and disposed of, or to admit the defendant to bail as the Recorder may deem proper. 
Section 7-25. - Right of Appeal-Prerequisites. 
    Any person convicted of violating any of the laws and ordinances of the City of LaFayette shall have the right of appeal to the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia; provided, all costs are first paid to the City Clerk, who shall, upon payment thereof, certify in writing that the same has been paid and the bond and security given in double the amount of the fine imposed, to personally appear, stand and abide by the final judgment in said case; and if no fine is imposed and the defendant is imprisoned or sentenced to work on the streets or other public works in said City, then a bond shall be given in the amount which shall be fixed by the Recorder in his sound discretion. 
Section 7-26. - Same-Rules and Regulations Applicable. 
    Unless otherwise provided by law, an appeal to the Superior Court shall be by writ of certiorari only and in accordance with Chapter 4, Title 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 04-09, § 1, 5-10-2004) 
Note- (Ga. Laws 1969, p. 2298) 
Section 7-27. - Same-Bonds to be Approved. 
    All bonds given in appeal cases shall be approved by the Recorder. 
Section 7-28. - Same-Affidavit in Lieu of Bond. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent the defendant if he wishes to appeal his case from filing an affidavit in forma pauperis in lieu of giving bond and security and the payment of the costs. 
Section 7-29. - Same-Affidavit; Bond to Act as Supersedes. 
    Upon the affidavit provided for in section 7-28 being given or bond provided for in section 7-27 being given and approved, the same shall act as a supersedeas of the judgment sought to be reviewed by appeal, until the final judgment is rendered in said case. 
Section 7-30. - Costs. 
    Upon the conviction of any person for the violation of any law or ordinance of the City of LaFayette, the Recorder may, in his discretion, tax the cost of the proceedings against the person convicted and the cost shall be computed under the provisions of the laws of the State of Georgia fixing costs in the Justice of the Peace Courts of said State, except that the Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette may establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation of the Recorder's Court, City of LaFayette, and in that event the costs shall be computed based upon the schedule of fees established by the Mayor and Council of the City of LaFayette and the collection of the costs shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for collection of fines in Section 7-21 [of this Charter]. 
Section 7-31. - Rules for Recorder's Court. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein the Recorder shall have full power and authority to make rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the business of said Court; provided, however, the rules of evidence applicable to the Superior Courts of this State shall apply in the Recorder's Court of the City of LaFayette. 
CHAPTER VIII. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Section 8-10. - Initial Election of Mayor, Council and Recorder. 
    The Mayor, Members of City Council and Recorder in office at the date of adoption of this Act will serve out the term for which they were elected, or appointed, as the case may be, notwithstanding the fact that more than one (1) Councilman may live in one (1) Ward as herein designated and no Councilman may be living in some Ward or Wards as hereinafter designated. Any vacancy occurring in any of said elected offices before the expiration of the terms for which those who are in office at the date of adoption of this Act has expired shall be filled for the remainder of said term by appointment by the Mayor and Council with no Ward residency requirements applying to such appointments. 
    At the next regular municipal election to be held in the City of LaFayette in 1969 there shall be elected three (3) Councilmen, one (1) from the Third Ward, one (1) from the Fourth Ward, and one (1) from the City at Large, for terms of two (2) years, at the next regular municipal election to be held in the City of LaFayette in 1970 there shall be elected a Mayor, a Recorder, and two (2) Councilmen, one (1) from the First Ward and one (1) from the Second Ward, for terms of two (2) years. 
Section 8-11. - Official Bonds. 
    The officers and employees of the City of LaFayette, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the Mayor and Council may from time to time require. 
Section 8-12. - Amending Charter. 
    Except in the particulars hereinbefore specifically provided for, the terms and provisions of this Charter may be hereinafter modified, rescinded, changed, or amended by: 
(a)  The General Assembly of Georgia; 
(b)  Any procedure authorized by the laws of Georgia as the same may now or hereafter exist. 
Section 8-13. - Existing Ordinances and Regulations. 
    Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of LaFayette not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified or amended by the Mayor and Council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of LaFayette not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified or amended. 
Section 8-14. - General Laws May be Used. 
    The Mayor and Council, in their discretion, may elect to use the provision of any general laws of the State in addition to or instead of the provision of this Charter. 
Section 8-15. - Section Captions. 
    The captions to the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not intended to be considered as a part thereof. 
Section 8-16. - Severability. 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
Section 8-17. - Effective Date. 
    This Charter shall be effective on and after April 30, 1969. 
Section 8-18. - Repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed. 
APPENDIX I. - BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY OF LAFAYETTE, GEORGIA 
The boundaries of the City of LaFayette shall be as follows: Beginning at the Northwest corner of Land Lot 8 in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and from said beginning point running thence South along the West line of said Land Lot 8 and continuing along the West line of Land Lot 29 in said District and Section a total distance of 5,280 feet to the Southwest corner of said Land Lot 29; thence North 89 degrees 37 minutes West along the North line of Land Lot 43 in said District and Section 2,731.4 feet to the Northwest corner of said Land Lot 43; thence South 0 degrees 30 minutes West along the West line of said Land Lot 43 a distance of 1,060.8 feet; thence South 88 degrees 35 minutes East 952 feet, more or less, to the Westerly right-of-way line of Hillsdale Road; thence Southerly along the Westerly line of Hillsdale Road the following courses and distances: South 1 degree 08 minutes West 192.92 feet, South 0 degrees 43 minutes East 158.96 feet, South 1 degree 25 minutes West 98.69 feet, and South 9 degrees 18 minutes West 4.33 feet to the Northeast corner of the property owned by the City of LaFayette upon which is located a water treatment plant; thence south 80 degrees 41 minutes West 345 feet; thence south 3 degrees 31 minutes West along the West line of said property of City of LaFayette 305.98 feet to a point located on the Northerly right-of-way line of State Highway No. 193; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said State Highway No. 193 a distance of 2,142.5 feet, more or less, to the point where the Northerly line of said highway intersects the East line of said Land Lot 43, the same being the West line of Land Lot 44, in said District and Section; thence South along the original West lines of Land Lot 44, Land Lot 65 and Land Lot 80 in the 7th District and 4th Section of said County to the Southwest corner of said Land Lot 80; thence East along the South line of said Land Lot 80, the same being the North line of Land Lot 101 in said District and Section, to a point which is 1,740.1 feet West of the Northeast corner of said Land Lot 101; thence South 1 degree 30 minutes East 891.7 feet; thence North 86 degrees 10 minutes West 609.3 feet; thence North 75 degrees 30 minutes West 260 feet to a point on the Easterly line of Broomtown Road (Georgia State Highway No. 337); thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said State Highway No. 337 to the point where the Easterly line of said highway is intersected by the West line of said Land Lot 101, the same being the East line of Land Lot 102; thence Southwesterly along the Easterly line of said State Highway No. 337 a distance of 1,135 feet, more or less, to the point where the Easterly right-of-way line of said State Highway intersects the South line of Land Lot 102 in said District and Section; thence North 89 degrees 10 minutes East along the South line of said Land Lot 102, the same being the North line of Land Lot 115, a distance of 330 feet; thence South 17 degrees 5 minutes West 340 feet; thence South 0 degrees 50 minutes East 905 feet to a point in or near the center of a branch; thence South 47 degrees 49 minutes East 344.2 feet to a point in said branch; thence South 0 degrees 50 minutes East 620.3 feet; thence South 88 degrees 26 minutes East 100 feet to the center line of what is known as the Central of Georgia Railroad right-of-way (Southern Railway System, now Norfolk-Southern Railroad System); thence Northeasterly along and with the center line of said Railroad 1,180.1 feet to a point which is 1,370.6 feet, measured along the center line of said Railroad, Southerly from the point where the center line of said Railroad intersects the North line of Land Lot 116 in said District and Section; thence South 67 degrees 24 minutes East 315.8 feet to a point in the center of Chattooga Creek; thence Northeasterly and Northerly along and with the center line of Chattooga Creek and continuing along the center line of the channel change which was made around the year 1972 a distance of 2,195 feet, more or less, to the point where the center line of said Creek intersects the Southerly right-of-way line of Shattuck Industrial Boulevard, the bridge over said Creek on Shattuck Industrial Boulevard being immediately North of said point; thence Southeasterly along and with the Southerly right-of-way line of Shattuck Industrial Boulevard to the Southwest corner of the intersection of Shattuck Industrial Boulevard and Foster Mill Drive; thence Northerly 100 feet, more or less, to the Northwest corner of the intersection of Shattuck Industrial Boulevard and Foster Mill Drive; thence Northeasterly along the Westerly right-of-way line of Foster Mill Drive 939.86 feet to the Southeasterly corner of the property of John William Tench; thence North 65 degrees 7 minutes West along the Southerly line of said Tench property 200.3 feet to the Southwest corner of said Tench property; thence North 32 degrees 18 minutes East along the West line of said Tench property 256.4 feet to the South line of the property of Louie Hegwood; thence North 56 degrees 58 minutes West 153.6 feet; thence North 24 degrees 7 minutes East 647.5 feet; thence North 88 degrees 19 minutes East 219.9 feet; thence North 45 degrees East 483 feet; thence South 69 degrees 3 minutes East 332.5 feet to the Westerly right-of-way line of Foster Mill Road; thence North 24 degrees 33 minutes East along the Westerly line of said road 38.4 feet; thence Northeasterly and continuing along the Westerly line of said road 111.7 feet (the chord on the last described line being North 22 degrees 54 minutes East 111.6 feet); thence North 69 degrees 6 minutes West 272 feet; thence North 25 degrees 24 minutes East 160.3 feet; thence North 69 degrees 6 minutes West 206.1 feet; thence North 16 degrees 10 minutes East 328.2 feet; thence North 22 degrees 36 minutes East 339.7 feet to the Northwest corner of the property of Rudy R. Barrett and Lola Barrett; thence North 14 degrees 44 minutes East 30 feet, more or less, to the South line of Land Lot 82; thence East along the South line of Land Lot 82 to the Easterly right-of-way line of the Foster Mill Road; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said road 214 feet; thence South 75 degrees East along the South line of the Underwood property 318 feet; thence North 12 degrees 20 minutes East 286 feet to a point on the North line of Land Lot 99, the same being the South line of Land Lot 82, in said District and Section; thence East along the South line of said Land Lot 82 and continuing along the South line of said Land Lot 83 in said District and Section to the Southeast corner of said Land Lot 83; thence North along the East line of said Land Lot 83 a distance of 2,640 feet to the Northeast corner of said Land Lot; thence continuing North along the East line of Land Lot 62 in said District and Section to the point where the East line of said Land Lot is intersected by the North right-of-way line of State Highway No. 136; thence Southeasterly along the North line of said State Highway No. 136 a distance of 760 feet, more or less, to the point where the North line of said highway is intersected by the East line of a road which leads North into Skyline Heights Subdivision, which road is now known as Sunrise Drive; thence South 72 degrees 15 minutes East along the Northerly line of said State Highway No. 136 a distance of 168.4 feet; thence North 3 degrees 10 minutes East 309.6 feet; thence North 54 degrees 57 minutes East 40.1 feet; thence North 47 degrees 17 minutes West 115.1 feet; thence North 44 degrees 17 minutes West 35.1 feet; thence North 42 degrees 6 minutes West 64 feet to a point on the Westerly right-of-way line of Sunrise Drive; thence Northerly along the Westerly line of Sunrise Drive, sometimes referred to as Skyline Drive, 15 feet to the Southeast corner of property of City of LaFayette; thence South 74 degrees East 348.8 feet; thence North 1 degree East 9 feet; thence North 88 degrees 30 minutes East 181 feet to the Southeast corner of property of City of LaFayette; thence North 1 degree 30 minutes West 650 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot 5 in Block E of Skyline Heights Subdivision as shown on plat recorded in Plat Book 5, page 53, Clerk's Office, Superior Court, Walker County, Georgia; thence North 29 degrees East along the East line of said Lot No. 5 a distance of 256.7 feet to a point on the South line of Lot 6 Block E of said subdivision; thence South 86 degrees East along the South line of said Lot 6 a distance of 186 feet to the Southeast corner of said Lot 6; thence North 15 degrees East along the East line of Skyline Heights Subdivision 400 feet; thence South 76 degrees 29 minutes 19 seconds East along the South line of the Pope property 832.4 feet to a point on the East line of Land Lot 48 in the 7th District and 4th Section; thence North 0 degrees 8 minutes 16 seconds West along the East line of said Land Lot 48 a distance of 677.7 feet to the center line of the 100 foot right-of-way of Georgia Power Company; thence South 86 degrees 33 minutes 27 seconds West along the center line of said right-of-way and along the South line of the Wardlaw property 678.1 feet to the East line of Block E Skyline Heights Subdivision; thence North 15 degrees East along the East line of Lot 13 in Block E of said subdivision a distance of 75.6 feet to the South line of Morningside Drive; thence North 1 degree 30 minutes West along the dead-end of Morningside Drive and along the East line of Block D of Skyline Heights Subdivision (Flat Book 4, page 182 in said Clerk's Office) a total distance of 1,327 feet to a point on the North line of said Land Lot 48, which point is 210 feet East of the East right-of-way line of Sunrise Drive; thence continuing North 1 degree 15 minutes West into Land Lot 25 in the 7th District and 4th Section a distance of 972 feet to the North line of the property of Paul W. Baker; thence North 89 degrees 53 minutes East 600 feet, more or less, to the East line of Land Lot 25; thence North along the East line of Land Lot 25 a distance of 1,174.5 feet; thence South 89 degrees 54 minutes East 2,085 feet to the East line of Wilson Pond Road, sometimes known as Bird Wilson Road; thence North along the East line of said road and continuing along an extension of the East line of said road in a Northerly direction a total distance of 780 feet, more or less, to the North right-of-way line of Round Pond Road; thence West along the North right-of-way line of Round Pond Road 586 feet, more or less, to the East line of Land Lot 11 in the 7th District and 4th Section; thence North along the East line of said Land Lot 11 a distance of 2,640 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of said Land Lot 11; thence West along the North line of said Land Lot 11 to the Southeast corner of Land Lot 315 in the 8th District and 4th Section; thence North along the East line of said Land Lot 315 to the Northeast corner of Land Lot 315; thence continuing North along the East line of Land Lot 298 and along the East line of Land Lot 279 in said District and Section a total distance of 2,780 feet to a point on the Northerly right-of-way line of McCarter Road; thence Southeasterly along the Northerly and Northeasterly line of McCarter Road 580 feet to the Southeast corner of Lot No. 69 of Fairview Heights Subdivision; thence North along the East line of said Lot 69 of Fairview Heights Subdivision 180 feet to a point on the South line of Linda Drive, also known as Louise Avenue, and continuing thence North 50 feet to a point on the Northerly line of Louise Avenue; thence Northwesterly along the Northeasterly line of Louise Avenue 156 feet; thence North along the East line of Louise Avenue 630 feet to the Southeast corner of the intersection of Louise Avenue and Jessie Drive; thence continuing North 50 feet to a point on the North line of Jessie Drive; thence North 185 feet to a point on the North line of Pickard Drive; thence South 87 degrees 29 minutes 33 seconds East along the North line of Pickard Drive 105 feet, more or less, to the Southeast corner of the property conveyed to Auto Custom Carpets, Inc. by deed dated August 30, 1984, recorded in Deed Book 525, page 562 in said Clerk's Office; thence North 5 degrees 28 minutes 45 seconds East 171.48 feet; thence North 88 degrees 54 minutes 40 seconds West 103.6 feet to the Southeast corner of what was known as the Duckett property, now the property of K. L. Ficken, Trustee, as described in deed dated May 6, 1980, recorded in Deed Book 471, page 668; thence North 19 degrees 30 minutes East 507 feet; thence North 89 degrees 20 minutes West 218 feet to a point on the East right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27; thence Northerly along the Easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway No. 27 a distance of 950 feet, more or less, to the point where the Easterly line of said highway intersects the South line of what is known as Lake Howard Road; thence West to the point of intersection of the Westerly line of U.S. Highway 27 with the South line of State Highway No. 136, and continuing West along the South line of said State Highway No. 136 a total distance of 600 feet, more or less, to the Easterly right-of-way line of the Central of Georgia Railroad; thence Northerly along the Easterly line of said Railroad right-of-way 100 feet, more or less, to the Northerly line of State Highway No. 136; thence Westerly along the Northerly line of said highway 60 feet, more or less, to the point where the Westerly right-of-way line of said Railroad intersects the Northerly line of said highway; thence North 32 degrees 26 minutes East along the Westerly right-of-way line of said Railroad 1,422.55 feet; thence North 81 degrees 53 minutes West 835.69 feet; thence North 1 degree 13 minutes East 1,060.07 feet; thence North 88 degrees 11 minutes 54 seconds West 300 feet; thence North 1 degree 13 minutes East 300 feet to a point on the South line of Warren Road; thence North 89 degrees 37 minutes 6 seconds West along the South line of Warren Road 612.08 feet, and continuing along the South line of said road North 83 degrees 15 minutes 20 seconds West 191.24 feet to the point where the South line of Warren Road intersects the Easterly line of Straight Gut Road; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of Straight Gut Road 2,856 feet, more or less, to the point where the Easterly line of said road intersects the Northerly line of said State Highway No. 136; thence Easterly along the Northerly line of said Highway No. 136 a distance of 1,946 feet, more or less, to the point where the Northerly line of said highway intersects the Westerly right-of-way line of said Central of Georgia Railroad; thence Southerly along the Westerly line of said Railroad 860 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of the property conveyed by Phoenix Smelting Corporation to City of LaFayette, Georgia, by deed dated December 16, 1981, recorded in Deed Book 491, page 108 of the Deed Records of Walker County, Georgia; thence South 89 degrees 34 minutes West 1,685.7 feet to a point on the Easterly line of Gordon Pond Road, also known as Mineral Springs Road; thence Southerly along the Easterly line of said road the following courses and distances: South 13 degrees 45 minutes East 243.9 feet, South 5 degrees 27 minutes East 150 feet, and South 0 degrees 27 minutes East 1,087.3 feet to the North line of the property of Frank Shattuck, Jr.; thence North 88 degrees 45 minutes East 464.3 feet; thence South 1 degree 15 minutes East 100 feet; thence South 31 degrees 15 minutes East 77.5 feet to a point on the Northwesterly right-of-way line of said Central of Georgia Railroad; thence Southwesterly along the Northwesterly right-of-way line of said Railroad a distance of 990 feet, more or less, to the point where the Northwesterly right-of-way line of said Railroad intersects the Westerly line of Gordon Pond Road; thence Southerly along the Westerly line of Gordon Pond Road 1,350 feet to the point where the West line of said road intersects the West line of West North Main Street, also known as the Old Chattanooga Highway; thence South along the West line of West North Main Street 952 feet, more or less, to the point where the West line of said street intersects the South line of Land Lot 298 in said district and section, said point also being where the North line of Probasco Street intersects the West line of West North Main Street, thence West along the South line of said Land Lot 298, the same being the North line of Probasco Street, a distance of 670 feet, more or less, to the point where the North line of Probasco Street is intersected by the West right-of-way line of said Central of Georgia Railroad in Land Lot 298; thence Northerly along the Westerly line of said Railroad 385 feet; thence South 88 degrees 30 minutes West 341 feet to a point on the East line of Land Lot 297 in the 8th District and 4th Section; thence North 1 degree 30 minutes West along the East line of said Land Lot 297 a distance of 841.7 feet; thence South 88 degrees 30 minutes West 1,330 feet; thence South 1 degree 30 minutes East 1,193 feet to the South line of said Land Lot 297, the same being the North line of Land Lot 316 in said District and Section; thence West along the North line of said Land Lot 316 to the Northwest corner of Land Lot 316; thence South along the West line of Land Lot 316 a distance of 2,640 feet to the Southwest corner of Land Lot 316; thence West along the North line of Land Lot 8 in the 7th District and 4th Section of said County to the Northwest corner of said Land Lot, the same being the beginning point. 
Also, there is included within the boundaries of the City of LaFayette all of that property owned by the City of LaFayette (but not including land in which the City only has flood easement rights) which was acquired in connection with the creation of a lake which is owned by said City and which is now known as Queen City Lake, said property being more particularly described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 12 in the 7th District and 4th Section and in Land Lots 240, 263, 264, 265, 276, 277, 278, 299, 300, 301, 312, 313 and 314 in the 8th District and 4th Section, all in Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Start at the point where the center line of Round Pond Road, a public road in Walker County, Georgia, intersects the East line of Land Lot 11 in the 7th District and 4th Section, and from said starting point running thence Easterly and Northeasterly along and with the center line of said Round Pond Road a distance of 3,400 feet, more or less, to the point where the East line, if the same were extended Southerly in a straight line, of the property conveyed by J. T. Rhyne and J. Morton Rhyne to City of LaFayette, Georgia, by warranty deed dated December 5, 1974, recorded in Deed Book 403, pages 635-641, of the Deed Records of Walker County, Georgia, would intersect the center line of said Round Pond Road; thence Northerly 20 feet, more or less, to a point on the Northerly line of said road, said point being the point where the East line of the property so conveyed by J. T. Rhyne and J. Morton Rhyne to City of LaFayette, Georgia, by the aforesaid deed, intersects the Northerly line of said Road, the same also being the Southwest corner of the property of Mrs. Clark Sosebee, which point is the beginning point of the property herein described, and from said beginning point running thence North 05 degrees 07 minutes West along a fence and along the West line of said Sosebee property a distance of 437.9 feet to an iron pipe; thence North 04 degrees 30 minutes West along the West line of said Sosebee property 153.2 feet to the North line of said Land Lot 12, said line also being the District line between the 8th District and 7th District of Walker County, Georgia, and said point being 200.1 feet North 88 degrees 59 minutes West of the Northeast corner of said Land Lot 12; thence North 11 degrees 35 minutes East 1,038.3 feet to an iron pipe located in said Land Lot 313; thence North 03 degrees 15 minutes East 149.1 feet; thence North 48 degrees 28 minutes West 233.4 feet; thence North 65 degrees 57 minutes West 138.9 feet; thence North 56 degrees 26 minutes West 91.4 feet; thence North 34 degrees 32 minutes West 293.3 feet; thence North 01 degree 58 minutes West 230.5 feet; thence North 68 degrees 59 minutes East 52.9 feet; thence North 00 degrees 23 minutes East 303.2 feet; thence North 47 degrees 53 minutes East 103.4 feet; thence North 60 degrees 13 minutes East 318.5 feet; thence South 76 degrees 29 minutes East 96.4 feet; thence North 05 degrees 36 minutes West 111.7 feet; thence North 44 degrees 30 minutes East 158.7 feet; thence South 86 degrees 08 minutes East 87.9 feet; thence North 00 degrees 10 minutes West 94.6 feet; thence North 30 degrees 47 minutes East 124.4 feet to a point on the North line of said Land Lot 313, the same being the South line of said Land Lot 300; thence North 49 degrees 55 minutes East 79.1 feet; thence North 27 degrees West 19.2 feet; thence South 63 degrees 28 minutes West 154.2 feet to a point on the aforesaid South line of said Land Lot 300; thence South 67 degrees 18 minutes West 84.8 feet; thence South 64 degrees 01 minute West 286.8 feet; thence South 89 degrees 31 minutes West 185.4 feet; thence North 00 degrees 37 minutes East 168.1 feet to a point on the South line of said Land Lot 300; thence North 04 degrees 43 minutes East 217.4 feet; thence North 25 degrees 30 minutes East 106.4 feet; thence North 28 degrees 59 minutes East 227.5 feet; thence North 45 degrees 06 minutes East 89.4 feet; thence North 35 degrees 11 minutes East 128 feet; thence North 52 degrees 35 minutes East 350.2 feet; thence North 69 degrees 14 minutes East 102.2 feet; thence North 89 degrees 41 minutes East 115.4 feet to a point on the East line of said Land Lot 300, the same being the West line of said Land Lot 301; thence North 89 degrees 41 minutes East 1.8 feet; thence North 29 degrees 31 minutes East 46.9 feet; thence North 29 degrees 31 minutes East 55.9 feet; thence North 72 degrees 35 minutes East 245.5 feet; thence North 71 degrees 59 minutes East 93.9 feet; thence North 36 degrees East 200.9 feet; thence North 46 degrees 47 minutes West 62.2 feet; thence North 87 degrees 50 minutes West 105.7 feet; thence North 77 degrees 34 minutes West 199.8 feet; thence South 69 degrees 55 minutes West 75.6 feet; thence North 86 degrees 38 minutes West 69.2 feet to the West line of said Land Lot 301; thence North 86 degrees 38 minutes West 239.5 feet; thence North 73 degrees 50 minutes West 138.7 feet; thence North 11 degrees 59 minutes West 94.1 feet; thence North 14 degrees 57 minutes East 172.7 feet; thence North 07 degrees 44 minutes East 91.5 feet; thence North 22 degrees 28 minutes East 127.3 feet; thence North 09 degrees 52 minutes East 314.3 feet; thence North 29 degrees 48 minutes East 83.6 feet; thence North 06 degrees 54 minutes East 100.7 feet; thence North 22 degrees 39 minutes West 38.9 feet to the North line of said Land Lot 300, the same being the South line of said Land Lot 277; thence North 22 degrees 39 minutes West 108.8 feet; thence North 10 degrees 06 minutes East 107.4 feet; thence North 07 degrees 33 minutes East 82.1 feet; thence North 25 degrees 21 minutes East 77.1 feet; thence North 15 degrees 28 minutes East 134 feet; thence North 08 degrees 40 minutes East 105 feet; thence North 14 degrees 04 minutes East 137 feet; thence North 23 degrees 18 minutes East 117.9 feet; thence North 27 degrees 29 minutes West 71.7 feet; thence North 52 degrees 39 minutes West 121 feet; thence North 12 degrees 22 minutes West 47.2 feet; thence North 55 degrees 51 minutes West 24.9 feet; thence continuing North 55 degrees 51 minutes West 38.3 feet; thence North 00 degrees 11 minutes West 82.5 feet; thence North 04 degrees 51 minutes East 108.2 feet; thence North 26 degrees 05 minutes West 100.9 feet; thence North 08 degrees 24 minutes West 91.9 feet; thence North 16 degrees 32 minutes East 103.4 feet; thence North 63 degrees 32 minutes East 69.2 feet; thence North 81 degrees 44 minutes East 123 feet; thence North 18 degrees 12 minutes East 50 feet; thence North 54 degrees 58 minutes West 81.5 feet; thence North 83 degrees 58 minutes West 58.9 feet; thence North 06 degrees 30 minutes East 175.5 feet; thence North 28 degrees 05 minutes East 120.6 feet; thence North 22 degrees 33 minutes East 274.2 feet to the East line of said Land Lot 277, the same being the West line of said Land Lot 276; thence North 22 degrees 33 minutes East 22.8 feet; thence North 25 degrees 11 minutes East 273.2 feet; thence North 22 degrees 09 minutes East 248.5 feet to a point on the South line of Lake Howard Road; thence North 24 degrees 13 minutes East crossing said Lake Howard Road 54.4 feet to a point in said Land Lot 265 which is located on the North line of said Lake Howard Road, the same being on or near the original South line of said Land Lot 265; thence North 26 degrees 14 minutes East 346.2 feet; thence North 23 degrees 57 minutes East 98.9 feet; thence North 22 degrees 17 minutes East 392.9 feet; thence North 69 degrees 55 minutes East 194.9 feet; thence North 08 degrees 40 minutes West 340.8 feet; thence North 04 degrees 43 minutes East 81.2 feet; thence North 57 degrees 13 minutes West 31.5 feet; thence South 67 degrees 28 minutes West 266.7 feet; thence South 43 degrees 05 minutes West 280.1 feet; thence South 80 degrees 39 minutes West 178.2 feet; thence South 15 degrees 15 minutes East 197 feet; thence South 24 degrees 03 minutes West 136.4 feet; thence South 39 degrees 50 minutes West 125.8 feet to the West line of said Land Lot 265, the same being the East line of said Land Lot 264; thence South 78 degrees 58 minutes West 48.6 feet; thence South 50 degrees 13 minutes West 98.8 feet; thence South 34 degrees 59 minutes West 147.6 feet; thence South 30 degrees 11 minutes West 356.4 feet; thence South 50 degrees 56 minutes West 8.5 feet to a point on the North right-of-way line of Lake Howard Road; thence crossing said Lake Howard Road South 36 degrees 09 minutes West 61.1 feet to a point on the South right-of-way line of Lake Howard Road, said point also being in Land Lot 277; thence South 13 degrees 26 minutes West 40.6 feet; thence South 24 degrees 52 minutes East 84.2 feet; thence South 19 degrees 20 minutes West 79.2 feet; thence South 40 degrees 06 minutes West 119.3 feet; thence South 49 degrees 37 minutes West 159.9 feet; thence North 86 degrees 29 minutes West 86.3 feet; thence South 14 degrees 12 minutes West 33.3 feet; thence South 52 degrees 34 minutes East 79 feet; thence South 11 degrees 40 minutes West 190 feet; thence South 03 degrees 46 minutes West 101.3 feet; thence South 12 degrees 53 minutes West 115.6 feet; thence South 17 degrees 14 minutes West 159.6 feet; thence South 07 degrees 30 minutes West 171.9 feet; thence South 04 degrees 37 minutes East 93.9 feet; thence South 19 degrees 27 minutes West 48.6 feet; thence South 41 degrees 48 minutes West 101 feet; thence South 57 degrees 34 minutes West 85.7 feet; thence South 33 degrees 04 minutes East 206.1 feet; thence South 03 degrees 10 minutes West 289 feet; thence South 16 degrees 31 minutes West 219.6 feet; thence South 25 degrees 16 minutes East 231.2 feet; thence South 00 degrees 12 minutes East 62 feet; thence South 75 degrees 19 minutes West 126 feet; thence South 05 degrees 08 minutes West 65.2 feet; thence South 33 degrees 12 minutes East 74.8 feet; thence South 01 degree 52 minutes West 156.2 feet; thence South 42 degrees 24 minutes West 4.1 feet to the South line of said Land Lot 277, the same being the North line of said Land Lot 300; thence South 42 degrees 24 minutes West 47 feet; thence South 55 degrees 29 minutes West 130.6 feet; thence South 87 degrees 07 minutes West 92.8 feet; thence South 52 degrees 36 minutes West 207.8 feet; thence North 47 degrees 28 minutes West 140.1 feet: thence North 59 degrees 47 minutes West 55.1 feet; thence North 04 degrees 40 minutes West 39.4 feet; thence North 68 degrees 23 minutes West 75.1 feet; thence North 71 degrees 10 minutes West 99.3 feet; thence North 66 degrees 43 minutes West 50.5 feet to the North line of said Land Lot 300, the same being the South line of said Land Lot 277; thence continuing North 66 degrees 43 minutes West 36.8 feet; thence North 21 degrees 58 minutes West 178.5 feet; thence North 55 degrees 27 minutes West 109.5 feet; thence North 22 degrees 49 minutes West 52.4 feet; thence North 30 degrees West 58 feet; thence North 62 degrees 26 minutes West 53.7 feet; thence North 06 degrees 14 minutes East 2.1 feet to a point on the South right-of-way line of Wheeler Road, also known as McCarter Road; thence crossing said road North 06 degrees 14 minutes East 44.3 feet to a point on the North line of said road; thence North 06 degrees 14 minutes East 18.6 feet; thence North 41 degrees 22 minutes West 136.7 feet; thence North 15 degrees 52 minutes West 142.3 feet; thence North 20 degrees 29 minutes West 134.5 feet; thence North 43 degrees 40 minutes West 103.2 feet; thence North 17 degrees 28 minutes West 65.1 feet; thence North 45 degrees 23 minutes West 109.1 feet; thence North 00 degrees 13 minutes West 69.1 feet; thence North 16 degrees 50 minutes West 99 feet; thence North 30 degrees 55 minutes West 72 feet; thence North 30 degrees 55 minutes West 25.4 feet; thence North 54 degrees 15 minutes West 62.2 feet; thence North 65 degrees 20 minutes West 51 feet; thence North 24 degrees 44 minutes West 70.7 feet; thence North 12 degrees 12 minutes East 83.7 feet; thence North 21 degrees 25 minutes West 64.3 feet; thence North 01 degree 51 minutes West 87.2 feet; thence North 06 degrees 15 minutes West 117.6 feet; thence North 26 degrees 10 minutes West 78 feet; thence North 09 degrees 24 minutes West 114.1 feet; thence North 17 degrees 31 minutes West 53.2 feet; thence North 48 degrees 04 minutes West 37.8 feet; thence North 01 degree 37 minutes East 14 feet; thence North 88 degrees 23 minutes West 16.5 feet; thence South 06 degrees 09 minutes West 104.5 feet; thence South 03 degrees 26 minutes West 168.1 feet; thence South 13 degrees 02 minutes West 82 feet; thence South 16 degrees 34 minutes West 73.5 feet; thence South 01 degree 22 minutes East 104.3 feet; thence South 09 degrees 23 minutes East 58 feet; thence South 06 degrees 34 minutes West 62.1 feet; thence South 33 degrees 46 minutes East 154.4 feet; thence South 06 degrees 27 minutes West 43 feet; thence South 08 degrees 13 minutes East 57.5 feet; thence South 29 degrees 52 minutes East 82.8 feet; thence South 24 degrees 47 minutes West 106.6 feet; thence South 18 degrees 30 minutes East 85.5 feet; thence South 64 degrees 45 minutes East 59.3 feet; thence South 35 degrees 08 minutes East 96.3 feet; thence South 43 degrees 54 minutes East 89.5 feet; thence South 32 degrees 42 minutes West 57.9 feet; thence South 28 degrees 48 minutes West 35.7 feet; thence South 14 degrees 12 minutes East 51.8 feet; thence South 09 degrees 03 minutes East 79.8 feet; thence South 22 degrees 19 minutes East 100.1 feet; thence South 33 degrees 19 minutes East 68.8 feet; thence South 40 degrees 18 minutes East 81.6 feet; thence South 14 degrees 43 minutes East 14 feet to a point on the Northerly line of Wheeler Road, also known as McCarter Road; thence crossing said road South 14 degrees 43 minutes East 40.9 feet to a point on the South line of said Road; thence South 14 degrees 43 minutes East 10.9 feet; thence South 08 degrees 22 minutes West 84.2 feet; thence South 29 degrees 33 minutes West 90.7 feet; thence South 23 degrees 28 minutes West 60.8 feet; thence South 21 degrees 29 minutes East 186.1 feet; thence South 21 degrees 30 minutes West 38 feet; thence South 40 degrees 26 minutes West 105.6 feet; thence North 85 degrees 55 minutes West 126.2 feet; thence South 28 degrees 12 minutes West 30.9 feet; thence South 10 degrees 58 minutes East 72.1 feet; thence South 69 degrees 45 minutes East 67.1 feet; thence North 74 degrees 37 minutes East 154.6 feet; thence South 86 degrees 57 minutes East 73.8 feet; thence South 15 degrees 16 minutes East 75.9 feet; thence North 60 degrees 11 minutes East 82.5 feet; thence South 63 degrees 01 minute East 46.9 feet; thence South 28 degrees 12 minutes East 83.6 feet; thence South 85 degrees 35 minutes East 39.7 feet; thence South 42 degrees 58 minutes East 48.2 feet; thence South 58 degrees 26 minutes East 105.3 feet; thence South 58 degrees 20 minutes East 134.5 feet; thence South 25 degrees 22 minutes East 39.6 feet; thence South 86 degrees 40 minutes East 127.4 feet; thence South 47 degrees 53 minutes East 134.7 feet; thence South 25 degrees 47 minutes East 86.5 feet; thence South 27 degrees 47 minutes West 130.9 feet; thence South 19 degrees 04 minutes East 105.4 feet; thence South 28 degrees 25 minutes East 108.3 feet; thence South 18 degrees 58 minutes East 7.18 feet; thence South 30 degrees 14 minutes West 264.6 feet; thence South 16 degrees 41 minutes East 167.1 feet; thence South 54 degrees 59 minutes West 171.9 feet; thence South 02 degrees 09 minutes East 222.5 feet; thence South 01 degree 02 minutes West 110 feet; thence South 24 degrees 52 minutes West 83 feet; thence South 55 degrees 08 minutes West 56 feet; thence South 69 degrees 49 minutes West 113.6 feet; thence South 19 degrees 39 minutes East 151 feet; thence South 13 degrees 43 minutes West 53.5 feet; thence South 03 degrees 35 minutes West 79.1 feet; thence South 03 degrees 48 minutes East 72.4 feet; thence South 19 degrees 24 minutes East 128.9 feet; thence South 20 degrees 48 minutes West 106.6 feet; thence South 37 degrees 38 minutes West 97.7 feet; thence South 31 degrees 42 minutes West 80.6 feet; thence South 05 degrees 44 minutes West 136.4 feet; thence South 16 degrees 40 minutes West 83.9 feet; thence South 35 degrees 35 minutes West 138.8 feet; thence South 68 degrees 34 minutes West 74 feet; thence South 79 degrees 50 minutes West 72.1 feet; thence North 73 degrees 04 minutes West 66.3 feet; thence North 37 degrees 53 minutes West 65.2 feet; thence North 23 degrees 12 minutes West 133.9 feet; thence South 71 degrees 56 minutes West 138.1 feet; thence South 26 degrees 52 minutes West 33 feet; thence South 05 degrees 15 minutes East 72.9 feet; thence South 25 degrees 44 minutes East 160.4 feet; thence South 84 degrees 19 minutes West 133.7 feet; thence North 74 degrees 11 minutes West 187.3 feet; thence North 46 degrees 57 minutes West 219.7 feet; thence North 29 degrees 32 minutes West 232.8 feet; thence North 07 degrees 46 minutes West 146.4 feet; thence North 65 degrees 42 minutes West 68.9 feet; thence North 16 degrees 46 minutes West 183.7 feet; thence North 42 degrees 18 minutes West 62.9 feet; thence North 22 degrees 28 minutes West 131.2 feet; thence North 36 degrees 10 minutes West 40.8 feet; thence North 09 degrees 39 minutes East 8.9 feet to the North line of Said Land Lot 314, the same being the South line of said Land Lot 299; thence North 09 degrees 39 minutes East 74.1 feet; thence North 58 degrees 54 minutes West 56.1 feet; thence North 01 degree 32 minutes East 70.1 feet; thence North 37 degrees 07 minutes East 75.6 feet; thence North 46 degrees 37 minutes West 45.6 feet; thence North 87 degrees 17 minutes West 47 feet; thence North 11 degrees 09 minutes West 64.4 feet; thence North 68 degrees 04 minutes West 83.2 feet; thence North 23 degrees 20 minutes West 51.4 feet; thence North 17 degrees 59 minutes West 170 feet; thence North 23 degrees 45 minutes West 98.4 feet; thence North 38 degrees 05 minutes West 88.7 feet; thence North 24 degrees 14 minutes West 168.9 feet; thence North 38 degrees 14 minutes West 79.5 feet; thence North 40 degrees 14 minutes West 75.7 feet; thence South 86 degrees 20 minutes West 33.6 feet; thence South 09 degrees 15 minutes East 141.2 feet; thence South 15 degrees 45 minutes East 152.4 feet; thence South 05 degrees 20 minutes East 95.4 feet; thence South 19 degrees 40 minutes West 61.4 feet; thence South 48 degrees 32 minutes East 100.2 feet; thence South 13 degrees 18 minutes East 193.8 feet; thence South 23 degrees 48 minutes East 84.8 feet; thence South 31 degrees 28 minutes East 91 feet; thence South 06 degrees 28 minutes East 39.6 feet; thence South 08 degrees 45 minutes West 59.4 feet; thence South 33 degrees 10 minutes West 171.7 feet; thence South 40 degrees 06 minutes East 98 feet; thence South 79 degrees 38 minutes East 93.9 feet; thence South 18 degrees 51 minutes East 114.4 feet; thence South 14 degrees 04 minutes West 176.6 feet; thence South 48 degrees 31 minutes West 49.4 feet; thence South 43 degrees 17 minutes East 78.6 feet; thence South 49 degrees 55 minutes East 132.2 feet; thence South 22 degrees 39 minutes east 135.1 feet; thence South 17 degrees 07 minutes East 115.5 feet; thence South 67 degrees 16 minutes West 112.1 feet; thence South 61 degrees 02 minutes West 435.1 feet; thence South 77 degrees 07 minutes West 127 feet; thence South 84 degrees 33 minutes West 156.6 feet; thence South 63 degrees 36 minutes West 90.1 feet; thence South 05 degrees 42 minutes West 62.4 feet; thence North 86 degrees 45 minutes East 238.9 feet; thence South 89 degrees 39 minutes East 181.4 feet; thence North 58 degrees 15 minutes East 100.6 feet; thence North 79 degrees 30 minutes East 64.7 feet; thence South 30 degrees 14 minutes East 76.8 feet; thence North 81 degrees 14 minutes East 54.1 feet; thence North 39 degrees 15 minutes East 84.1 feet; thence North 63 degrees 33 minutes East 148.6 feet; thence South 84 degrees 58 minutes East 126.4 feet; thence South 17 degrees 23 minutes East 87.4 feet; thence North 22 degrees 09 minutes East 62.2 feet; thence South 83 degrees 07 minutes East 91 feet; thence South 42 degrees 33 minutes East 178.7 feet; thence South 35 degrees 07 minutes East 121.3 feet; thence South 51 degrees 19 minutes East 196.1 feet; thence South 28 degrees 16 minutes East 84.1 feet; thence South 10 degrees 09 minutes East 100.5 feet; thence South 13 degrees 01 minute West 87.6 feet; thence South 32 degrees 03 minutes West 165.4 feet; thence North 83 degrees 06 minutes West 96.2 feet; thence South 20 degrees 24 minutes West 300 feet; thence South 45 degrees 42 minutes East 544.9 feet to a point which is identified as Reference Point 'B' in the description of Parcel 'A' of the property described in the deed from J.T. Rhyne and J. Morton Rhyne to City of LaFayette, Georgia, dated December 5, 1974, recorded in Deed Book 403, page 635 of the Deed Records of Walker County, Georgia; thence continuing South 45 degrees 42 minutes East 25.1 feet to the center line of Chattooga Creek; thence Southerly along and with the center line of Chattooga Creek 750 feet, more or less, to the Southwest corner of the property described as Parcel 'A' in the aforesaid deed from J. T. Rhyne and J. Horton Rhyne to City of LaFayette, Georgia; thence continuing along the center line of said Creek a distance of 15 feet, more or less, to what would be the Southwesternmost corner of the property described as Parcel 'B' of the property so conveyed by J. T. Rhyne and J. Morton Rhyne to City of LaFayette, Georgia, by the aforesaid deed; thence South 77 degrees 21 minutes East 25 feet, more or less, to the Easterly bank of Chattooga Creek; thence South 77 degrees 21 minutes East 257.5 feet: thence South 77 degrees 27 minutes East 101 feet; thence South 82 degrees 52 minutes East 100.2 feet; thence South 84 degrees 37 minutes East 122.7 feet; thence South 85 degrees 48 minutes East 300.8 feet; thence South 88 degrees 05 minutes East 100.3 feet; thence North 76 degrees 56 minutes East 302.7 feet; thence North 71 degrees 58 minutes East 115.2 feet; thence North 68 degrees 29 minutes East 398.8 feet; thence North 69 degrees 21 minutes East 290.4 feet; thence South 05 degrees 07 minutes East 451.3 feet to an iron pipe located on the Northerly line of Round Pond Road; thence North 56 degrees 13 minutes East along the Northerly line of said Road 57 feet to an iron pipe which is located at the Southwest corner of the property of Mrs. Clark Sosebee, which is the beginning point. 
Also, a parcel of land located in Land Lot 277 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, which said parcel adjoins the above described Lake property on the Westerly side thereof, which said parcel is more particularly described as follows: START at the point where the West line of the above described City Lake property intersects the Northerly line of Wheeler Road, also known as McCarter Road, and from said starting point running thence North 14 degrees 43 minutes West 14 feet; thence North 40 degrees 18 minutes West 81.6 feet; thence North 33 degrees 19 minutes West 68.8 feet; thence North 22 degrees 19 minutes West 100.1 feet; thence North 09 degrees 03 minutes West 70 feet; thence North 01 degree 51 minutes East 91.2 feet to the beginning point of the property herein described, and from said beginning point running thence North 32 degrees 42 minutes East 57.9 feet; thence North 43 degrees 54 minutes West 89.5 feet; thence North 35 degrees 08 minutes West 96.3 feet; thence North 64 degrees 45 minutes West 59.3 feet; thence North 18 degrees 30 minutes West 85.5 feet; thence South 77 degrees 50 minutes West along the South line of the property of Mrs. Bettye Armistead Jones a distance of 40 feet, more or less, to the original West line of said Land Lot 277; thence South along the West line of said Land Lot a distance of 281 feet, more or less, to the North line of property formerly owned by John L. Gray, now owned by Stephen T. Gilbreath; thence East along the North line of said Gilbreath property 210 feet, more or less, to the beginning point. Said latter tract is the same property conveyed by Frank Keown to City of LaFayette, Georgia, by warranty deed dated January 7, 1974, recorded in Deed Book 391, page 38 of the Deed Records of Walker County, Georgia. 
Also, that property in Land Lot 300 in the 8th District and 4th Section in Green Forest Subdivision and being all of Lots Numbers 11, 15, 16, 17, 18, 31, 32, 33, 39, 40 and 41 of said subdivision as shown on plat recorded in Plat Book 6, page 19 in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia (a portion of said Lots Numbers 15, 16, 17 and 18 are included within said Queen City Lake property described above). 
There is excepted from the above described property and not included within said City boundaries the following described tract located in Land Lot 48 in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, said tract being described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the West line of said Land Lot 48, said beginning point being 667.5 feet South of the Northwest corner of said Land Lot and from said beginning point running thence North 88 degrees East 945 feet; thence South 7 degrees 45 minutes West 688 feet; thence South 88 degrees 30 minutes West 770 feet to a point on the West line of said Land Lot 48; thence North along the West line of said Land Lot a distance of 667.5 feet. 
There is hereby expressly EXCEPTED from the territory enclosed in the above boundary lines of the City of LaFayette that portion thereof which lies within the corporate limits of the Town of Linwood, said area lying within the corporate limits of the Town of Linwood being that property which is described as follows: 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 28 and Land Lot 29 in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at the original Northwest corner of said Land Lot 28 and from said beginning point running thence East along the North line of said Land Lot to the point where the same is intersected by the East right-of-way line of the Central of Georgia Railroad; thence continuing East along said Land Lot line a distance of 20 feet; thence Southerly to a point on the South right-of-way line of Indiana Avenue, which point is South 82 degrees 22 minutes 44 seconds east a distance of 20 feet from the point where the South line of Indiana Avenue intersects the Easterly right-of-way line of said Railroad; thence South 15 degrees 23 minutes 6 seconds West 80 feet; thence South 26 degrees 32 minutes 8 seconds East 325 feet; thence South 27 degrees 54 minutes 58 seconds East 135 feet; thence South 12 degrees 43 minutes 58 seconds East 144 feet; thence South 9 degrees 37 minutes 43 seconds East 149 feet; thence South 6 degrees 32 minutes 19 seconds East 80 feet; thence South 3 degrees 26 minutes 40 seconds East 333.4 feet; thence South 12 degrees 30 minutes 44 seconds East 42 feet; thence South 40 degrees 27 minutes 34 seconds East 38 feet; thence South 27 degrees 43 minutes 4 seconds West 228.64 feet to the Northeast corner of property of Walker County Board of Education; thence along the East line of said Board of Education property south 17 degrees 59 minutes West 322 feet, and thence South 25 degrees 25 minutes East 392 feet, more or less, to the west line of First Street; thence Southerly along the Westerly line of First Street 692 feet, more or less, to the Northwest corner of the intersection of First Street and Culberson Avenue; thence North 84 degrees West along the North line of Culberson Avenue 315 feet; thence North 1 degree 58 minutes West 208 feet; thence North 85 degrees 15 minutes West 208 feet to the East right-of-way line of said Central of Georgia Railroad; thence North 2 degrees 40 minutes West along the East right-of-way line of said Railroad 458 feet; thence South 80 degrees 5 minutes West 293 feet, more or less, to a point on the East line of Probasco Street; thence South 2 degrees 55 minutes East along the East line of Probasco Street 62.9 feet to the point where the Easterly line of said Probasco Street intersects the Northeasterly right-of-way line of Cove Road; thence North 69 degrees 19 minutes West, first along the Northerly line of Cove Road and then along the Southerly line of the property shown on the Map of Linwood, Georgia, property of Fred B. Henry, et al., prepared by B. G. Justus dated July 16, 1949, recorded in Plat Book 2, page 231, Clerk's Office, Superior Court, Walker County, Georgia, a total distance of 848.6 feet; thence South 13 degrees 35 minutes West 153.7 feet to a point on the Northerly line of Cove Road; thence North 52 degrees 25 minutes West along the Northerly line of said road 83.7 feet; thence North 13 degrees 35 minutes East 140 feet; thence North 75 degrees West and continuing along the South line of the property shown as Block Q on said Map of Linwood a distance of 387.2 feet to a point on the West line of said Land Lot 28, which point is approximately 50 feet South of the South line of Jones Street, and which point also was the Southwest corner of the property owned by Union Cotton Mills at the time the Town of Linwood was first incorporated by the State of Georgia; thence North along the West line of said Land Lot 28 a distance of 300 feet; thence due West 990 feet, more or less, to a point on the Northeasterly line of Cove Road, formerly known as the LaFayette and Dug Gap Public Road, said point being approximately 20 feet, measured along the Northeasterly line of Cove Road, Southerly from the point where the Northeasterly line of Cove Road intersects the Southeasterly line of King Street; thence Northwesterly along the Northeasterly line of Cove Road 60 feet, more or less, to the Northeast corner of the intersection of Cove Road and King Street; thence continuing Northwesterly along the Northeasterly line of Cove Road 340 feet to the point where the West line of the property of Grover Cooper and Martha Cooper intersects said Cove Road, the same being the East line of the property of W. E. Middleton, said line also being what was formerly the West boundary line of the lands of Mrs. S. A. Warthen, said line also being an extension in a straight line South of the East line of the lots in E. P. Hall Subdivision (Plat Book 2, page 109, said Clerk's Office) which front on said Cove Road; thence North 1,150 feet, more or less, to the North line of said Land Lot 29; thence East along the North line of said Land Lot 29 to the beginning point. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 278 and/or 279 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows, to-wit: BEGINNING at a point where the Easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27 intersects the South line of what is known as Lake Howard Road and from said point of beginning running thence in a Northerly direction along the Easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27 to the point where the Easterly line of said Highway intersects the North line of Lake Howard Road; thence West to the point of intersection of the Westerly line of U.S. Highway 27 with the North line of State Highway No. 136, and continuing West along the North line of said Highway No. 136 to its intersection with the Easterly right-of-way line of Straight Gut Road; thence in a Southerly direction along an extension of the Easterly line of said Road to its intersection with the Southerly right-of-way line of State Highway No. 136; thence in an Easterly direction along the South line of said Highway to its intersection with the West right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27, thence in an Easterly direction to the point of intersection of the Southerly line of Lake Howard Road and the East line of U.S. Highway 27, the point of beginning. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot No. 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Start at the point of intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27 with the southwesterly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, said starting point being marked by a Georgia DOT concrete right-of-way monument; then from said starting point running thence North 83 degrees 32 minutes 50 seconds East, a distance of 70.03 feet to a right-of-way monument; thence South 42 degrees 55 minutes 59 seconds East, a distance of 335.49 feet to a point; thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 643.25 feet to a point; thence North 45 degrees 09 minutes 11 seconds East, a distance of 25.0 feet to a point; thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 120.78 to a 1/2-inch iron pipe which marks the northernmost corner of the property presently owned by C.M. Hooper and wife, Vera B. Hooper; thence South 0 degrees 10 minutes East, a distance of 450.74 feet; thence South 88 degrees 52 minutes 25 seconds West, a distance of 492.53 feet to a 1/2-inch iron pipe located on the original west line of said Land Lot 299 in said district and section, the same being the LaFayette city limits; thence North 2 degrees 46 minutes 28 seconds East, a distance of 105.46 feet to a 1/2-inch rebar; thence North 1 degree 09 minutes 34 seconds East, a distance of 149.54 feet to a point; thence South 86 degrees 49 minutes 38 seconds East, a distance of 217.29 feet to an iron pin which marks the beginning point of the property described herein; thence from said beginning point running thence North 3 degrees 38 minutes 22 seconds West, a distance of 100 feet to an iron pin; thence North 86 degrees 49 minutes 38 seconds West, a distance of 209.62 feet; thence South 1 degree 09 minutes 34 seconds West, a distance of 100 feet; thence South 86 degrees 49 minutes 38 seconds East, a distance of 205.29 feet to the point of beginning. 
Being that portion of Tract No. 9 located in Land Lot 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, as shown on a plat dated May 31, 1990, as revised October 24, 1990, by Charles D. Wardlaw, Georgia Registered Surveyor No. 1558, entitled "Survey Plat for American Star Development, Inc., Being Partially in the City of LaFayette, in Land Lots 278, 279, 298 and 299, 8th District, 4th Section, Walker County, Georgia." 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lots Nos. 278 and 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Start at the point of intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27 with the southwesterly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, said starting point being marked by a Georgia DOT concrete right-of-way monument; then from said starting point running thence North 83 degrees 32 minutes 50 seconds East, a distance of 70.03 feet to a right-of-way monument; thence South 42 degrees 55 minutes 59 seconds East, a distance of 335.49 feet to the beginning point of the property described herein; then from said beginning point running thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 643.25 to a point; thence North 45 degrees 09 minutes 11 seconds East, a distance of 25.0 feet to a point; thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 120.78 to a 1/2-inch iron pipe which marks the northernmost corner of the property presently owned by C.M. Hooper and wife, Vera B. Hooper; thence South 0 degrees 10 minutes East, a distance of 450.74 feet; thence South 88 degrees 52 minutes 25 seconds West, a distance of 492.53 feet to a 1/2-inch iron pipe located on the original west line of said Land Lot 299 in said district and section, the same being the LaFayette city limits; thence North 2 degrees 46 minutes 28 seconds East, a distance of 105.46 feet to a 1/2-inch rebar; thence North 1 degree 09 minutes 34 seconds East, a distance of 149.54 feet to a point; thence in a northwesterly direction, a distance of 10 feet to a point located in the west original line of said Land Lot No. 299; thence in a northwardly direction, with and along the west original line of said Land Lots 299 and 278, a distance of 730 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. 
Being that portion of Tract No. 8 located in Land Lots 278 and 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, as shown on a plat dated May 31, 1990, as revised October 24, 1990, by Charles D. Wardlaw, Georgia Registered Surveyor No. 1558, entitled "Survey Plat for American Star Development, Inc., Being Partially in the City of LaFayette, in Land Lots 278, 279, 298 and 299, 8th District, 4th Section, Walker County, Georgia." 
EXCEPTING from the above described property all that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Start at the point of intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27 with the southwesterly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, said starting point being marked by a Georgia DOT concrete right-of-way monument; then from said starting point running thence North 83 degrees 32 minutes 50 seconds East, a distance of 70.03 feet to a right-of-way monument; thence South 42 degrees 55 minutes 59 seconds East, a distance of 335.49 feet to a point; thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 643.25 feet to a point; thence North 45 degrees 09 minutes 11 seconds East, a distance of 25.0 feet to a point; thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 120.78 to a 1/2-inch iron pipe which marks the northernmost corner of the property presently owned by C.M. Hooper and wife, Vera B. Hooper; thence South 0 degrees 10 minutes East, a distance of 450.74 feet; thence South 88 degrees 52 minutes 25 seconds West, a distance of 492.53 feet to a 1/2-inch iron pipe located on the original west line of said Land Lot 299 in said district and section, the same being the LaFayette city limits; thence North 2 degrees 46 minutes 28 seconds East, a distance of 105.46 feet to a 1/2-inch rebar; thence North 1 degree 09 minutes 34 seconds East, a distance of 149.54 feet to a point; thence South 86 degrees 49 minutes 38 seconds East, a distance of 217.29 feet to an iron pin which marks the beginning point of the property described herein; then from said beginning point running thence North 3 degrees 38 minutes 22 seconds West, a distance of 100 feet to an iron pin; thence North 86 degrees 49 minutes 38 seconds West, a distance of 209.62 feet; thence South 1 degree 09 minutes 34 seconds West, a distance of 100 feet; thence South 86 degrees 49 minutes 38 seconds East, a distance of 205.29 feet to the point of beginning. 
Being that portion of Tract No. 9 located in Land Lot 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, as shown on a plat dated May 31, 1990, as revised October 24, 1990, by Charles D. Wardlaw, Georgia Registered Surveyor No. 1558, entitled "Survey Plat for American Star Development, Inc., Being Partially in the City of LaFayette, in Land Lots 278, 279, 298 and 299, 8th District, 4th Section, Walker County, Georgia." 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lots Nos. 278 and 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Start at the point of intersection of the easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27 with the southwesterly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, said starting point being marked by a Georgia DOT concrete right-of-way monument; then from said starting point running thence North 83 degrees 32 minutes 50 seconds East, a distance of 70.03 feet to a right-of-way monument; thence South 42 degrees 55 minutes 59 seconds East, a distance of 335.49 feet to a point; thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 643.25 feet to a point; thence North 45 degrees 09 minutes 11 seconds East, a distance of 25.0 feet to a point; thence in a southeasterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 120.78 to a 1/2-inch iron pipe which marks the northernmost corner of the property presently owned by C.M. Hooper and wife, Vera B. Hooper, which point marks the beginning point of the property described herein; thence South 0 degrees 10 minutes East, a distance of 450.74 feet; thence South 88 degrees 52 minutes 25 seconds West, a distance of 492.53 feet to a 1/2-inch iron pipe located on the original west line of said Land Lot 299 in said district and section, the same being the LaFayette city limits; thence South 1 degree 24 minutes 27 seconds West, a distance of 305.08 feet to a point; thence South 89 degrees 43 minutes 22 seconds East, a distance of 724.71 feet to a point located on the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass; thence in a northwesterly direction, along and with the westerly right-of-way line of the LaFayette Bypass, a distance of 816.83 feet to the point of beginning. 
Being that portion of Tract No. 10 located in Land Lot 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, as shown on a plat dated May 31, 1990, as revised October 24, 1990, by Charles D. Wardlaw, Georgia Registered Surveyor No. 1558, entitled "Survey Plat for American Star Development, Inc., Being Partially in the City of LaFayette, in Land Lots 278, 279, 298 and 299, 8th District, 4th Section, Walker County, Georgia." 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 99 in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING on the easterly right-of-way line of Foster Mill Drive at a point 214 feet South from the intersection of the North Land Lot line of Land Lot 99 in said District and Section and the easterly right-of-way line of Foster Mill drive and from said beginning point running thence South 75 degrees 00 minutes 00 seconds East 262 feet; thence South 19 degrees 49 minutes 05 seconds West 268. 33 feet; thence South 79 degrees 23 minutes 42 seconds West 275 feet to a point located on the easterly right-of-way line of said Drive; thence along and with the easterly right-of-way line of said Foster Mill Drive the following courses and distances: North 13 degrees 58 minutes 39 seconds East 75.40 feet, thence along and with an angle with a radius of 572.90 feet a distance of 181.14 feet; thence North 32 degrees 03 minutes 35 seconds East 36.08 feet to the point of beginning. 
Said property is described in accordance with a survey plat for Troy L. Broome, dated May 31, 1994 and revised October 17, 1994, and prepared by Max Randall Compton, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor. Said property contains 1.769 acres according to said plat. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 61 in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Southeasterly right-of-way line of Patterson Road where it intersects with the West land lot line of Land Lot 61 in said District and Section and from said beginning point running thence North 43 degrees 05 minutes 26 seconds East 61.92 feet; thence South 50 degrees 13 minutes 15 seconds East 20.03 feet; thence North 40 degrees 40 minutes 25 seconds East 135 feet; thence North 72 degrees 02 minutes 27 seconds East 47.59 feet: thence South 72 degrees 38 minutes 11 seconds East 100 feet to a point located on the Southerly right-of-way line or Georgia State Route Number 136; thence at a 90 degree angle in a northerly direction to a point located on the Northerly right-of-way line of Georgia State Route Number 136 thence in a Northwesterly direction along and with the Northerly right-of-way line of Georgia State Route Number 136 to a point located on the West land lot line of Land Lot 61 in said District and Section where same is intersected by the Northerly right-of-way line of State Route Number 136; thence along and with the West land lot line of Land Lot 61 in said District and Section South 04 degrees 48 minutes 27 seconds East to a point located on the Southerly right-of-way line of Georgia State Route Number 136; thence South 68 degrees 36 minutes 48 seconds East 92.77 feet; thence South 01 degrees 14 minutes 51 seconds West 35.25 feet; thence South 41 degrees 31 minutes 53 seconds West 104.82 feet; thence South 48 degrees 20 minutes 37 seconds East 19.54 feet; thence South 43 degrees 05 minutes 26 seconds West 23.12 feet; thence South 04 degrees 48 minutes 27 seconds East 55.32 feet to the point of beginning. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 263 in the 8th District and 4th section of Walker County, Georgia and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27 (State Route One) at or near its intersection with the Northerly right-of-way line of Land Howard Road, said point of beginning being marked by a monument and designated as Station 149 + 70.02 as shown on a plat dated February 9, 1996, revised March 28, 1997, and prepared by Jacob Roland Harrison, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor, No. 1134, and from said beginning point running thence along and with said Easterly right-of-way line North 21 degrees 36 minutes 10 seconds East 629.22 feet to a monument; thence North 66 degrees 11 minutes 18 seconds West 10 feet to a monument; thence North 21 degrees 40 minutes 02 seconds East 387.02 feet more or less to a monument located on the Easterly right-of-way line of U.S. Highway 27; thence South 88 degrees 48 minutes 47 seconds East 499.79 feet to an iron pin set; thence South 00 degrees 24 minutes 05 seconds East 519.45 feet; thence North 89 degrees 57 minutes 59 seconds West 210 feet; thence South 00 degrees 45 minutes 12 seconds East 202.28 feet to an iron pin found; thence South 32 degrees 28 minutes 41 seconds West 293.09 feet to a point located on the Northerly right-of-way line of Lake Howard Road; thence along and with the Northerly right-of-way line of Lake Howard Road North 89 degrees 24 minutes 46 seconds West 174.36 feet; thence North 89 degrees 20 minutes 40 seconds West 235.59 feet to an iron pin set; thence North 41 degrees 34 minutes 46 seconds West 33.59 feet to the point of beginning. Said property contains 12.812 acres according to said plat. 
Also, that portion of Lake Howard Road that fronts, is contiguous to and is adjacent to the South property line of the above-described property. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 48 and Land Lot 61 in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point on the easterly line of Sunrise Drive South 41 degrees West 175 feet, measured along the easterly line of Sunrise Drive, from the point of intersection of the easterly line of Sunrise Drive with the southerly line of Alpine Drive, said beginning point also being located at the southwest corner of Lot 1 in Block "E" of Skyline Heights Subdivision as shown on plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 5, Page 53 in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, and from said beginning point running thence southwesterly along the easterly line of Sunrise Drive to the point where the easterly line of Sunrise Drive intersects the northeasterly line of Skyline Drive and continuing along the northeasterly line of Skyline Drive in a southeasterly direction to the point where the easterly line of Skyline Drive intersects the south original land lot line of Land Lot 48, the distance from the point of beginning to said point of intersection on the south line of said land lot as measured along said street lines being the total of 542 feet; thence in a southwesterly direction and continuing along the easterly line of Skyline Drive 135 feet to an iron pin; thence South 80 degrees, East 259.6 feet to an iron pin; thence North 6 degrees East 342.7 feet to a stake located in a pond; thence South 74 degrees East 205 feet to a post; thence North 22 degrees East 177 feet more or less to the southeast corner of Lot 5 in Block "E" of Skyline Heights as shown on the aforementioned plat; thence North 81 degrees West along a fence and along the southerly line of Lots 5, 4 and 3 in Block "E" of Skyline Heights as shown on the aforesaid plat a distance of 301.5 feet; thence northwesterly along said fence and along the southerly line of Lot 2 in Block "E" of Skyline Heights as shown on the aforesaid plat a distance of 100 feet to the southeasterly corner of Lot 1 in Block "E" of said Skyline Heights; thence North 63 degrees West and continuing along said fence and along the southwesterly line of Lot 1 in Block "E" of Skyline Heights Subdivision as shown on the aforesaid plat a distance of 150 feet to the beginning point. 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Original Land Lots Nos. 48 and 61, in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and described as follows: Beginning at a stake corner on the east line of Skyline Drive, which corner is 25 feet northwardly along the east line of Skyline Drive from an iron pin in the center of an old road, said beginning point being also the northwest corner of the property of Henry Marks; thence South 74 degrees East, along the north line of said Henry Marks property, 348.8 feet to a stake corner; thence North 1 degree 30 minutes West, 9 feet to a stake corner; thence North 88 degrees 30 minutes East, along the North 1 degree 30 minutes West, 469 feet to a stake corner; thence North 74 degrees West, along a fence, 170 feet to a stake corner; thence South 6 degrees West, along a fence, 342.7 feet to a stake corner; thence North 80 degrees West, along a fence, 259.6 feet to a post corner on the east line of Skyline Drive; thence southwardly, along the east line of Skyline Drive, 149.3 feet to the point of beginning. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in original Land Lots Nos. 43 and 66 in the Seventh District and Fourth Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point where the southeasterly right-of-way line of Burnt Mill Road intersects with the southerly right-of-way line of State Route No. 193 and from said beginning point running along and with the southeasterly right-of-way line of Burnt Mill Road the following courses and distances: South 36 degrees 49 minutes 30 seconds West 83.62 feet, South 42 degrees 05 minutes 30 seconds West 300.93 feet, South 42 degrees 48 minutes 30 seconds West 250.12 feet to a point located on the southeasterly right-of-way line of Burnt Mill Road; thence South 47 degrees 11 minutes 30 seconds East 600 feet; thence North 57 degrees 06 minutes 21 seconds East 680.8 feet; thence North 9 degrees 15 minutes 30 seconds West 600 feet to a point located on the southerly right-of-way line of State Route No. 193; thence along and with the southerly right-of-way line of State Route No. 193 South 80 degrees 44 minutes 30 seconds West 500 feet to the point of beginning. Said property is described in accordance with a survey plat for the Walker County Board of Education dated November 24, 1989 and prepared by Charles D. Wardlaw, Walker County Surveyor. According to said plat, the above described property contains 13.61 acres. 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Original Land Lot Number Two Hundred Seventy-eight (278) in the Eighth (8th) District and Fourth (4th) Section of Walker County, Georgia, being described as follows: Beginning at the right of way marked on the east line of U. S. Highway No. 27, where it intersects with the south line of Lake Howard Road; thence along the south line of Lake Howard Road, North 55 degrees 46 minutes 50 seconds east a distance of 66.72 feet to a rebar set; thence continuing along the south line of Lake Howard Road the following courses and distances: South 88 degrees 06 minutes 25 seconds east 109 feet; South 89 degrees 03 minutes 59 seconds east 125 feet; South 89 degrees 26 minutes 00 seconds east 55 feet; and South 89 degrees 38 minutes 05 seconds east 261.21 feet to a rebar set; thence leaving Lake Howard Road and running South 22 degrees 26 minutes 12 seconds west a distance of 108.62 feet to an Iron pin found on a fence line; thence South 88 degrees 55 minutes 11 seconds west 596.69 feet, along said fence, a distance of 596.69 feet to a rebar found on the east line of U. S. Highway No. 27; thence along the east line of U. S. Highway No. 27, North 21 degrees 46 minutes 32 seconds east, a distance of 88.27 feet to the right of way monument; the point of beginning. Said tract contains 1.46 acres, more or less, as shown by survey drawing prepared by K. C. Campbell dated June 22, 1999, for Jack D. Acuff. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot No. 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at an old stone found at the midpoint of the West line of Land Lot No. 299; thence South 87 degrees 57 minutes 17 seconds East, along and with a fence line, 742.82 feet to a right of way monument marking the Westerly right of way line of U. S. Highway No. 27 (LaFayette Bypass); thence South 05 degrees 15 minutes 32 seconds West, 350.10 feet to an iron pin set in the ground; thence North 87 degrees 27 minutes 51 seconds West, 730.74 feet to another iron pin set in the ground in the West line of Land Lot 299; thence North 03 degrees 17 minutes 59 seconds East, 343.38 feet along the West line of Land Lot 299, to the old stone marking the midpoint of the West line of the land lot and the point of beginning. 
TOGETHER WITH an easement for purposes of ingress and egress over, across and upon a 50 foot by 110.32 foot strip described as follows: COMMENCING at the Southeast corner of the hereinbefore described tract; thence North 87 degrees 27 minutes 51 seconds West, along and with the South line of the aforedescribed tract 50 feet to an iron pin; thence South 05 degrees 15 minutes 32 seconds East, 110.32 feet to an iron pin; thence South 87 degrees 27 minutes 51 seconds East, 50 feet to an iron pin; thence North 05 degrees 15 minutes 32 seconds West, 110.32 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning. 
Being the Northern tract of property shown and described as containing 5.86 acres, more or less, on a plat dated August 7, 1991, surveyed by K. C. Campbell, Georgia Registered Surveyor No. 2256, and recorded in Plat Book 9, page 218, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
Being the same property as conveyed from Maurice Shattuck to Betsy Clements Hannah in Warranty Deed dated August 26, 1991, recorded in Deed Book 657, page 174, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot No. 299 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at an iron pin set in the ground South 03 degrees 17 minutes 59 seconds West, 343.38 feet from an old stone that marks the midpoint of the west line of Land Lot No. 299; from said beginning point, South 87 degrees 27 minutes 51 seconds East, 730.74 feet to an iron pin; thence South 05 degrees 15 
minutes 32 seconds West, 350.10 feet to an iron pin; thence North 87 degrees 54 minutes 27 seconds West, 718.86 feet along and with a certain fence line to an iron pipe found in the ground in the west line of Land Lot 299; thence North 03 degrees 17 minutes 59 seconds East, 355.30 feet along the west line of Land Lot 299 to the point of beginning. 
SUBJECT TO a certain 50 foot by 110.32 foot easement for ingress and egress located in the northeast corner of said tract and shown in more particularity on the recorded plat as well as all other easements including without limitation the Georgia Power Company overhead transmission lines easements shown thereon. 
Being the southern tract of property as shown and described as containing 5.86 acres on a plat dated August 7, 1991, surveyed by K. C. Campbell, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor No. 2256, and recorded in Plat Book 9, page 218, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
The City of LaFayette, Georgia desires to annex to its existing corporate limits a certain unincorporated area contiguous to the existing corporate limits of said City, which property is a portion of the Lyle Jones Parkway; and 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Land Lot 279 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia and in Land Lots Nos. 313 and 314 in the 8th District and also being in Land Lots Nos. 11 and 12 in the 7th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point where the westerly right-of-way line of the Lyle Jones Parkway intersects the east property line of the property of or formerly of Miriam L. Hammond and described as TRACT FIVE in a certain deed recorded in Deed Book 474, Page 196, Walker County Deed Records and from said beginning point running in a northerly direction along and with an extension of the east property line of said Hammond property to a point where said extension intersects the easterly right-of-way line of Lyle Jones Parkway; thence in a southerly direction along and with the easterly right-of-way line of said Parkway to a point where said right-of-way line intersects the south property line of property of Miriam R. Beck, et al., described in a certain deed recorded in Deed Book 666, Page 143, Walker County Deed Records; thence along and with an extension of the south property line of said Beck property to a point where said extension intersects the westerly right-of-way line of Lyle Jones Parkway; thence in a northerly direction along and with the westerly right-of-way line of said Parkway to the point of beginning. 
The City of LaFayette, Georgia, has received an application for annexation from Nora & Jeanelle Millard, and the City desires to annex to its existing corporate limits a certain unincorporated area contiguous to the existing corporate limits of said City, which property is located in Land Lot 278, in the 8 th District and 4 th Section of Walker County Georgia; and 
All that tract or parcel of land situate, lying and being in Original Land Lot 278 in the 8 th District and 4 th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point on the Southerly right of way line of Lake Howard Road 1,267.94 feet West of the East line of Land Lot 278 in said District and Section and from said beginning point running thence along and with the Southerly right of way line of Lake Howard Road North 89 degrees 38 minutes 08 seconds West 261.21 feet, North 89 degrees 26 minutes 00 seconds West 55 feet, North 89 degrees 03 minutes 59 seconds West 19.74 feet; thence South 01 degree 08 minutes 08 seconds 108.54 feet; thence South 01 degree 08 minutes 08 seconds West 34.99 feet; thence North 88 degrees 51 minutes 52 seconds West 308.59 feet to an iron pin found located on the Easterly right of way line of U. S. Highway No. 27; thence along and with the Easterly right of way of said highway South 21 degrees 52 minutes 07 seconds West 696.60 feet; thence South 89 degrees 13 minutes 00 seconds East 375.16 feet; thence South 89 degrees 46 minutes 53 seconds East 284.05 feet; thence North 88 degrees 46 minutes 12 seconds East 206.84 feet to an iron pin found; thence North 00 degree 03 minutes 46 seconds West 682.82 feet; thence North 22 degrees 31 minutes 00 seconds East 108.56 feet to an iron pin found on the Southerly right of way line of Lake Howard Road, same being the point of beginning. Said property is described in accordance with a plat of survey for Nora Millard and Jeanelle Millard dated October 30, 2000, prepared by K. C. Campbell, Georgia Registered Land Surveyor. Said property contains 11.94 acres according to said plat. 
    Ordinance for the purpose of annexing certain unincorporated property lying contiguous to existing corporate limits of the city. 
Situated in Land Lot 263 in the 8 th district, 4 th section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at an iron pin set where the northwest right-of-way line of U. S. Highway 27 is intersected by northwest line of Pearl Drive; thence South 67 degrees 25 minutes 55 seconds West with and along the said right-of-way of Pearl Drive a distance of 84.48 feet to an iron pin found; thence continuing along the right-of-way of pearl Drive; North 69 degrees 12 minutes 23 seconds West, a distance of 130.16 feet to an iron pin found where said right-of-way is intersected by the eastern line of the Central Georgia Railroad right-of-way; thence North 30 degrees 12 minutes 58 seconds East along the said Central Georgia Railroad right-of-way a distance of 200.72 feet to an iron pin found in the southwest corner of the property conveyed to Pearl Brown by the deed recorded in Deed Book 1024, page 115, Walker County Deed Records; thence South 84 degrees 36 minutes 53 seconds East along the south line of said Brown property a distance of 164.54 feet to the southeast corner thereof in the northwest line of U. S. Highway No. 27; thence South 20 degrees 45 minutes 52 seconds West along said highway right-of-way a distance of 183.72 feet to the point of beginning. Said tract contains 0.83 acre. 
Also, that portion of Pearl Drive that fronts, is contiguous to, and is adjacent to the South property line of the above-described property. 
    Ordinance for the purpose of annexing certain unincorporated property lying contiguous to existing corporate limits of the city. 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot No. 117, in the 7 th District and 4 th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the southern right of way line of Shattuck Industrial Blvd. and the western right of way line of Foster Mill Drive; thence along the western right of way line of Foster Mill Drive the following courses and distances; south 38 degrees 38 minutes 40 seconds west, 117.69 feet; south 57 degrees 04 minutes west, 79.05 feet; south 44 degrees 36 minutes 54 seconds west, 103.26 feet; south 44 degrees 40 minutes 19 seconds east, 125.29 feet; south 40 degrees 40 minutes 41 seconds west, 57.02 feet; and south 40 degrees 37 minutes 06 seconds east, 90.32 feet to an iron pin; thence north 58 degrees 34 minutes 24 seconds west, a distance of 283.75 feet to an iron pin; thence north 19 degrees 57 minutes 13 seconds east, a distance of 526.07 feet to the southern right of way line of Shattuck Industrial Blvd.; thence along the southern right of way line of Shattuck Industrial Blvd. the following courses and distances: south 70 degrees 11 minutes 40 seconds east, 77.44 feet; south 68 degrees 30 minutes 51 seconds east, 164.01 feet; south 28 degrees 37 minutes 40 seconds west, 19.80 feet; and south 62 degrees 48 minutes 57 seconds east, 268.43 feet to the point of beginning. 
    Ordinance for the purpose of zoning certain property and to amend the official zoning map to conform thereto. 
Exhibit A 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot No. 117, in the 7 th District and 4 th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: 
Beginning at the intersection of the southern right of way line of Shattuck Industrial Blvd. and the western right of way line of Foster Mill Drive; thence along the western right of way line of Foster Mill Drive the following courses and distances: south 38 degrees 38 minutes 40 seconds west, 117.69 feet; south 57 degrees 04 minutes west, 79.05 feet; south 44 degrees 36 minutes 54 seconds west, 103.26 feet; south 44 degrees 40 minutes 19 seconds east, 125.29 feet; south 40 degrees 40 minutes 41 seconds west, 57.02 feet; and south 40 degrees 37 minutes 06 seconds east, 90.32 feet to an iron pin; thence north 58 degrees 34 minutes 24 seconds west, a distance of 283.75 feet to an iron pin; thence north 19 degrees 57 minutes 13 seconds east, a distance of 526.07 feet to the southern right of way line of Shattuck Industrial Blvd.; thence along the southern right of way line of Shattuck Industrial Blvd. the following courses and distances: south 70 degrees 11 minutes 40 seconds east, 77.44 feet; south 68 degrees 30 minutes 51 seconds east, 164.01 feet; south 28 degrees 37 minutes 40 seconds west, 19.80 feet; and south 62 degrees 48 minutes 57 seconds east, 268.43 feet to the point of beginning. 
Ordinance for the purpose of annexing certain unincorporated property lying contiguous to existing corporate limits of city. 
EXHIBIT "A" 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Original Land Lot No. 314 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING in the west right-of-way line of U. S. Highway 27 (Lyle Jones Parkway - LaFayette Bypass) at its intersection with the south line of the 100-foot right-of-way line of the LaFayette Middle School Road as shown by plat recorded in Plat Book 12 Page 19 in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia thence South 03 degree 23 minutes 28 seconds West, along the west right-of-way line of U. S. Highway 27 (Lyle Jones Parkway LaFayette Bypass), a distance of 1190.90 feet to the centerline of a 50-foot utility and access easement thence South 87 degrees 28 minutes 20 seconds West along the centerline of the 50-foot utility and access easement, a distance of 560.20 feet to a point in the west line of Land Lot No. 314 and the east line of Land Lot No. 315, thence North 01 degree 05 minutes 51 seconds East, along the west line of Land Lot No. 314 and the east line of Land Lot No. 315, a distance of 836.16 feet to a fence; thence South 89 degrees 26 minutes 32 seconds East, along the fence, a distance of 267.02 feet to a fence corner; thence North 01 degree 05 minute 51 seconds East, along the fence, a distance of 469.79 feet to a point in the south line of the 100-foot right-of-way line of the LaFayette Middle School Road as shown by plat recorded in Plat Book 12, Page 19, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia; thence Eastwardly, along the south line of the 100-foot right-of-way line of the LaFayette Middle School Road along a curve to the left (having a radius of 570.87 feet, a chord bearing and distance of South 71 degrees 23 minutes 39 seconds East, 236.85 feet), an arc distance of 238.58 feet to the end of the curve to the left; thence South 83 degrees 22 minutes 01 second East, along the south line of the 100-foot right-of-way line of the LaFayette Middle School Road, a distance of 114.33 feet to the POINT OF BEGINNING, Containing 13.98 acres, more or less, as shown on the survey by Charles D. Wardlaw, GRLS 1558, dated December 11, 2003. 
EXHIBIT A 
All that tract of land lying and being in Original Land Lot No. 263 in the 8 th and 4 th Sections of Walker County, Georgia being described as follows: Beginning at a point on the north line of Pearl Drive (a 60 foot right-of-way) a distance of 479.55 foot west, is measured along the north line of Pearl Drive, from its intersection with the west line of Central of Georgia Railroad (a 60 foot right-of-way) thence North 69 degrees 12 minutes 23 seconds, West 14.06 feet to a rod found; thence around a curve in a northwesterly direction, with an arc distance of 51.68 feet (radius = 39.00) to a point; thence continuing on a curve to the left, an arc distance of 321.60 foot (radius = 72.00); to a rod found, thence leaving the circle and running North 69 degrees 12 minutes 23 seconds West, 165.18 feet to a rod arc; thence North 01 degrees19 minutes 00 seconds West, a distance of 286.36 feet to a rod on the south line of a 10 foot strip retained by Brown, thence along the south line of said 10 foot strip retained by Brown, South 84 degrees 05 minutes 44 seconds East 414.20 feet to a rod arc; thence South 21 degrees 49 minutes 15 seconds West, a distance of 311.78 feet to the point of beginning. According to survey prepared by K.C. Campbell, Ga., Ga. R.L.S. # 2256 dated June 14, 2002 for Rafael and Jose Arellano. This tract contains 2.10 acres, more or less. 
Subject to and together with the right of ingress and egress over a triangle strip running along the 0881 line of said property fronting 24 East on the North line of Pearl Drive and extending northwardly to the northeast corner of the above described property. Said property being triangular in shape. 
For prior title, see Quick Claim recorded in Deed Book 1029, Page 550, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
EXHIBIT A 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Original Land Lot No. 263 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, being more particularly described as follows: Beginning at a point located in the north right-of-way line of Pearl Drive (a public road with a 60 foot right-of-way) said point being located north 69 degrees 12 minutes 23 seconds west with and along the north right-of-way line of Pearl Drive a distance of 202.69 feet from its intersection with the west right-of-way line of the Central of Georgia Railroad Company; thence North 69 degrees 12 minutes 23 seconds West, along the north right-of-way line of Pearl Drive, a distance of 276.86 feet to a point in the southeast corner of the property conveyed to Jose Arellano and Rafael Arellano by deed recorded in Deed Book 1120, page 410, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia; thence North 21 degrees 49 minutes 15 seconds East, along the east line of the Arellano property, a distance of 311.78 feet to the northeast corner thereof; thence North 84 degrees 05 minutes 44 seconds West, along the North line of the Arellano property, a distance of 414.20 feet to the northwest corner thereof; thence North 01 degree 19 minutes 00 seconds West, a distance of 10.00 feet to a 1/2 inch rebar in the north line of the property conveyed to Secured Investment Enterprises Limited Partnership by deed recorded in Deed Book 1029, page 550 in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, thence South 84 degrees 05 minutes 44 seconds East, along the North line of the Secured Investment Enterprises Limited Partnership property, a distance of 988.31 feet to a point in the west right-of-way line of the Central of Georgia Railroad Company; thence South 30 degrees 08 minutes 05 seconds West, along the west right-of-way line of the Central of Georgia Railroad Company, a distance of 291.58 feet to a point; thence North 84 degrees 23 minutes 31 seconds West, a distance of 240.85 feet to a point; thence South 20 degrees 47 minutes 37 seconds West, a distance of 117.78 feet to the point of beginning. According to the survey by Campbell Surveying & Mapping, dated June 14, 2002. 
Reference to prior title is made to Deed recorded in Deed Book 918, page 360 and in Deed Book 1029, page 550 in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
Subject to ingress and egress easement as set out in deed recorded in Deed Book 1120, page 410 in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
Subject to Transmission line easement recorded in Deed Book 1143, page 333 in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
Subject to the 2005 property taxes. 
To have and to hold said property to the said Edgar L. Cagle, Jr., his heirs and assigns, forever in fee simple. 
EXHIBIT A 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Land Lot No. 115 in the 7 th District and 4 th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: BEGINNING at a point in the North right of way line of Industrial Loop, South 87 degrees 02 minutes 13 seconds East, as measured along and with said right of way, 485.95 feet from its intersection with the East right of way line of Broomtown Road, a/k/a Highway 337; thence continuing along and with said right of way line South 87 degrees 56 minutes 16 seconds East, a distance of 234.15 feet to a point marked by an iron pin found in a fence line; thence North 03 degrees 55 minutes 43 seconds East, a distance of 338.40 feet to a point marked by a 1/2 inch rebar set at chain link fence corner; thence North 53 degrees 25 minutes 19 seconds West, a distance of 341.14 feet to a point marked by a 1/2 inch rebar set in the East right of way line of Broomtown Road, a/k/a Highway 337; thence along and with said road right of way the following courses and distances: South 29 degrees 48 minutes 35 seconds West 23.92 feet, South 30 degrees 39 minutes 13 seconds West, 37.22 feet, South 31 degrees 56 minutes 51 seconds West, 30.32 feet, and South 33 degrees 16 minutes 29 seconds West, 44.37 feet to a point in the centerline of a stream; thence leaving said road right of way along and with the centerline of said stream the following courses and distances: South 16 degrees 03 minutes 02 seconds East, 35.00 feet. South 08 degrees 17 minutes 13 seconds East, 70.00 feet, South 11 degrees 55 minutes 55 seconds East. 90.00 feet, South 24 degrees 58 minutes 38 seconds East, 40.00 feet, South 10 degrees 04 minutes 19 seconds East, 145.00 feet, and South 08 degrees 57 minutes 38 seconds East, 47.47 feet to a point, said point being point of beginning, containing 2.98 acres, more or less, as shown on survey for Christopher James Purcell. James David Cooper and James A. Maples, dated April 4, 2007, prepared by K. C. Campbell, GRIS No. 2256. 
Being part of the same property conveyed by Deed recorded in Deed Book 214, page 20, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
Ordinance for the purpose of annexing certain unincorporated property lying contiguous to existing corporate limits of the city. 
EXHIBIT "A" 
All that tract or parcel of land lying and being in Original Land Lot No. 263 in the 8th District and 4th Section of Walker County, Georgia, and being more particularly described as follows: To arrive at the point of beginning of the subject property start at a concrete monument found at the intersection of the northwesterly right of way line of U. S. Highway 27 and the north right of way line of State Route 136 (State Route 136 having a right of way 100 feet in width); thence North 57 degrees 11 minutes 40 seconds East, a distance of 11.92 feet to an iron pin; thence North 21 degrees 16 minutes 45 seconds East, along the northwesterly right of way line of U.S. Highway 27, a distance of 220.73 feet to an iron pin which marks the point of beginning and from said beginning point South 89 degrees 14 minutes 54 seconds West 375.82 feet to a 11/2 inch pipe: thence North 30 degrees 38 minutes 27 seconds East 307.15 feet; thence South 79 degrees 23 minutes 41 seconds East 303.36 feet to a one-inch pipe; thence South 21 degrees 11 minutes 52 seconds West 218.27 feet to the point of beginning. Said property is described in accordance with a plat of survey dated November 4, 1993, and prepared by Charles D. Wardlaw, Walker County Surveyor; said plat being incorporated herein by reference. Said property contains 1.88 acres according to said plat. 
The property is owned by C. D. Dangler. 
    Subject to approval by the U.S. Department of Justice, the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette, Walker County, Georgia, are hereby amended so as to exclude all of the property described in EXHIBIT A, which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, which was previously within the corporate limits of the City, and the property described in EXHIBIT A hereto is hereby deannexed from the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
The effective date of this annexation shall be September 1, 2010. 
Exhibit A 
LEGAL DESCRIPTION 
ALL THAT TRACT OR PARCEL OF LAND lying and being in Original Land Lot No. 262, 8 th District, 4 th Section of Walker County, Georgia, being known and designated as Tract Nos. 1 and 34, of the Pearl L. Brown Property, as shown by plat of record in Plat Book 12, Page 166-167, in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
(Ga. Laws 1988, p. 3912, § 1; Ord. No. 6-93, 7-7-93; Ord. No. 7-93, 7-7-93; Ord. of 12-12-94; Ord. of 6-9-97, Exh. A; Ord. No. 98-3, Exh. A, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 99-8, Exh. A, 6-14-99; Ord. of 12-13-93, Exh. A; Ord. No. 00-2, Exh. A, 1-10-2000; Ord. No.00-8, Exh. A, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. 94-1, 7-14-94; Ord. No. 00-12, 12-11-2000; Ord. No. 02-10, Exh. A, 9-9-2002; Ord. No. 02-12, Exh. A, 10-14-2002; Ord. No. 02-14, Exh. A, 10-14-2002; Ord. No. 04-3, Exh. A, 1-19-2004; Ord. No. 06-03, Exh. A, 5-30-2006; Ord. No. 06-05, Exh. A, 5-30-2006; Ord. No. 06-08, 11-13-2006; Ord. No. 08-14, 10-13-2008; Ord. No. 10-04, 8-9-2010) 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
LAWS OF GEORGIA 
This table shows the location of the Charter of the City of LaFayette and the Georgia Laws that have amended the Charter. 
Ga. Laws 
Year Page 
Number Section Section 
this Charter 1969 2298 1-10-8-18, App. I 1983 4274 1 1-21 2 2-16 3 2-19 4 3-23(10) 5 4-14 1985 4106 1 2-15 2 2-17 3 2-19 4 2-21 5 2-30 6 2-40 7 3-21 8 6-10 1988 3912 1 App. I  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Charter of those ordinances amending the original Charter. 
Ordinance 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter  9-13-76 1 4-40  2-12-90 1 7-18 12-13-93 Exh. A App. I  
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section  Section 
this Charter 93-2  4-12-93 1 2-12 93-2  5-19-93 1 2-12 93-3  5-19-93 1 7-18 6-93  7- 7-93 App. I 7-93  7- 7-93 App. I 94-1  7-14-94 App. I 12-12-94 App. I 96-15  8-12-96 1 5-21  6- 9-97 Exh. A App. I 98-3  6- 8-98 Exh. A App. I 99-8  6-14-99 Exh. A App. I 00-2  1-10-2000 Exh. A App. I 00-8  4-20-2000 Exh. A App. I 00-12 12-11-2000 App. I 02-10  9- 9-2002 Exh. A App. I 02-12 10-14-2002 Exh. A App. I 02-14 10-14-2002 Exh. A App. I 04-3  1-19-2004 Exh. A App. I 04-5  3- 8-2004 1 2-16 04-09  5-10-2004 1 7-26 06-03  5-30-2006 Exh. A App. I 06-05  5-30-2006 Exh. A App. I 06-08 11-13-2006 Exhb. A App. I 08-14 10-13-2008 Exhb. A App. I 10-04  8- 9-2010 Exhb. A App. I 14-3  2-10-2014 1 2-41(a) 14-4  9- 8-2014 1 3-23(10)  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The provisions in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of LaFayette, Georgia" and may be so cited. This Code may also be cited as the "LaFayette City Code." 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless it shall be otherwise expressly provided in any section or ordinance, or unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council or unless the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Charter. The words "the Charter" shall mean the Charter of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, as printed in part I of this volume. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    City limits. The words "the city limits" shall mean the corporate limits or legal boundary of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    Code. Reference to "this Code" or "the Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Codes enforcement officer. The words "codes enforcement officer" shall mean the City of LaFayette's Building Official and Deputy Building Official. 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided in OCGA section 9-11-6, when a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in OCGA section 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
State Law reference- Similar construction, OCGA § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
    Council, city council. The words "council" or "city council" shall mean the city council of the City of LaFayette. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Walker County, Georgia. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, or granting some right of him as such official it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty, or it shall grant to them such right, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
    Manager. The word "manager" shall mean the city manager of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    May. The word "may" is always permissive and never mandatory. 
    Mayor. The word "mayor" shall mean the mayor of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons or things as well as to one (1) person or thing. 
    OCGA. The abbreviation "OCGA" shall mean the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency. The naming of any office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of LaFayette, Georgia." Any such reference shall be deemed to include any person authorized by law to perform the duties of any such office, officer, department, board, commission or other agent or agency. 
    Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner", applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property, as described in this section. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available or accessible to the public. 
    Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one (1) place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the city seal, the seal of the corporation. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory and never permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature, subscription. The "signature" or "subscription" of a person shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease or who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
    Written, in writing. The terms "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 99-7, § 1, 9-13-99) 
State Law reference- Construction of definitions, OCGA § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, OCGA § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Interpretation of Code. 
    Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provision imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the general restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
Sec. 1-4. - Liberal construction of Code. 
    All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the board of city commissioners may be fully carried out. 
State Law reference- Construction of statutes generally, OCGA § 1-3-1. 
Sec. 1-5. - Notes and catchlines of sections not part of law. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the descriptive headings or catchlines immediately preceding or within the text of the individual sections of this Code, except the section numbers included in the headings or catchlines immediately preceding the text of such sections, and title and chapter analyses do not constitute part of the law and shall in no manner limit or expand the construction of any section of this Code. All historical citations, title and chapter analyses, and notes set out in this Code are given for the purpose of convenient reference and do not constitute part of the law. 
Sec. 1-6. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same in substance as those of ordinances existing at the time of the adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-7. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
(2)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(3)  Any ordinance assessing a fee; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person, firm or corporation; 
(5)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(6)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance, resolution, policy or procedure pertaining to the regulation, retirement or pensioning of city personnel; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law; 
(11)  Establishing any one-way street, traffic device, signal or marking, any parking regulation, or any limitation placed upon the use of any specific street for vehicles or pedestrians; 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the grades of any street in the city; 
(14)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same; 
(15)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof; 
(16)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(17)  Any ordinance annexing real property to the city; 
(18)  Any ordinance adopted after February 9, 1987; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. These ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-8. - Repeal not to revive former ordinance. 
    When an ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision shall itself be repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the former ordinance, clause or provision unless it be expressly so provided and the former ordinance, clause or provision is set forth at length. 
Sec. 1-9. - Repeal of ordinance not to affect liabilities, etc. 
    Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or modified, either expressly or by implication, by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus repealed or modified shall continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying it shall go into effect unless therein otherwise expressly provided; but no suit, prosecution, proceeding, right, fine or penalty instituted, created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal shall in anywise be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance or provisions had continued in force, unless it shall be therein otherwise expressly provided. 
Sec. 1-10. - Amendments to Code-Effect. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to "The Code of Ordinances of the City of LaFayette, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Sec. 1-11. - Same-Manner; language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(b)  All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(c)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of The Code of Ordinances of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 1-12. - Same-New material. 
(a)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be, to be numbered _______, which reads as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  In lieu of subsection (a) hereof, when the mayor and council desire to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in this Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the mayor and council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of The Code of Ordinances of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
Sec. 1-13. - Same-Subject to general penalty. 
    In case of the amendment by the mayor and council of any section of this Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 1-17 shall apply to the section as amended. In case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Sec. 1-14. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the mayor and council. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-15. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. 
State Law reference- Alteration of records prohibited, OCGA § 50-18-102. 
Sec. 1-16. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, if any title, chapter, article, part, subpart, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, item, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this Code is declared or adjudged to be invalid or unconstitutional, such declaration or adjudication shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code, which shall remain of full force and effect as if such portion so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part of this Code, since the mayor and council declare that it would have enacted the remaining parts of this Code if they had known that such portion hereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
Sec. 1-17. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the guardhouse, city prison or other place provided, or by compulsory labor on the streets or public works not to exceed six (6) months or by both fine and imprisonment or labor, or the fine may be imposed with an alternative of such imprisonment or compulsory labor, for each separate violation. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 93-4, 5-19-93) 
Charter reference- Penalty for violation of ordinances, § 7-18. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administration generally, Chapters 2, 3. 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, Ch. 7; civil defense, Ch. 8; court, Ch. 9; police, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Counties and municipal corporations, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX; local government generally, OCGA Title 36; provisions applicable to municipal corporations only, OCGA Title 36, Chs. 30-59; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, OCGA Title 36, Chs. 60-79; provisions applicable to counties, municipal corporations and other governmental entities, OCGA Title 36, Chs. 80-84. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Annexation policy. 
(a)  The following is a policy for the city in connection with applications for annexation under the provisions of OCGA §§ 36-36-1 and 36-36-2, the same being known as the "One Hundred Percent Method." 
(b)  Application. Each person owning land which they desire to be annexed to the city must file a written application with the city clerk. Such application must have attached thereto a copy of the deed of the land sought to be annexed together with a copy of a recent plat based upon a survey by a competent surveyor. The land must be contiguous to the then existing corporate limits of the city or contiguous to the property of other annexation applicants whose property is contiguous to the then existing corporate limits. The property must be accessible to the city through roads or streets which are within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Procedure for official action. Official action shall be taken upon the annexation application at the next regular monthly meeting of the mayor and council following the completion of all prerequisites for the proposed annexation including, but not limited to, completion of the annexation dispute resolution process by and between the city and Walker County, Georgia. 
(d)  City services. No city services, other than utility services which are already being provided in the area so sought to be annexed, shall be provided by the city to the property so sought to be annexed until such property is finally and officially annexed by an appropriate annexation ordinance duly adopted by the governing authority of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-14-81, §§ I-III; Ord. No. 99-13, § 1, 12-13-99) 
Secs. 2-2-2-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Mayor and council, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 2-16. - Meetings. 
    The city council shall hold regular monthly meetings in the city hall at 6:30 p.m. on the second Monday of each month. 
(Code 1975, § 16-10; Ord. No. 15-02, § 1, 3-2-2015) 
Charter reference- Meetings of council, § 2-16. 
Sec. 2-17. - Presiding officer; rules of order. 
(a)  The mayor, or in his absence, the mayor pro tem, shall preside at all meetings of the city council. 
(b)  The rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised, shall govern the transaction of business by and before the governing body at its meetings in all cases to which they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with provisions of the Charter or this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 16-11) 
Sec. 2-18. - Salary of mayor and councilmen. 
    The mayor and each city councilman shall be paid a salary of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. 
(Code 1975, § 16-12) 
Charter reference- Compensation of mayor and council, § 2-16. 
Secs. 2-19-2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY RECORDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Records of the city, §§ 2-50, 3-40. 

Sec. 2-36. - Official records of city; clerk as custodian. 
    The city clerk shall be the official custodian of the records of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 16-20) 
Sec. 2-37. - Public inspection; removal restricted. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city to make each and every record kept by the city available to the public for reading, inspecting, examining and copying. However, such examination shall be limited to the regular business hours of city hall and shall be made under the supervision of the city clerk or some person designated by the city clerk. 
(b)  The city clerk shall not allow any person to remove city records from their lawful storage place, except by motion of the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 16-21) 
Sec. 2-38. - Cost of certified copies. 
    The city clerk shall charge for furnishing certified copies of city records at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) for each page measuring eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches whether double or single spaced and whether typed or handwritten. 
(Code 1975, § 16-22) 
Sec. 2-39. - Records management plan adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to the Georgia Records Act, OCGA section 50-18-90 et seq., the city hereby adopts the common records retention schedules for municipal governments, as amended from time to time, developed by the Department of Archives and History, issued by the Office of the Secretary of State of the State of Georgia and approved by the State Records Committee. 
(b)  The common records retention schedules for municipal governments, as amended from time to time, are made a part of and are incorporated in this section by reference, as if same were set forth herein verbatim. 
(c)  The city clerk for the City of LaFayette, Georgia, shall coordinate and perform the responsibilities of the mayor and council under this section and the Georgia Records Act. 
(d)  The city clerk shall maintain the records of the city, as provided herein, and shall provide for the security of said records. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, §§ 1-4) 
Editor's note- An ordinance of Feb. 13, 1995, §§ 1-4, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as § 2-39 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 2-40-2-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 10-16 et seq.; police, Ch. 18. 

Sec. 2-46. - Purchase orders by department heads, limit. 
    Each city department head is authorized to write purchase orders for amounts not exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per purchase. 
(Code 1975, § 17-10) 
Sec. 2-47. - Monthly safety meetings, minutes, mandatory. 
    Each city department head shall conduct monthly safety meetings with employees of his department. Minutes shall be recorded for all such meetings. 
(Code 1975, § 17-11) 
Sec. 2-48. - City materials sold or work done for private individuals; work order required; procedure. 
(a)  Before any work is done for private individuals or materials sold for private use, the head of the city department involved shall compute the cost of such work or materials. The cost shall be set out on a form supplied by the city, and the form shall be given to the city clerk. 
(b)  Upon payment in full by the buyer of the amount of the cost, the city clerk shall issue an order to the department head involved so that the work may be done or the materials may be released. 
(Code 1975, § 17-12) 
Sec. 2-49. - City machinery; approval required for use on private property. 
    No person, whether employed by the city or not, shall use any city machinery on private property without first obtaining the approval of the city manager and the head of the city department which usually operates the machinery involved. 
(Code 1975, § 17-13) 
Secs. 2-50-2-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERSONNEL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-66. - Relatives of department heads. 
    No person shall be hired for employment in any city department where the department head is related by consanguinity or affinity to such person within the sixth degree, as computed according to the civil law. 
(Code 1975, § 17-20) 
Sec. 2-67. - Driver education training required. 
    All city mobile equipment drivers shall take and complete the National Safety Council driver education training course. 
(Code 1975, § 17-21) 
Sec. 2-68. - Overtime procedure; salaried employees ineligible. 
(a)  Overtime shall not be paid to a city employee unless his department head signs a statement declaring that the overtime was necessary and explaining why overtime was needed to accomplish the work done on overtime. 
(b)  Salaried employees of the city shall not be paid for overtime. 
(Code 1975, § 17-22) 
Sec. 2-69. - Salary raises; hourly raises. 
(a)  The city council shall have exclusive authority to grant pay increases to salaried employees of the city. Any salary increase for a city employee must be recommended to the city council by either the head of the department in which such employee works or by the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall have authority to grant pay raises to hourly employees of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 17-23) 
Sec. 2-70. - Unpaid debts owed to city, notice; amount to be withheld from pay check. 
(a)  Any city employee who fails to pay when due any debt owed to the city shall be notified in writing that such debt is due and owing and must be paid within thirty (30) days. 
(b)  Upon failure of a city employee to pay such debt by the end of such thirty-day-period, the amount of the debt owed to the city shall be withheld from the employee's wages. 
(Code 1975, § 17-24) 
Sec. 2-71. - Fidelity bond required of specified officers. 
(a)  The following officers and employees of the city shall each be covered by a fidelity bond in the amounts designated below: 
(1)  City manager ..... $20,000.00 
(2)  City clerk ..... 25,000.00 
(3)  Chief of police ..... 10,000.00 
(b)  The premiums of such fidelity bonds shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 17-25) 
Charter reference- Bonds of officers, §§ 3-23(13), 8-11. 
Sec. 2-72. - Director of utilities. 
    The city hereby creates the position of director of utilities. The director of utilities shall be responsible for overseeing the department heads of the water and sewer department, electric department and gas department. The director of utilities will also oversee and coordinate the operations of the water and sewer department, electric department and gas department. The director of utilities will also have the functions and duties as assigned to the director of utilities by the city manager. The director of utilities will report to and be under the supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 14-1, §§ 1, 2, 1-13-2014) 
Secs. 2-73-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOCIAL SECURITY 

Sec. 2-81. - Policy and purpose as to coverage. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the Federal Security Administration, to the employees and officials of the city and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this division, the benefits of the system of Old-Age and Survivors Insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, the State Enabling Act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 18-10) 
Sec. 2-82. - Authority to execute agreements. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia for coverage of such employees and officials as provided for in section 2-81 to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in manner by the law provided. 
(Code 1975, § 18-11) 
Sec. 2-83. - Withholdings from salaries or wages. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in section 2-81 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Code 1975, § 18-12) 
Sec. 2-84. - Appropriations for employer's contributions. 
    There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a fault of the agreement referred to in section 2-82. Such funds shall be paid over to the employees' retirement system of the state in accordance with regulations established by the agency. 
(Code 1975, § 18-13) 
Sec. 2-85. - Records and reports to be made. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 18-14) 
Sec. 2-86. - Exclusion of employees not authorized to be covered. 
    There is hereby excluded from this division any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Code 1975, § 18-15) 
Sec. 2-87. - City attorney and city recorder excluded. 
    For social security purposes only, the individual performing services in the positions of city attorney and city recorder on retainer fee basis or other professional persons on retainer fee basis are considered to be in fee service positions and are to be excluded from the benefits of the systems of Federal Old Age and Survivors Insurance. 
(Code 1975, § 18-16) 
Secs. 2-88-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-101. - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; to encourage the development of financial and other incentives at all levels of government and the private sector that will serve to promote the preservation of historic resources; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal and state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal and/or state law; the governing authority of the city declare it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features, and works of art having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 1, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-102. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall be applicable in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
    Backyard fence. Any fence located completely in the rear yard, as defined in this section, and having no frontage on the street. 
    Certificate of appropriateness. A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property. 
    Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure, object or work of art, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and the style of all windows, doors, signs, and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the foregoing. 
    Historic district. A geographically definable area which contains structures, buildings, objects, sites, works of art, or a combination thereof which exhibit a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the mayor and council. 
    Historic property. Property designated by this article as either being within a historic district or as a landmark. 
    Landmark. An individual structure, building, object, site, or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural, or environmental character as designated by the mayor and council. 
    Material change in appearance. A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property, and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details; 
(2)  Demolition of a historic property; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way on any historic property; 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building, structure, object or work of art within a historic property, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
    Rear yard. A yard extending across the full width of the lot between the rearmost line of the principal building projected to the side lines of the lot and the rear lot line, the depth of which shall be the least horizontal distance between the rear line of the principal building and the rear lot line. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 2, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 09/04, § 1, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-103. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation. The title of the historic preservation commission shall be the "City of LaFayette Historic Preservation Commission," hereafter referred to as the "historic preservation commission." Historic preservation commission members shall be appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council and will have only advisory authority in recommending landmark and historic district designation. 
(b)  Historic preservation commission position within the city government. The city historic preservation commission shall be considered a part of the planning functions of the city government and shall be administrated by the staff of the city. 
(c)  Historic preservation commission members: number, appointment, term and compensation. The historic preservation commission shall consist of five (5) members, who shall be residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. Members successors shall be appointed as aforesaid for a term of three (3) years. Any vacancy in membership appointed as aforesaid shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor and ratified by the council as heretofore provided; no member of the historic preservation commission shall serve more than two (2) consecutive full, three-year terms; and the mayor and council shall have the authority to remove any member of the historic preservation commission appointed by it for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. The majority of such members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. Members shall not vote on issues in which they have conflict of interest. 
(d)  Statement of the historic preservation commission's powers. The city historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within its respective historic preservation jurisdiction having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the mayor and council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and approve, approve with conditions or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the mayor and council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, object, or work of art as historic property be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of easements in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq., entitled "Uniform Conservation Easement Act"; 
(7)  Conduct an educational program on historic properties located within the city's historic preservation jurisdiction; 
(8)  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation as the mayor and council or the historic preservation commission may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc.; 
(11)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties designated; 
(12)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city's historic preservation program; 
(13)  Receive such volunteer services as are available and appropriate, and employ persons and services within the limits of funds budgeted by the mayor and commission to carry out the responsibilities of the historic preservation commission in an appropriate manner; 
(14)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of property and to acquire and sell historic properties. The historic preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior written consent; 
(15)  To recommend to the mayor and council such financial and/or other incentives that can be expected to encourage the preservation of the communities' historic resources and provide a positive incentive to affected property owners; 
(16)  Attend or take advantage of any training available through state, federal or private agencies to further the education of the historic preservation commission members in accordance with established budget constraints. 
(e)  Historic preservation commission's power to adopt rules of procedure. The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and consideration of applications; shall provide for the time and place of regular open meetings, with proper public notification, and for the calling of special meetings. The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules of procedure with approval from the mayor and council. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. The latest edition of Roberts' Rules of Order shall determine the order of business at all meetings. 
(f)  Records of historic preservation commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions in the office of the planning department. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 3, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-104. - Designation of historic districts and landmarks. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the historic preservation commission. [The following provisions shall apply to preliminary research by the historic preservation commission:] 
(1)  Historic preservation commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to compile and collect information and conduct surveys of resources within the city or county. 
(2)  Historic preservation commission's power to recommend historic districts and landmarks to the mayor and council for designation. The historic preservation commission shall present to the mayor and council nominations for historic districts and local landmarks. 
(3)  Preparation of a report on proposed designation. The historic preservation commission shall prepare formal reports when nominating historic districts or local landmarks. These reports shall be used to educate the community and to provide a permanent record of the designation. The report will follow guidelines for nominating property to the National Register of Historic Places (National Preservation Act of 1966), and shall consist of two (2) parts: (a) a physical description and (b) a description of historic significance. This report will be submitted to the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. [The following shall apply to the designation of historic districts:] 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, buildings, objects, landscapes, works of art, places or a combination thereof which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one (1) or more periods of styles of architecture typical of one (1) or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state, or region; 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be specified on tax maps or an official historic district and landmark map adopted by the mayor and council and drawn at a scale sufficient to clearly ascertain district and landmark boundaries, and located on the official zoning map, these boundaries will be included in the separate ordinances designating local districts and landmarks. Boundaries specified in legal notices shall be no smaller than and shall normally coincide with the boundaries finally designated. This shall not preclude the deletion of property from the adopted district that had been noticed as intended for inclusion. Districts shall be shown on the official zoning map adopted by the mayor and council. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing. A building, site, structure, landscape, work of art or object that adds to the aesthetic qualities or historic values for which a district is significant because it possesses historic integrity reflecting the district's character or it independently meets the designation criteria. The property should meet an age criteria of fifty (50) years unless the property has exceptional significance. 
b.  Noncontributing. A building, site, structure, landscape, work of art, or object that does not add to the aesthetic qualities, historic values for which a district is significant because it does not possess historic integrity reflecting the district's character and it does not independently meet the designation criteria. 
(4)  Affirmation of existing zoning. This historic preservation ordinance [this article] is not a use ordinance and local zoning laws apply. 
(c)  Designation of a landmark. [The following provisions apply to the designation of landmarks:] 
(1)  Criteria for selection of landmarks. A landmark is a building, structure, site, place, object, landscape, or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to [the] city, county, state, or local region for one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a building, structure, object, or work of art representative of its era; 
b.  It is one (1) of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place, building, site, object, work of art or structure associated with an event or a person of historic or cultural significance to [the] city, county, state, or the region; 
d.  It is a site or place of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(2)  Boundary description. Boundaries shall be clearly defined for landmarks on tax maps or an official historic district and landmark map adopted by the mayor and council and drawn at a scale sufficient to clearly ascertain district and landmark boundaries and located on the official zoning map adopted by the mayor and council. 
(d)  Procedure for designation of historic districts and landmarks: 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts and landmarks: 
a.  Historic district. A historical society, neighborhood association, group of property owners, or the mayor and council may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
b.  Landmark. A historical society, property owner, or the mayor and council may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
(2)  Historic preservation commission recommendation. Prior to the designation of any historic district or landmark, the historic preservation commission shall first consider the merits of such a designation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter at a public hearing and shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, or denial of any request in a timely manner to the mayor and council. The historic preservation commission shall transmit its recommendation and the report required hereunder to the mayor and council for its consideration. 
(3)  Required public hearings and notifications procedures. The historic preservation commission and the local governing body shall hold separate public hearings on the proposed ordinance for designation. Notice of the hearings shall be published in at least three (3) consecutive issues of the legal organ of the county and/or in a newspaper of general circulation within the county, and written notice of the hearings shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed out not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set forth the public hearings. A letter sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property, as shown on the most recent tax digest, shall constitute legal notification of owners under this chapter. Included with the required notification to each property owner within a proposed designation shall be a questionnaire, which may be returned to the historic preservation commission, to ascertain the degree of interest in and support for the proposed designation amongst that segment of the community directly affected by the proposal. Such questionnaire shall be used for information purposes only and is not to be binding on the mayor and council. 
(4)  Requirements for designation ordinances. Any ordinance designating any historic property shall describe the exterior boundaries of each historic district or each landmark to be designated, set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties, as listed on the most recent tax digest, and require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated historic property. 
(5)  Requirements regarding historic property boundaries. Any ordinance designating any property as historic property shall require that the designated historic property be shown on the official zoning map adopted by the mayor and council and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(6)  Notification of historic preservation office. Prior to any historic preservation commission recommendation on designation and prior to the mayor and council's public hearing to consider designating any property or properties under this article, the historic preservation commission must submit a report on the historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site building, structure, object, or work of art to the Historic Preservation Office of the Department of Natural Resources; thirty (30) days will be allowed to prepare written comments. 
(7)  The mayor and council's actions on the historic preservation commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the historic preservation commission's recommendation, the mayor and council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(8)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within thirty (30) days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the mayor and council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property shall be given written notification of such designation by the historic preservation commission, which notice shall apprise such owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated. 
(9)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The historic preservation commission shall notify all necessary agencies of the city of the ordinance of designation. 
(10)  Moratorium on applications for alterations of demolitions while an ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation has been recommended by the historic preservation commission to the mayor and council, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to delay an application for alteration or demolition for properties under consideration for up to sixty (60) days. 
Any building permit issued prior to the recommendation of an ordinance for designation may continue until its six-month expiration. However, if the work described in any building permit has not begun within six (6) months from the date of permit issuance, or once construction has begun, if it is discontinued for a period in excess of six (6) months, such permit shall expire and be cancelled by the building official. 
(11)  Authority to rescind designation. The mayor and council has the authority to rescind the designation following receipt of a recommendation from the historic preservation commission and receipt of comments at a public hearing noticed in accordance with the provisions for designation. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 4, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 09/04, § 2, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-105. - Design guidelines for historic districts and landmarks. 
(a)  Identification of design guidelines. Concurrent with, or immediately following, the designation of any historic district or landmark, the historic preservation commission shall recommend to the mayor and council a set of "design guidelines" appropriate to the district or landmark. The guidelines are intended to identify the characteristic features of the designation that will be used in determining the compatibility of new construction or alterations of size, location, materials, style, rhythm, and any other quality deemed by the historic preservation commission to contribute to the character of the historic property. 
(b)  Procedure for adoption of design guidelines. The historic preservation commission must draft and recommend the proposed design guidelines to the mayor and council at a public hearing. Adoption of the guidelines by mayor and council may only be considered after the historic preservation commission's recommendation and following a public hearing as follows: The historic preservation commission and the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the adoption of the design guidelines. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three (3) consecutive issues in the legal organ and/or in a newspaper of general circulation within the county. All such notices shall be published not less than ten (10) nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the date set forth the public hearing. 
(c)  Concurrent action. The historic preservation commission may recommend, and the mayor and council may consider and adopt, the design guidelines at the same public hearing and/or meeting as the designation of the corresponding historic district or landmark. The legal notices for the guidelines and designated area may be combined into one (1) notice if the hearings are to be combined. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 5, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-106. - Application to the historic preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of alterations to historic properties. After designation by ordinance of a historic property and adoption of corresponding design guidelines, no demolition or material change in the appearance of such historic property shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof unless or until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Approval of new construction to historic properties. The historic preservation commission shall review and may approve, or approve with conditions pursuant to the provisions of subsection (j) below, concerning undue hardships, and issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures, buildings, objects, or works of art to be constructed within historic property. Such structures, buildings, objects, or works of art shall conform in design, scale, building materials, setback, and landscaping to the character of historic property specified in the historic preservation commission's design guidelines. If, in the opinion of the historic preservation commission, any such structure, building, object or work of art would fail to comply with the guidelines and would be inconsistent with the character of the historic property, the certificate of appropriateness shall be denied. Reasons for denial shall be stated and transmitted to the applicant in writing. 
(c)  Submission of plans to historic preservation commission. An application for certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, or plans as may be required by the historic preservation commission. 
(d)  Acceptable historic preservation commission reaction to application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  The historic preservation commission shall approve or approve with conditions the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property. In making this determination, the historic preservation commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture, and materials of the architectural feature involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures, buildings, objects, or works of art in the immediate neighborhood in accordance with the adopted design guidelines. 
(2)  The historic preservation commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic, architectural significance and value of the historic property. 
(e)  Public hearing on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. At least seven (7) days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness the historic preservation commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. Notice in Walker County's legal organ or newspaper of general circulation within the county shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be sufficient action. 
In cases where the historic preservation commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application, notice in Walker County's legal organ or newspaper of general circulation within the county at least one (1) time not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the hearing. At such hearing, any interested party shall be given the opportunity to comment on the request. 
(f)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the historic preservation commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features nor shall the commission consider the construction of or alterations to backyard fences. 
(g)  Technical advice. When dealing with difficult technical questions, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to seek expert advice within approved budgetary limitations. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny an application for a certificate of appropriateness within no more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of a complete application by the owner or authorized agent of a historic property. Failure of the historic preservation commission to act within such forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary actions to be taken by historic preservation commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  In the event the historic preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The historic preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure, building, object or work of art which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the historic preservation commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Undue hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the historic preservation commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the historic preservation commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. 
(k)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. Work not in accordance with an issued certificate of appropriateness shall be halted by the building official before it is completed. Any such work shall be considered a violation of this chapter subject to any and all appropriate fines and penalties. 
(l)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six (6) months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of eighteen (18) months and are renewable. 
(m)  Recording of applications for certificates of appropriateness. The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all the historic preservation commission's proceedings in connection with such application. 
(n)  Acquisition of property. The historic preservation commission may, when and only when such action is authorized by the mayor and council, and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(o)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the mayor and council within thirty (30) days of the date of the decision; 
(2)  The appeal shall be in writing, shall be filed in the office of the city manager of city, and shall state the name and address of the person filing the appeal, the identification number of the certificate of appropriateness that is being appealed, state facts upon which standing to file the appeal is based, and the grounds for which the determination of the historic preservation commission should be denied by the mayor and council, based on abuse of discretion by the historic preservation commission; 
(3)  The appeal hearing before the mayor and council shall be scheduled by the mayor within sixty (60) days of the filing date of the appeal; 
(4)  At least ten (10) days but no more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the hearing, notice of the hearing stating the location of the property by street address, the time, date, place and purpose of hearing shall be posted on the property; published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, and mailed to the person who filed the appeal. 
(5)  At least one (1) week prior to the hearing, the mayor and council shall receive from the director of planning a complete record of the historic preservation commission's action, including all information presented by the applicant, proponents and opponents, the planning staff, minutes of the hearing before the historic preservation commission, and all other evidence and documents considered by the historic preservation commission in reaching their determination. If the person filing the appeal wants the mayor and council to have a complete transcript of the hearing before the historic preservation commission, then upon a written request for a written transcript filed with the planning department at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, the planning department will have a written transcript of the hearing prepared by a certified court reporter and forwarded to the mayor and council prior to the hearing. The applicant must pay the full costs of the transcript to the planning department at least five (5) working days prior to the date of the hearing; 
(6)  The procedures for the conduct of the hearing before the mayor and council are as follows: 
a.  The party who filed the appeal first presents a ten-minute argument in the support of the appeal, and opponents shall then present their ten-minute argument in opposition to the appeal. 
b.  Neither side will be required to use all of its ten-minute argument period. 
c.  Either side may allocate its ten-minute argument period among any number of speakers, provided that the presentation by all speakers for each side shall not exceed ten (10) minutes per side. 
d.  All persons wishing to speak during one side's ten-minute argument period must register their intent to do so and the amount of time to be allocated per speaker with the clerk of commission not later than the time that the meeting of the mayor and council at which the hearing on the appeal is to be conducted is first called to order. 
e.  In the event that all persons wishing to speak as a part of one side's ten-minute argument are not able to agree how that side's ten-minute argument period shall be allocated, they shall inform the mayor of their disagreement before either side begins its ten-minute argument, in which event the mayor shall decide and announce the manner in which that side's ten-minute argument period shall be allocated. Any commissioner dissatisfied with the mayor's allocation of that side's ten-minute argument shall have the right to appeal the mayor's allocation decision to the commission before either side begins its ten-minute argument. 
f.  After the opponents of the appeal have concluded their ten-minute arguments, the party who filed the appeal shall have a three-minute rebuttal. 
(7)  The hearing before the mayor and council shall be confined to a review of the record of the historic preservation commission's determination for error based on abuse of discretion of the historic preservation commission. 
(8)  The mayor and council may approve, modify and approve, or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission if the mayor and council finds that the historic preservation commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. 
(9)  Appeals from decisions of the mayor and council made pursuant to this chapter may be taken to the Superior Court of Walker County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(p)  Department of transportation and local governments. The department of transportation and any contractors performing work funded by the department of transportation are exempt from this article. Local governments are exempt from the requirement of obtaining certificates of appropriateness; provided, however, that local government shall notify the historic preservation commission forty-five (45) days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 6, 12-14-2006; Ord. No. 09/04, § 3, 6-8-2009) 
Sec. 2-107. - Demolition or relocation applications. 
(a)  Authority to comment on demolition permit applications. The commission shall have the authority to approve or deny a certificate of appropriateness for a permit to demolish or relocate a structure, building, object or work of art from, to or within a historic property. 
(b)  Actions acceptable in reaction to application for demolition permit or relocation permit. The commission shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny a certificate of appropriateness for a demolition permit or relocation permit within its jurisdiction. 
(c)  Consideration of predemolition plans. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for demolition. Notice shall be given in Walker County's legal organ and/or newspaper of general circulation within the county at least one (1) time not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days prior to the public hearing. 
(d)  Consideration of post-demolition plans. The historic preservation commission shall not grant a certificate of appropriateness for demolition permission without reviewing at the same time the plans for the historic property. 
(e)  Demolition or relocation criteria. The historic preservation commission's decision concerning the certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation of a historic site, landmark, or building shall be based on the following criteria: 
(1)  The structure is of such interest or quality it would reasonably meet national, state, or local criteria for designation as a historic property. 
(2)  The structure, building, object or work of art is of such unusual or uncommon design, texture or materials that it could not be reproduced or be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense. 
(3)  Retention of the structure, building, object or work of art would aid substantially in preserving and protecting a structure, building, object, work of art, or district which meets subsections (1) or (2) hereinabove. 
Where the historic preservation commission determines that one (1) or more of these criteria are met, no certificates of appropriateness shall be issued and the application shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 7, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-108. - Maintenance of historic property. 
(a)  Ordinary repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property that does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof is excluded from review. 
(b)  Conformity to existing building codes. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing building codes adopted by city nor to prevent any property owner from making use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 8, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-109. - Penalty provisions. 
    Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall be punished as generally provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 9, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-110. - Severability. 
    In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect as if the section, subsection, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 10, 12-14-2006) 
Sec. 2-111. - Amendments. 
(a)  This article, including the official historic district and landmark map, may be amended by the mayor and council on its own motion or on recommendation of the historic preservation commission; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the historic preservation commission for review and recommendation. All amendments to historic districts and landmarks shall follow the procedure set forth above in [subsection 2-104(d)] of this article, known as "procedure for designation of historic districts and landmarks." 
(b)  Amendments to the design guidelines for new construction or alterations within a designated district or involving landmarks must be approved by the mayor and council on its own motion or on recommendation of the historic preservation commission; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed or shall have been submitted to the historic preservation commission for review and recommendation. All amendments to the design guidelines shall follow the procedure set forth in [subsection 2-105(b)] of this article, known as "procedure for adoption of design guidelines." 
(Ord. No. 06/09, § 11, 12-14-2006) 
Secs. 2-112-2-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 2-141. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(1)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(2)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(3)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(4)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-142. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This article shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-143. - Definitions. 
    Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
    City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined, does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city council, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the city charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city council as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city council. 
    Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city council or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the council, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
    Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
    Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
    Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
    Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
    Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five (5) percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more of the equity or market value of the entity; 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous twelve (12) months either equal or exceed (a) five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten (10) percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city council; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or more. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-144. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the council or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself/herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city council or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city council and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city council and shall recuse himself/herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(1)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefor. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of LaFayette nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a municipal court judge of the City of LaFayette on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of LaFayette. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-145. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and council prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-146. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics shall consist of three (3) residents of the city, one (1) appointed by the mayor, one (1) appointed by the council, and the third appointed by the two (2) named board members and approved by a majority of the city council. 
(b)  Such board will elect one (1) of its members to serve as chair. 
(c)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(d)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a three-year term. 
(e)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one (1) year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(f)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(g)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city council shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten (10) years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(i)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than twenty-one (21) years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of LaFayette. 
(j)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(k)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-147. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the city clerk, who will give it to the mayor and council. The mayor and council may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city council. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the city clerk or the clerk's designee shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven (7) calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this article. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city council; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city council has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the city council for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, ethics complaints against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, which are filed between the date of qualifying for municipal office and the date of certification of the election results will be held and will not be processed until the election results for that office have been certified. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-148. - Service of complaint. 
    The city clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven (7) calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one (1) hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. 
    The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within seven (7) calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven (7) calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the article shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city council to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-149. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of the county within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Sec. 2-150. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(1)  Public reprimand or censure by the city council; or 
(2)  Request for resignation by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 12-02, § A, 4-9-2012) 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising sale of malt beverages, § 4-28; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 

Sec. 3-1. - Notices, handbills or signs, posting prohibited on utility poles or public buildings; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or place, or cause to be posted, painted or placed, any notice, sign, handbill, picture or advertisement whatsoever on any street telegraph or telephone pole, lamppost or upon the walls of any public building, or upon any property of the city except that legal elections and similar notices may be posted on bulletin boards. 
(Code 1975, § 32-20) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 3-2. - Posting handbills, etc., on private buildings or fences, exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or place, or cause to be posted, painted or placed upon any private building or fence, any handbills, pictures, signs or advertisement whatsoever without first obtaining the consent of the owner thereof in writing. 
(Code 1975, § 32-21) 
Sec. 3-3. - Distribution of handbills on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed on any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks, or any vacant property within the city any handbills, circulars, dodgers, pamphlets, posters, or literature of any kind; provided, however, distribution is permitted to the extent that same does not create litter, does not interfere with traffic, and does not otherwise endanger the safety and/or welfare of any individual as a result of said distribution. 
(Code 1975, § 32-22; Ord. No. 03-10, § 1, 9-8-2003) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 3-4. - Placing handbills in or on automobiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute in the city any handbill or other similar form of advertising by throwing or placing the same in or on any automobile or other vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 32-23; Ord. No. 03-11, § 1, 9-8-2003) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 3-5. - Banners across streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to extend or suspend any sign or banner across any street in the city without permission from the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 32-24) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 3-6. - Sound trucks and sound-amplifying devices. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated in the city any sound-amplifying devices or equipment for any purpose whatever, whether the same be stationary or operated from a vehicle, unless a permit has been obtained from the city council to do so; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to make any loud and raucous noise to the disturbance of the peace. Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this section who abuses his discretion and causes or permits loud and raucous noises shall subject the permit to immediate revocation. 
(b)  The words "sound-amplifying equipment" as used in this section shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of any sound. 
(Code 1975, § 32-25) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 20; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. Title 3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MALT BEVERAGES AND WINES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Malt beverages and wines generally, OCGA §§ 3-5-1-3-6-76. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-16. - Business hours of outlets. 
    Retail dealers shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages or wine during any of the following times: 
(1)  Christmas day; 
(2)  At any time between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any election day for all elections including, but not limited to, all general and special elections; and 
(3)  On any day or portion of a day that the laws of the state prohibit the sale or offering to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 7-13-81(1); Ord. No. 02-16, § 1(1-3), 11-18-2002; Ord. No. 18-10, § 1, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-17. - Business hours of wholesalers. 
    The business hours of wholesale dealers shall be the same hours and days as retail dealers and outlets are allowed to engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine by the terms of section 4-16. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.2) 
Sec. 4-18. - Compliance with business hours. 
    Retail licensees and wholesale licensees are hereby prohibited from selling, giving away, offering for sale, delivering or dispensing in any manner whatsoever any malt beverages or wine within the city except on such days and at such times as sales are specifically authorized in sections 4-16 and 4-17. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.3) 
Sec. 4-19. - Annual license fees. 
(a)  The following annual license fees shall be on file in the city clerk's office, as set from time to time: 
(1)  For the privilege of engaging in the business of selling malt beverages at wholesale within the city ..... $500.00 
(2)  For the privilege of engaging in the business of selling wine at wholesale within the city ..... $500.00 
(3)  For the privilege of engaging in the business of selling malt beverages at retail ..... $500.00 
(4)  For the privilege of engaging in the business of selling wine at retail ..... $500.00 
(b)  No license shall be issued for less than the calendar year as provided in this article and, in the case of revocation or surrender of any such license, before the expiration of such calendar year the holder thereof shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(c)  The license fees set pursuant to this section shall not be prorated for any portion of a year and shall remain the full amount regardless of the time the application is made. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.4; Ord. No. 99-11, § 1, 12-13-99; Ord. No. 02-15, § 1, 11-18-2002) 
Sec. 4-20. - Visibility and lighting of outlets. 
    No license shall be granted to a retailer under any provision or section of this article unless the front entrance to the outlet is clearly visible from a public street, road or highway and no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which prevents a clear view into the interior of the outlet shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail outlet. Each retail outlet shall be so lighted that the interior of the store or premises is visible day or night and all parking areas adjacent to or used in connection with the business shall be fully lighted and unobstructed. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.5) 
Sec. 4-21. - Consumption on premises. 
    The retail licenses authorized under this article are for retail sales in package only and there shall be no consumption on the premises of any outlet of any malt beverages or wine. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.6) 
Sec. 4-22. - Drive-thru window service. 
    No retail licensee, through its officers, agents, employees or otherwise, shall serve, sell or deliver any malt beverages to occupants of automobiles except through a drive-thru window operated as an accessory use to their main business in compliance with the following conditions. This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the delivery of sacks or other packages to automobiles when the sales have been consummated inside the retail outlet. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this Code section, it shall be unlawful for any licensee, through its officers, agents, employees or otherwise, to serve, sell or deliver any malt beverages to occupants of automobiles except through a drive-thru window operated as an accessory use to their main business. 
(2)  No licensee, through its officers, agents, employees or otherwise, shall serve, sell or deliver any malt beverages to occupants of automobiles except through a drive-thru window operated as an accessory use to their main business except if they are in compliance with all of the provisions of this Code section set forth below: 
a.  The drive-thru shall be placed at the side of the building, not at the front or rear, that will still be clearly visible from the right-of-way and parking areas of the business; 
b.  The drive-thru shall be lighted at all times the business is open for sales, so that all vehicles are clearly visible from the right-of-way and that the licensee, through its officers, agents, employees or otherwise, can clearly see the individuals purchasing the alcohol; 
c.  The business shall install and operate a camera system of the drive-thru that will hold sales transactions for a minimum of two weeks. These videos shall be available for review by the City of LaFayette law enforcement and code enforcement officers; and 
d.  The licensee must comply will all other sections of the Alcohol Ordinance and all other state and federal laws that are applicable to alcohol sales. 
(3)  Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor offense. The penalty for a violation of this section is a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and incarceration not to exceed one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, 10-8-2012) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 12-05, § 1, adopted Oct. 8, 2012, repealed former § 4-22 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to curb service and derived from Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.7. 
Sec. 4-23. - Intoxicated persons. 
    No malt beverages or wine shall be sold to any intoxicated person, nor shall any intoxicated person be allowed to remain upon the premises of any outlet. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.8) 
Cross reference- Drunkenness, generally, § 14-4(b)(3); drunkenness on city property, § 14-5. 
Sec. 4-24. - Consumption on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume any alcoholic beverages, as defined by OCGA § 3-1-2, as amended, on or upon the public streets, roads, ways or alleys of the city or in any public park, playground or recreational area of the city or any other public property of the city, except as contemplated and permitted by OCGA § 3-8-2, as amended and as permitted by the city at the city golf course. 
(Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, 4-10-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-03, § 1, adopted Apr. 10, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter. For prior history, see Code Comparative Table. 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, Ch. 7; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 4-25. - Sale to minors. 
    No malt beverages or wine shall be sold to a minor under any conditions whatsoever. A minor for the purposes of this article shall be considered to be any person who is considered to be a minor under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.10) 
Sec. 4-26. - Employees, drinking on premises. 
    No owner, operator, manager or employee of any outlet shall work in the outlet while intoxicated nor shall any such persons drink any malt beverages, wine or alcoholic beverages whatsoever while working and employed in any outlet. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.11) 
Sec. 4-27. - Minors on premises of package store. 
    No minors shall be allowed inside any package store outlet. Minors shall not be allowed to congregate or loiter on the premises of any package store outlet. This section shall not apply to convenience stores which have retail licenses under this article. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.12) 
Sec. 4-28. - Advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful for any retail or wholesale licensee to advertise the sale of malt beverages on the outside of the outlet in which the licensee is licensed to operate his business under this article. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.13) 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3. 
Sec. 4-29. - Posting licenses. 
    All licenses required under this article must be posted in a conspicuous place within the outlet, and if the license is not so posted, the outlet shall not be authorized to continue in business until the license is posted. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.14) 
Sec. 4-30. - Posting of article. 
    At all times all retail licensees under this article must post within the place of business a copy of this article in a conspicuous place within the outlet. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.15) 
Sec. 4-31. - Compliance with health authorities. 
    All retail licensees under this article are hereby required to comply with rules and regulations and requirements of the county board of health, state board of health and any and all other state, federal and local public health authorities. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.16) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 4-32. - Retail licenses, categories. 
    Retail licenses under this article shall be of two (2) categories as follows: 
(1)  Package stores only. 
(2)  Convenience store licenses. A convenience store license shall be one issued to a business whose primary function is the sale of food and related merchandise and whose sale of beer and wine at retail is incidental to the operation thereof. All malt beverages and wine must be located within the interior of such outlet and shall be sacked in containers at the checkout counter of such outlet. No such beverages shall be opened or consumed either inside the outlet or on the premises of the outlet. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.17) 
Sec. 4-33. - License issued only after fees paid. 
    All license fees required under this article shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.18) 
Sec. 4-34. - Authorized wines. 
    For the purposes of this article wine which is authorized is that wine which is authorized to be legally sold and distributed in municipalities and counties which have not authorized the legal sale of distilled spirits and spirituous liquors as defined by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.19) 
Sec. 4-35. - Possession for purpose of sale or resale. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale or resale any malt beverages or wine when such person does not have a license from the city to sell or possess for sale or resale such beverages. It shall be presumed, as a matter of law, that any person having located on his premises more than one thousand four hundred forty (1,440) fluid ounces of malt beverages or five (5) gallons of wine shall have the goods in his possession for the purpose of resale. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.20) 
Sec. 4-36. - Receipt of and delivery to retail licensees. 
    Malt beverages and wine shall be received at or delivered to the premises of the retail licensee by no other means than by a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesale dealer with a permit from the city to make deliveries in the city. Transportation of malt beverages or wine by any other means shall be grounds for revocation of a wholesale permit or license. Receipt of malt beverages or wine by any other means by a retail licensee shall be grounds for revocation of a retail license. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.21) 
Sec. 4-37. - Licenses; transferability. 
    No licenses granted under this article shall be transferable from one (1) person to another nor shall the license be transferable from one (1) outlet location to another. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.22) 
Sec. 4-38. - Manager of outlet; requirements. 
    If the person to whom any license under this article is issued does not personally manage the outlet, the name of the managers on duty of the outlet must always be registered with the city clerk, and the managers of the outlet must meet all of the requirements of a person to whom a license could be granted under this article. If such licensed outlet is not managed directly by the holder of the license, or a manager properly registered who meets all of the requirements under this article, then license shall be immediately suspended or revoked. If such a manager is changed the holder of the license must notify the city clerk no later than ten (10) days from the date of the change of such manager. All information required under this article with regard to managers shall also be furnished to the city clerk at that time. This section shall apply to any person who is in charge of the business operation of the outlet at any given time. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.23) 
Sec. 4-39. - Applicant requirements. 
(a)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license under this article, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the division of investigation as is required by OCGA section 3-3-2. 
(b)  In addition to the license required by the city under this article, each licensee must obtain any permit or license required by the state and the United States. Failure to obtain any such license or permit or the revocation of any such license or permit shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted under this article. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 3.24) 
Sec. 4-40. - Violations. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be an offense punishable by the recorder's court of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 4.1) 
Secs. 4-41-4-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MALT BEVERAGES 

Sec. 4-51. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context or the specific provisions of this section demand otherwise, the words and terms used in this article shall have the definition and meaning as state law where used in OCGA Title 3, Chapter 5. 
    Business location shall mean the location or proposed location of a retail or wholesale malt beverage outlet. 
    Measured shall mean the straight line distance from the closest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is located to the closest corner of the building of an involved institution or establishment, except as otherwise stated in this division. 
    Outlet shall mean a store in which malt beverages are sold. 
    Outlet manager shall mean the person who does or who will actually manage or operate the malt beverage store on a day-to-day basis. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-52. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful to manufacture, sell or offer to sell at wholesale or retail within the city any malt beverage without having the appropriate license for such manufacture or sale, or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or of this division. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.2) 
State Law reference- Municipal license required, OCGA § 3-5-40. 
Sec. 4-53. - License use restrictions. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each malt beverage outlet, and separate application shall be made for each. 
(b)  No license shall be transferable or assignable. 
(c)  Immediately upon the sale of an outlet or immediately upon the closing of an outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender his license to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.3) 
Sec. 4-54. - Classification of licenses; fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this division shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Retail package. Retail beer package store, which shall permit the sale of malt beverages only in packages at retail. 
(2)  Retail convenience stores. A retail store whose primary function is the sale of food and related merchandise in which the sale of malt beverages at retail is incidental to the operation thereof. 
(3)  Wholesale. Wholesale malt beverage distributor, which shall permit only the sale of malt beverages at wholesale to licensed retailers. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be set forth in the license schedule in section 4-19. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.4) 
Sec. 4-55. - Application for license. 
    Each initial malt beverage license applicant shall make written application to the city for the privilege of engaging in the sale of malt beverages, specifying wholesale or retail, such application using forms approved by the city clerk and furnished by the city clerk. 
(1)  The application shall be filed with the city clerk with a fee for investigation of the application and of the proposed location and processing of the application. Such fee is on file in the city clerk's office, as set from time to time. 
(2)  The application shall state: 
a.  As to the applicant: Full name, age, home address, business address, telephone number, place of permanent residence, date of establishment of permanent residence at such location, address of last place of residence, name of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all convictions, guilty pleas and pleas of nolo contendere for violation of all laws, city, state and federal, of applicant and of applicant's spouse. If the applicant is a partnership such information shall be furnished as to each partner. If the applicant is a corporation such information must be furnished as to each director, each officer and each stockholder who owns or controls ten (10) percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of such corporation. 
b.  As to applicant's proposed outlet managers if not the same as applicant: Full name, age, home address, business address, telephone number, place of permanent residence, date of establishment of permanent residence at such location, address of last place of residence, name of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all convictions, guilty pleas and pleas of nolo contendere for violation of all laws, city, state and federal, of outlet manager and of outlet manager's spouse. 
c.  Exact location, street address and otherwise, of proposed business and outlet. 
d.  Name and address of owner or landlord and resident manager, if any, of property proposed for location and whether or not there is a building proposed to be used already erected thereon. 
e.  Name or trade name under which the proposed business shall be operated. 
f.  Name and address of all persons having any financial interest in the outlet by way of ownership of building or stock, receipt of income from business or otherwise. This shall not apply to any stockholder who owns less than ten (10) percent of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation. 
g.  If the applicant is a corporation, the address of the principal place of business, the registered office, and the name of the registered agent or agents of the corporation. 
h.  Such other information as may be required by the city through interrogatories or otherwise. 
(3)  The application shall be sworn to by all applicants. 
(4)  There shall be attached to the application a copy of applicant's application or proposed application for a license from the state if one is required. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.5) 
Sec. 4-56. - Action by city. 
    Within seven (7) days from the time the application pursuant to this division is filed, the city clerk shall notify the police chief or such other investigative officer as approved by the city, who shall investigate the character of the applicant and the reputation of the location, and make a full report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall further determine if the application and proposed location meets with and satisfies all of the requirements of this division. The city clerk shall consider and follow the requirements of sections 4-57 and 4-58 in determining whether or not the applicant shall be granted the license for which the application is made. After such investigation of applicant and proposed location and upon consideration of all of the other requirements of this division, if the city clerk determines that the applicant and proposed location comply with and satisfy all of the requirements of this division, the city clerk shall issue the license for which the application is made upon payment of the appropriate fee. The city clerk shall either issue or refuse to issue the license for which application is made within sixty (60) days from the time the application is filed with the city clerk. If the application is refused, upon request of the applicant, the city clerk shall furnish to the applicant the reasons for denying the application. 
(Ord. of 2-11-86(3)) 
Sec. 4-57. - Criteria for granting or denying license. 
    The city, in making its determination on an initial application, shall be guided by the factors set out in section 4-58. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.7) 
Sec. 4-58. - Grounds for denial of license. 
(a)  Prohibited location. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages within the following areas in the city: 
(1)  Within three hundred (300) feet of any church building, hospital building or rest home building, measured in a straight line, from the nearest "building" corner of any of these buildings to the nearest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is to be operated. The word "building" shall mean a structure used at the time of filing of the application for license for the purposes of church, hospital or rest home. Additionally, for the purpose of this division, a church is defined as an organization for the purpose of preaching the gospel and other related religious activities located within a permanent structure either owned or leased by such organization or which is used by such organization with the permission of the owner on a regular basis for such purpose. Such organization must either consist of at least twenty-five (25) adult members on its official rolls that meet on a regularly scheduled basis not less than one (1) time per week with an average attendance of not less than twenty-five (25) people of such organization, must be duly recognized and affiliated with a parent religious denomination and be either chartered, recognized or approved by such parent religious denomination. Such organization must also qualify under the rules of Internal Revenue Service as an organization to which contributions may be deducted for federal income tax purposes. 
(2)  Within three hundred (300) feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest property lien of any school or schoolhouse to the nearest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is to be operated. 
(3)  Within three hundred (300) feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest property line of any city recreation area to the nearest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is to be operated. 
(4)  In any existing building or establishment having a history of or reputation for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law. 
(b)  Prohibited outlet building. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages at retail where the proposed location does not have a front entrance to the premises which is clearly visible from a public street, road or highway. 
(c)  Prohibited persons. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages to: 
(1)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident of the county for a period of twelve (12) months next preceding the date of filing of the application. If the applicant is a partnership, these requirements apply to all partners in such business, whether a general partner or a limited partner. However, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a corporation. 
(2)  A corporation which is not duly qualified to do business in the state and which is not in good standing with all of the rules and regulations of the state corporation code and the secretary of state and which does not have a registered agent for service of process within the county. However, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an individual or a partnership which has no corporate partners. 
(3)  A person who is not of good character and reputation in the community in which he resides. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted of a felony, or of a crime opposed to decency and morality, within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(5)  A person who has been convicted or who has entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony or any misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any alcoholic spirits, prohibited liquors, wine or malt beverages, or taxability thereof within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(6)  A person who has been convicted or who has entered a plea of nolo contendere for any felony or any misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(7)  A person, partnership or corporation whose license under this division has been revoked for cause or who has had a license of any type under this division revoked for cause within five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(8)  A person, partnership or corporation who at the time of application for renewal of any license issued under this division would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(9)  A person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(10)  A person who is not of sound mind and memory. 
(11)  An elected official or police officer or other law enforcement office of the city. 
(12)  If the applicant is a corporation, subsections (3), (4), (5), (6), (9) and (10) shall not apply. 
(13)  Any partnership or corporation where any individual having any interest, either as owner, partner, stockholder, director or officer, or his or her spouse, shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application of any felony, or a crime opposed to decency and morality, or any felony or misdemeanor involving the manufacturing, possession, transportation or sale of beer, alcoholic spirits, wine, or prohibited liquors, or the taxability thereof, or a violation of this division, or shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of such application for any felony or misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance. 
(d)  Additional considerations. The city in reaching its final determination on an initial application shall also be guided by the following factors as to whether or not to grant such license: 
(1)  The proximity of other outlets. 
(2)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business. 
(3)  The proximity of public parks and playgrounds. 
(4)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.8; Ord. No. 12-04, §§ 1, 2, 9-10-2012) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 4-59. - Renewals of licenses; denial. 
(a)  All licenses pursuant to this division shall be issued for a period of one (1) year running from January 1 through December 31, and shall be renewable as a matter of course upon payment of the appropriate fee, except as is set out in subsection (d). 
(b)  Each licensee shall make written application for renewal on or before December 1 of each year on forms approved by the city clerk. 
(c)  Such application shall be referred to the police chief or such other person as is designated by the city, who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  If the police chief or designated investigator reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made, and the matter shall be referred to the city for its consideration. A public hearing must be held not later than December 31. 
(e)  The city shall afford the licensee a public hearing, and in passing upon the application for renewal, it shall be guided by the following factors applicable to an initial application: 
All matters contained in section 4-58 and such evidence as is obtained and presented to the city as the result of the investigation provided for in subsection (c). The city shall consider all evidence presented at the public hearing. 
(f)  At such public hearing the city may grant or deny for cause the renewal of any license issued under this division. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.9) 
Sec. 4-60. - Suspension and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Summary action. 
(1)  If, at any time during the holding of a license granted under this division, it should appear that the licensee has violated the provisions of this division or the state, or federal laws relating to the possession, transportation or sale of any alcoholic spirits, prohibited liquors, wine or malt beverages or taxability thereof or involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance, or has become a person prohibited by this division from having a license granted to him, as contained in section 4-58, or if it should appear that his application contained known false information, or if it appears necessary for the public safety, health and welfare, the chief of police of the city may suspend and seize any retail license to sell malt beverages within the city. 
(2)  If the licensee is dissatisfied with such suspension, he may appeal to the city by filing a written request with the city clerk, stating his grounds and reasons. 
(3)  The city shall hold a hearing on such suspension within ten (10) days of the filing of such appeal. After such hearing, the city may affirm, reverse or modify the action of the suspending officer and may revoke or suspend said license or place said licensee on probation or refuse to renew at the time of renewal. 
(b)  Action by city. The city shall have full power and authority to revoke, refuse to renew, suspend or place on probation any license to sell malt beverages for violation of this division or violation of any laws of the state or any federal laws involving possession, transportation or sale of any alcoholic spirits, prohibited liquors, wine or malt beverages or taxability thereof or involving illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance or, if the licensee has become a person, firm or corporation prohibited by this division from having a license granted to him or it, as contained in section 4-58 or if it should appear that his application contained known false information, or when the city shall determine, after five (5) days' notice and hearing, that the operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. For the purposes of this section, it shall be sufficient if notice is mailed giving the time and place of the hearing by United States registered mail at the address of the licensee shown in the application. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.10) 
Sec. 4-61. - Excise tax-Levied. 
    In addition to the annual license fees required, there is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax which shall be paid to the city, on all malt beverages which are sold within the corporate limits of the city. Such excise tax is to be that amount authorized in OCGA section 3-5-60. Said excise tax is imposed upon and shall be paid by each wholesale dealer who sells and delivers malt beverages within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.11) 
Sec. 4-62. - Same-Method of payment. 
    Such tax shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all malt beverages sold and delivered within the corporate limits of the city not later than the tenth day of each month, based upon the units of beer sold during the previous calendar month by such wholesalers to retailers in the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.12) 
Sec. 4-63. - Same-Payment report and records. 
    The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments and shall render a sworn statement of the same accompanying the monthly report to the city, and such report shall show the exact quantities of malt beverages, by size and type of container, and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.13) 
Sec. 4-64. - Right of city to audit records. 
    The city shall have the right to audit and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying retailers in the city and also from each retailer so supplied within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.14) 
Sec. 4-65. - Failure to make timely report and pay tax; penalty. 
    The failure to make a timely report and remittance of aforesaid taxes shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount due, in addition to the amount due; and, additionally, if such report is not filed or if the taxes are not remitted and paid within thirty (30) days from the date that the same are due, the city shall have the right to suspend and revoke any wholesale license and further to prohibit such wholesaler from making any deliveries of any type whatsoever within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.15) 
Sec. 4-66. - Sale prohibited when tax not paid. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell at retail or otherwise within the city any malt beverage on which the tax required in this division has not been paid to the wholesaler or distributor or to the city. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 1.16) 
Secs. 4-67-4-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WINE 

Sec. 4-81. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context demands otherwise, the words and terms used in this division shall have the same definition and meaning as state law where used in OCGA Title 3, Chapter 6. 
    Business location shall mean the location or proposed location of a retail wine outlet. 
    Outlet shall mean a store for the retail sale of wine. 
    Wine shall mean that wine which may be legally sold in a city or county in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 2.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 4-82. - License-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell, store or offer to sell at wholesale or retail, within the corporate limits of the city, wine without having the appropriate license for such sale or to carry on such activity in violation of the terms of such license or this division. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 2.2) 
Sec. 4-83. - Same-For each outlet; nontransferable; surrender. 
(a)  A separate license shall be required for each wine outlet. 
(b)  No license shall be transferable or assignable. 
(c)  Immediately upon the sale of an outlet or upon the closing of an outlet, it shall be the duty of the licensee to surrender the license to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 2.3) 
Sec. 4-84. - Same-Classification; fees. 
(a)  Licenses under this division shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Retail package: A retail wine package store, which shall permit only the sale of wine in packages at retail. 
(2)  Retail convenience store: A retail store whose primary function is the sale of food and related merchandise in which the sale of wine at retail is incidental to the operation thereof. 
(3)  Wholesale: Wholesale wine distributor which shall permit only the sale of wine at wholesale to duly licensed retailers. 
(b)  The amount of the license fee for each class shall be as set forth in the license schedule in section 4-19. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 2.4) 
Sec. 4-85. - Application and qualification. 
(a)  Application for a retail package wine license shall be the same as, and in accordance with, the requirements applicable to the sale of malt beverages by the package at retail, and all provisions in this division pertaining to the application and qualifications of a malt beverage license, including sections 4-54 through 4-60, shall be enforced in the sale of wine. All regulations controlling the sale of malt beverages shall also be applicable to the sale of wine as if fully set out as a separate section hereunder in this division. 
(b)  It is the intention of this division that wine be sold either in conjunction with a qualified and licensed retail malt beverage outlet under the same standards and restrictions as are applicable to retail malt beverage outlets, or if the licensee so desires that wine may be sold at a qualified licensed wine outlet which does not sell malt beverages, however, under any circumstances all wine outlets shall be under the same standards, qualifications, rules and restrictions as are applicable to malt beverage outlets under this division. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 2.5) 
Sec. 4-86. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Levied. In addition to the annual retail wine license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed as follows: 
(1)  Five cents ($0.05) per eight-ounce container. 
(2)  Ten cents ($0.10) per sixteen-ounce container. 
(3)  Twenty cents ($0.20) per quart or four-fifths of a quart. 
(4)  Forty cents ($0.40) per one-half-gallon container. 
(5)  Eighty cents ($0.80) per gallon container. 
(6)  Eighty cents ($0.80) per gallon on all larger containers. 
(b)  Payment due date. The tax shall be paid to the city by each wholesale distributor on all wine sold to retailers in the city no later than the tenth day of each month, based upon the units of wine sold during the previous calendar month by such wholesalers to retailers in the city. 
(c)  Summary of purchase invoices. Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the city a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth day of each month following such purchases. Such invoices shall show the exact quantities of wine, by size and type of container, and the amount of excise tax paid and the amount collected. 
(d)  Right of city to audit. The city shall have the right to audit, and the right to require production of records from each wholesaler who supplies retailers in the city and from each retailer so supplied. 
(e)  Reports under oath. All of the foregoing reports required by this section shall be under oath. 
(Ord. of 10-9-78, § 2.6) 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Municipal excise tax authorized, OCGA § 3-6-60. 
Secs. 4-87-4-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MALT BEVERAGE/WINE BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 4-101. - Title. 
    This division shall be known as the "City of LaFayette Malt Beverage/Wine by the Drink Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 1, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-102. - License is a privilege. 
    General prohibition. No person shall sell malt beverages or wine by the drink as provided for in this division without first obtaining all applicable licenses required by this division, and further: 
(1)  Malt beverages and wine may be sold for the limited purposes described herein within the City of LaFayette under a license granted by the city upon the terms and conditions provided in this division. 
(2)  All licenses pursuant to this division shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this division and state law. 
(3)  Any holder of a license issued in accord with this division is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the State of Georgia before any sales commence. Additionally, any holder of a license issued in accord with this division is required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(4)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall have printed on the face the following words: 
THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE CONDITIONAL ON THE HOLDER MEETING ALL STANDARDS FOR SUCH LICENSE AND OPERATING REGULATIONS APPLICABLE THERETO SET OUT IN CITY ORDINANCES AND GEORGIA LAW. FAILURE TO MEET SUCH STANDARDS OR TO COMPLY WITH SUCH OPERATING REGULATIONS SHALL SUBJECT THE HOLDER OF THE LICENSE TO HAVE THE LICENSE REVOKED FOLLOWING NOTICE AND HEARING. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 2, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-103. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed in this section, except if the context clearly indicates a different meaning, to-wit: 
(1)  Alcohol means malt beverage and wine. 
(2)  Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than fourteen (14) percent alcohol by volume and including, but not limited to, ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
(3)  Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full service kitchen. A full service kitchen shall consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. An eating establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour the establishment is open and shall derive at least seventy (70) percent of the gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(4)  Hotel/motel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either transient, permanent or residential. Such businesses shall have one (1) or more public dining rooms with a full service kitchen, as that term is defined in subsection (3) of this section. Hotels/motels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment described in this division, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel/motel pursuant to this definition. 
(5)  Licensee means the person to whom a license for the sale or distribution of malt beverages or wine is issued under this division. In the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation are licensees. A license issued under this division permits the licensee to sell malt beverages and/or wine for beverage purposes by the drink for consumption only on the premises where sold. 
(6)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi public. 
(7)  Premises means one (1) room or more all contiguous in nature operating under the same trade name. 
(8)  Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells malt beverages or wine for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
(9)  Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 3, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 16-01, § 1, 2-8-2016) 
Sec. 4-104. - Licenses, generally. 
    All licenses issued under this division shall: 
(1)  Permit the licensee to sell the beverage or beverages for which the license is issued solely within the City of LaFayette, Georgia, pursuant to the terms of this division and consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States; 
(2)  Expire on December 31 of each year and an application for renewal shall be made and filed annually on or before October 31 of each year. Any licensee must annually meet the requirements set forth by the city in order to obtain a renewal of any license. Any licensee making proper application with supporting documents for a license to operate during the following calendar year, and having filed such application before October 31, shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval of the licensee's application for the following year if final approval is not granted before January 1; 
(3)  Not be transferred from one (1) person to another or from one (1) location to another; and 
(4)  Permit the licensee to sell malt beverages or wine or combination thereof, depending upon the license issued, for beverage purposes by the drink for consumption only on the premises where sold. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 4, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-105. - Types of licenses to be issued. 
    Only the following licenses shall be issued under this division: 
(1)  Malt beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises; 
(2)  Wine by the drink for consumption on the premises; and 
(3)  Malt beverages and wine by the drink for consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 5, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-106. - Sale or possession for sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license, penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any malt beverage or wine if the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale malt beverage or wine or to make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. Violations of this section shall be dealt with pursuant to section 4-107 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 6, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-107. - Penalties for violation of division. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this division may upon determination of violation result in suspension or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this division; or the mayor and council may in lieu of suspension or revocation thereof impose a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 7, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-108. - Type of retail establishment where permitted. 
(a)  No malt beverage or wine shall be sold for consumption on the premises where sold except in areas zoned either B-1 or B-2 and which are being used as one of the following: 
(1)  An eating establishment, as that term is defined in section 4-103(3) hereof. When eating establishments are located in hotels or motels, every entrance to the establishment shall be from a public lobby, hallway, mall or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure; or 
(2)  An indoor nonprofit civic and cultural center qualified under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code capable of serving prepared food, with a full service kitchen, as that term is defined in section 4-103(3); prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least seventy (70) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities. 
    These eating establishments must be located in a zoning district which permits restaurants as conforming uses or where these eating establishments are incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(b)  Prohibited location. No license will be issued for the retail sale of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premise within the following areas in the city: 
(1)  Within three hundred (300) feet of any church building or alcohol treatment center measured in a straight line, from the nearest "building" corner of any of these buildings to the nearest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is to be operated. The word "building" shall mean a structure used at the time of filing of the application for license for the purposes of church, hospital or rest home. Additionally, for the purpose of this division, a church is defined as an organization for the purpose of preaching the gospel and other related religious activities located within a permanent structure either owned or leased by such organization or which is used by such organization with the permission of the owner on a regular basis for such purpose. Such organization must either consist of at least twenty-five (25) adult members on its official rolls that meet on a regularly scheduled basis not less than one (1) time per week with an average attendance of not less than twenty-five (25) people of such organization, must be duly recognized and affiliated with a parent religious denomination and be either chartered, recognized or approved by such parent religious denomination. Such organization must also qualify under the rules of Internal Revenue Service as an organization to which contributions may be deducted for federal income tax purposes. 
(2)  Within three hundred (300) feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest property line of any school or schoolhouse to the nearest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is to be operated. 
(3)  Within three hundred (300) feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest property line of any city recreation area to the nearest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is to be operated. 
(4)  Within three hundred (300) feet, measured in a straight line, from the nearest property line of any housing authority property to the nearest corner of the building in which the outlet or proposed outlet is to be operated. 
(5)  In any existing building or establishment having a history of or reputation for prostitution or other sex offenses; fighting, shooting, stabbing or other violence; gambling; illegal dealing in alcoholic beverages or drugs; or other violations of the law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 8, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 12-04, § 3, 9-10-2012) 
Sec. 4-109. - Separate application and separate license for each location of sale. 
    Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued for each location. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 9, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-110. - License fee. 
(a)  The fees for licenses issued pursuant to this division are as follows: 
(1)  Retail dealer of malt beverage to be consumed on the premises five hundred dollars ($500.00) per calendar year; 
(2)  Retail dealer of wine to be consumed on the premises five hundred dollars ($500.00) per calendar year; 
(3)  Retail dealer of malt beverage and wine to be consumed on the premises one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per calendar year. The license fee shall not be prorated based upon the day of the year that the license is issued. 
(b)  Each application for a license under this division shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the appropriate license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to the license being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) cost paid for investigative and administrative fees shall be retained by the city. However, any person applying for more than one (1) license at the same time shall pay only one (1) fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses. Any applicant for a license under this division who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this division shall pay no investigative and administrative fee. A notice of each application to sell malt beverages and/or wine by consumption shall be advertised in the official legal organ of the county, once a week for two (2) weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application. 
(c)  Once a license has been issued, however, no portion of the license fee shall be refunded if the license is revoked, suspended, or surrendered. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 10, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-111. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Malt beverages and/or wine shall not be sold or distributed for consumption on the premises except Monday through Saturday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight and on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  Election day sales. The sale of malt beverage and/or wine under this division shall be prohibited on election days within the city during the hours the polls are open. 
(c)  Christmas day sales. The sale or distribution of beer and/or wine for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted on Christmas day. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 11, 7-12-2010; Ord. No. 18-10, § 2, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-112. - Employment of underage persons prohibited. 
    No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any malt beverage or wine. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 12, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-113. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
    It shall be a violation of this division not to require and properly check identification for such persons as reasonably necessary to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his possession malt beverage or wine while in a licensed establishment. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. Nothing herein shall require mandatory checking of all customers' identifications. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 13, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-114. - Brown bagging. 
    It is prohibited for any person to bring his own malt beverage and/or wine in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve malt beverage and/or wine. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 14, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-115. - Display of license at place of business. 
    The city license issued pursuant to this division shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 15, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-116. - Transferability of license/change in ownership. 
    There shall be no transfers of licenses. Any change in ownership of any licensed entity other than a publicly traded corporation shall necessitate a new application and payment of the entirety of the license fee and administrative fee. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 16, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-117. - Inventory stored only on premises. 
    No licensee under this division shall keep any malt beverage or wine at any place except the licensed place of business. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 17, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-118. - Notice. 
    For purposes of this division, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served or when served by certified mail, within three (3) days after the date of the deposit in the United States mail; or the date of confirmation of delivery from an overnight delivery service. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 18, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-119. - Poured malt beverage and wine. 
    Poured malt beverages or wine shall be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by permitted employees only. Permitted employees are those who have applied for and received a pouring license authorizing such employees to take orders and transport alcoholic beverages to customers. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 19, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-120. - Regulations as to employees and managers. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of malt beverages and/or wine on the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense malt beverages or wine or serve in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license under this division until such person has been fingerprinted and cleared by the director of public safety for the city or his designee and/or city code enforcement officer indicating that the person is eligible for such employment as per the minimum requirements for an applicant under this division. 
(2)  This section shall not be construed to include employees whose duties are limited solely to those of busboy(s), cooks, or dishwashers. 
(3)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city clerk or designee and upon payment of a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the person, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of the arrest information, the application shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(4)  The city clerk or a designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any criminal record of the person fingerprinted. If the person is eligible for employment, the city clerk or a designee shall issue a permit to the person, by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the director of public safety or city code enforcement officer or other designee shall notify the person, in writing, that he or she is not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and his or her right of appeal. 
(5)  No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the city clerk or a designee that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to a minor in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually related crime within a period of five (5) years preceding the date of the application and is not on probation or parole. A person's first time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city or county ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an alcohol pouring permit. No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state, or local law for any felony within five (5) years preceding the date of the application and is currently on probation or parole. For purposes of this division, a conviction or pleas of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a person whose sentence was entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored if the person violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the person had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(6)  An alcohol pouring permit shall be issued for a period of three (3) calendar years from the date of the application. As provided in subsection (11) of this section, the alcohol pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment and available for inspection by members of the city police department. After application of the pouring permit is completed with the city, the employee may immediately commence work on a temporary basis provided the employee retains the receipt for the permit on his or her person at all times at the premises for which the alcohol license has been issued, and thereafter, if a permit is issued, must maintain on his or her person at the premises the actual pouring permit. If a permit is not issued, the employee must immediately cease work upon being notified that a permit will not be issued to the employee. 
(7)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick or scheme while making application to the city clerk for an alcohol beverage pouring permit under this section. If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a permit is denied for this reason, then ninety (90) calendar days must elapse from the date of notification of the denial of the permit before the person may submit a new application for a permit. 
(8)  All permits issued through administrative error can be immediately terminated and seized by the city clerk or designee. 
(9)  Replacement permits will be issued within thirty (30) days of original date, upon paying one-half of the fee charged for alcohol pouring permits. After thirty (30) days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(10)  All permits issued under this division remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, city clerk or a designee. 
(11)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a permit to work on premises unless the employee or manager has in his or her possession a current valid city pouring permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the city clerk may be used for a maximum of ninety (90) days from the date of its issue unless notified that a permit will not be issued. Licensees are required by this division to inspect and verify that each employee required to do so has in his or her possession a valid current alcohol pouring permit. 
(12)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license issued under this division to file with the city clerk the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(13)  The permit issued under this section shall be issued to individuals only and as long as the permit is valid, may be used at any employer licensed by this division until said license is revoked, suspended, terminated, or expires. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 20, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-121. - Open area and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the code enforcement officer and is in compliance with any and all other regulations of the city. Also, all sales of malt beverages and wine under this provision must be in opaque containers and not in bottles or cans. 
(b)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three and one-half (31/2) feet above the patio floor, but the structure does have to shield or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. The structure must be permitted and approved by the code enforcement officer and meet all building and fire code regulations. 
(d)  The only exit from the patio/open sales area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit must be of a type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 21, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-122. - No consumption outside premises. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open containers of malt beverage or wine, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open containers of malt beverage or wine are sold and carried out of the premises. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside a malt beverage and/or wine establishment and consume malt beverage and/or wine. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee of a licensee to allow persons to gather outside a malt beverage and/or wine establishment and consume malt beverage and/or wine. 
(d)  This section does not apply to open area/outside sales as set forth in section 4-41 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 22, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-123. - Enforcement of division. 
    The director of public safety and/or the code enforcement officer or their designees shall have the authority to enforce this division and to inspect establishments under this division. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this division and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other officer to enforce this division or conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this division or state law. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 23, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-124. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency. 
    The director of public safety or a designee may immediately close an establishment licensed under this division in case of emergency for the safety of the public, as determined in the sole discretion of the city or a designee or to investigate a crime for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 24, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-125. - Excise tax. 
(a)  In addition to the license fees required in this division and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on alcoholic beverages in the following amounts: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars ($6.00) on each container sold containing not more than fifteen and one-half (151/2) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of fifteen and one-half (151/2) gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. 
(3)  On the first sale or use of wine, a tax of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(b)  No person shall sell at retail for consumption on the premises within the city any alcoholic beverage on which the taxes imposed by this division have not been paid. 
(c)  Every licensee under this division for the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall keep all invoices relating to each purchase of alcoholic beverages and such other records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 25, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-126. - Method of payment. 
    Said excise tax shall be paid to the city by each wholesale dealer on all malt beverages and wine sold and/or delivered to licensees hereunder within the corporate limits of the city not later than the tenth day of each month, based upon the units of malt beverage and wine sold and/or delivered during the previous calendar month by said wholesalers to licensees hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 26, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-127. - Report. 
    The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments of malt beverages and wine to licensees hereunder and shall render a sworn statement of the truth and accuracy of the report accompanying the monthly report to the city, and said report shall show the exact quantities of malt beverages and wine, by size and type of container and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 27, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-128. - Right of audit. 
    The city shall have the right to audit and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying licensees hereunder within the city and also from each licensee hereunder so supplied with malt beverages and wine by each wholesaler. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 28, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-129. - Failure to make a timely report and pay tax; penalty. 
    Failure to make a timely report and remittance of the above taxes shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount due, in addition to the amount of tax due; and, additionally, if said report is not filed or if said taxes are not remitted and paid within thirty (30) days from the date that same are due, the city shall have the right to suspend and/or revoke any wholesale license and further to prohibit said wholesaler from making any deliveries of any type whatsoever within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 29, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-130. - Initial application for license. 
(a)  Application for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises license shall be as follows: 
Each initial applicant shall make written application to the city clerk or a designee for the privilege of engaging in the sale of malt beverages for consumption on the premises; using forms approved and furnished by the city clerk. 
(1)  The application shall be filed with the city clerk with a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for investigation of the application and of the proposed location and processing of the application. 
(2)  The application shall state: 
a.  As to the applicant: Full name, age, home address, business address, telephone number, place of permanent residence, date of establishment of permanent residence at said location, address of last place of residence, name of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all convictions, guilty pleas and pleas of nolo contendere for violation of all laws, city, state and federal, of applicant and of applicant's spouse. If the applicant is a partnership said information shall be furnished as to each partner. If the applicant is a corporation said information must be furnished as to each director, each officer, and each stockholder who owns or controls ten (10) percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of said corporation. 
b.  As to applicant's proposed establishment manager or managers (if not same as applicant): Full name, age, home address, business address, telephone number, place of permanent residence, date of establishment of permanent residence at said location, address of last place of residence, name of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all convictions, guilty pleas and pleas of nolo contendere for violation of all laws, city, state and federal, of outlet manager's spouse. 
c.  Exact location (street address) of proposed business establishment. 
d.  Name and address of owner or landlord and resident manager, if any, of property proposed for location and whether or not there is a building proposed to be used already erected thereon. 
e.  Name or trade name under which the proposed business shall be operated. 
f.  Name and address of all persons having any financial interest in the business by way of ownership of building or stock, receipt of income from business or otherwise. This shall not apply to any stockholder who owns less than ten (10) percent of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation. 
g.  If the applicant is a corporation, the address of the principal place of business, the registered office, and the name of the registered agent or agents of the corporation. 
h.  Such other information as may be required from time to time by the city through interrogatories or otherwise. 
(3)  The application shall be sworn to by all applicants. 
(4)  There shall be attached to the application a copy of applicant's license, application for license, or proposed application for a license from the State of Georgia, if one be required. 
(b)  Prohibited premises. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises where the proposed location does not have a front entrance to the premises which is clearly visible from a public street, road or highway. 
(c)  Prohibited persons. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises to: 
(1)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States for a period of twelve (12) months next preceding the date of filing of the application, and if the applicant is a partnership these requirements apply to all partners in said business, whether a general partner or a limited partner; however, the provisions of this subparagraph shall not apply to a corporation. 
(2)  A corporation which is not duly qualified to do business in the State of Georgia and which is not in good standing with all of the rules and regulations of the Georgia Corporation Code and the Secretary of State of Georgia, and which does not have a registered agent for service of process within the county; however, the provisions of this subparagraph shall not apply to an individual or a partnership which has no corporate partners. 
(3)  A person who has been convicted of a felony, or any crime of moral turpitude, within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application. 
(4)  A person who has been convicted or who has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any felony or any misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any alcoholic spirits, prohibited liquors, wine or malt beverages, or taxability thereof within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application. 
(5)  A person who has been convicted or who has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any felony or any misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application. 
(6)  A person, partnership or corporation whose license under this division has been revoked for cause or who has had a license of any type under this division revoked for cause within five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(7)  A person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(8)  A person who has been declared incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(9)  An elected official or police officer or other law enforcement officer of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, subsections (c)(3)-(5), (7)-(9) above shall not apply. 
(11)  Any partnership or corporation where any individual having any interest, either as owner, partner, stockholder, director or officer, or his or her spouse, shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application of any felony, or any crime of moral turpitude, or any felony or misdemeanor involving the manufacturing, possession, transportation or sale of beer, alcoholic spirits, wine, or prohibited liquors, or the taxability thereof, or a violation of this division, or shall have been convicted or shall have entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application for any felony or misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance. 
(d)  Additional considerations. The city in reaching its final determination on an initial application shall also be guided by following factors as to whether or not to grant such license: 
(1)  The proximity of other establishments licensed hereunder. 
(2)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business. 
(3)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 30, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-131. - Renewals of licenses; denial of renewal. 
(a)  All licenses shall be issued for a period of one (1) year, the same to be a calendar year, running from January 1 through December 31, and shall be renewable as a matter of course upon payment of the appropriate fee, except as is hereinafter set out in subsection (d) of this section and as otherwise provided in this division. 
(b)  Each licensee shall make written application for renewal on or before October 1 of each year on forms approved by the city clerk. 
(c)  Said application shall be referred to the director of public safety or a designee, who shall report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  If the director of public safety or designee reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal shall not be made, and the matter shall be referred to the city for its consideration. A public hearing on the denial of a non-renewal must be held no later than December 31. 
(e)  Said city shall afford the licensee a public hearing, and in passing upon the application for renewal, the city shall be guided by the following factors applicable to an initial application: 
All matters contained in section 4-130 of this division and such evidence as is obtained and presented to the city as the result of the investigation provided for in subparagraph (c) of this section. The city shall consider all evidence presented at the public hearing. 
(f)  At said public hearing the city may grant or deny for cause the renewal of any license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 31, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-132. - Suspension and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  Summary action. 
(1)  If, at any time during the holding of a license granted under this division, it should appear that the licensee has violated the provisions of this division or laws of the State of Georgia or federal laws relating to the possession, transportation or sale of any alcohol, alcoholic spirits, prohibited liquors, wine or malt beverages or taxability thereof or involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance, or has become a person prohibited by this division from having a license granted to him, or if it should appear that said person's application contained known false information, or if it appears necessary for the public safety, health and welfare, the director of public safety, code enforcement officer or a designee may suspend and seize any retail license to sell malt beverages and wine within the city. 
(2)  If the licensee is dissatisfied with such suspension, he may appeal to the city council by filing a written request with the city clerk stating his grounds and reasons. 
(3)  The city council shall hold a hearing on such suspension within ten (10) days of the filing of such appeal. After such hearing, the city council may affirm, reverse or modify the action of the suspending officer and may revoke or suspend said license or place said licensee on probation or refuse to renew at the time of renewal. 
(b)  Action by city. The city council shall have full power and authority to revoke, refuse to renew, suspend or place on probation any license to sell malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises for violation of this division or violation of any laws of the State of Georgia or any federal laws involving possession, transportation or sale of any alcohol, alcoholic spirits, prohibited liquors, wine or malt beverages or taxability thereof or involving illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance, or if the licensee has become a person, firm or corporation prohibited by this division from having a license granted to him or it, or if it should appear that his application contained known false information, or when the city council shall determine, after notice and hearing, that the operation of the licensed business is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the public. 
(c)  Hearings. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (a)(1) of this section, no license shall be suspended, revoked or non-renewed without the opportunity for a hearing as provided herein. 
(2)  The city council or its designee shall provide written notice to the licensee of its intent to suspend, revoke or not renew the license. Such written notification shall be given as provided in this division. The notice shall: 
a.  Advise of the time and place specified for the hearing, which hearing shall be held not more than fifteen (15) days, but not less than ten (10) days from the date notice is given, as provided herein; 
b.  Shall set forth in reasonable detail the ground or grounds for such action and the factual basis supporting the ground or grounds; and 
c.  Advise the licensee of the right to present evidence, witnesses, and arguments and to be represented by counsel at the hearing. 
d.  The city council shall make its final determination within ten (10) business days of the completion of the hearing. 
e.  The city council's decision shall be personally served or mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten (10) business days of the close of the hearing. The decision of the city council shall constitute final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the county superior court. 
(3)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city manager in consultation with the director of public safety. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and is nonappealable. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 32, 7-12-2010) 
Sec. 4-133. - Additional conditions. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free malt beverage or wine to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one (1) malt beverage or wine to one (1) person at a time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver any person or group of persons any malt beverage or wine at a price less than the price regularly charged for such malt beverage or wine during the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of malt beverages or wine during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver malt beverages or wine to any person or group of persons on any one (1) day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver malt beverages or wine in any container which holds more than thirty-two (32) fluid ounces (.947 liters), except to two (2) or more persons at any one (1) time; or 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of malt beverages and/or wine or the awarding of malt beverages or wine as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all malt beverage and wine to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from including a malt beverage or wine as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one (1) person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour or similarly designated promotions. 
(Ord. No. 2010-02, § 33, 7-12-2010) 
Secs. 4-134-4-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISTILLED SPIRITS 
DIVISION 1. - SALES OF DISTILLED SPIRITS BY THE DRINK 

Sec. 4-150. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning, the following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, have the following meanings: 
(a)  Date of notice means the date when a person is personally served with a written document or three (3) days after the date of the deposit in the United States mail when the document is served by certified mail; or the date of confirmation of delivery of the written document from an overnight delivery service. 
(b)  Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-four (24) percent alcohol by volume. 
(c)  Eating establishment means any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen. A full-service kitchen shall consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments. An eating establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour the establishment is open and shall derive at least seventy (70) percent of the gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(d)  Hotel/motel means any building or other structure providing sleeping accommodations for hire to the general public, either transient, permanent or residential. Such businesses shall have one (1) or more public dining rooms with a full-service kitchen, as that term is defined in (c) of this section. Hotels/motels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of any licensed establishment described in this division, and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of a hotel/motel pursuant to this definition. 
(e)  Identification means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(f)  Licensee means the person to whom a license for the sale or distribution of distilled spirits is issued under this division. In the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation are licensees. A license issued under this division permits the licensee to sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink for consumption only on the premises where sold. 
(g)  Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
(h)  Premises means one (1) room or more all contiguous in nature operating under the same trade name. 
(i)  Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
(j)  Wholesaler means any person who sells distilled spirits to other wholesale dealers or to a retail consumption dealer. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-151. - License is a privilege. 
(a)  Distilled spirits may be sold by the drink for consumption only on the premises within the city for the limited purposes described in this division under a license granted by the city upon the terms and conditions provided in this division. 
(b)  The sale of distilled spirits by the drink within the city without first obtaining the licensure required by this division is prohibited. 
(c)  Licenses issued under this division constitute a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license, subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this division and state law. 
(d)  Any holder of a license issued in accordance with this division is required to apply for and obtain any and all necessary alcoholic beverage licenses from the State of Georgia before any sales commence. Additionally, any holder of a license issued in accordance with this division is required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(e)  All licenses issued under this division must have printed on the face the following words: 
THIS LICENSE IS A PRIVILEGE CONDITIONAL ON THE HOLDER MEETING ALL STANDARDS FOR SUCH LICENSE AND OPERATING REGULATIONS APPLICABLE THERETO SET OUT IN CITY ORDINANCES AND GEORGIA LAW. FAILURE TO MEET SUCH STANDARDS OR TO COMPLY WITH SUCH OPERATING REGULATIONS SHALL SUBJECT THE HOLDER OF THE LICENSE TO HAVE THE LICENSE REVOKED FOLLOWING NOTICE AND HEARING. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-152. - Licenses, generally. 
(a)  All licenses issued under this division shall: 
(1)  Permit the licensee to sell distilled spirits for beverage purposes by the drink for consumption only on the premises where sold within the city under the terms of this division and consistent with the laws of the State of Georgia and the United States; 
(2)  Expire on December 31 of each year and an application for renewal must be made and filed annually on or before the 31st day of October of each year. Any licensee must annually meet the requirements set forth by the city in order to obtain a renewal of any license. Any licensee making proper application with supporting documents for a license to operate during the following calendar year, and having filed such application before October 31, shall be permitted to continue to operate pending final approval of the licensee's application for the following year if final approval is not granted before January 1; and 
(3)  Not be transferred from one (1) person to another or from one (1) location to another and any change in ownership of any licensed entity other than a publicly traded corporation shall necessitate a new application and payment of the entirety of the license fee and administrative fee. 
(b)  Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued for each location. 
(c)  The city license issued under this division must, at all times, be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of business of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-153. - Application and license fees. 
(a)  Each application for a license under this division must be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the appropriate license fee, together with a separate check or cash in the amount of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the application is denied and the license refused, or if the applicant withdraws his application prior to the license being issued, the license fee shall be refunded, but the one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) cost paid for investigative and administrative fees shall be retained by the city. However, any person applying for more than one (1) license at the same time shall pay only one (1) fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses. Any applicant for a license under this division who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this division is not required to pay the investigative and administrative fee. A notice of each application to sell distilled spirits by consumption must be advertised in the official legal organ of Walker County, once a week for two (2) weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application. 
(b)  The fee for a license issued under this division is one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per calendar year which will not be prorated based upon the day of the year that the license is issued. 
(c)  Once a license has been issued, however, no portion of the license fee will be refunded if the license is revoked, suspended, or surrendered. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-154. - Application process. 
(a)  Applications for the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises license must be made in writing to the city clerk or a designee for the privilege of engaging in the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises using forms approved and furnished by the city clerk. 
(b)  The application must be filed with the city clerk along with the applicable application fee. 
(c)  The application must state: 
(1)  As to the applicant: Full name, age, home address, business address, telephone number, place of permanent residence, date of establishment of permanent residence at said location, address of last place of residence, name of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all convictions, guilty pleas and pleas of nolo contendere for violation of all laws, city, state and federal, of applicant and of applicant's spouse. If the applicant is a partnership said information shall be furnished as to each partner. If the applicant is a corporation said information must be furnished as to each director, each officer, and each stockholder who owns or controls ten (10) percent or more of the issued and outstanding stock of said corporation. 
(2)  As to applicant's proposed establishment manager or managers (if not same as applicant): Full name, age, home address, business address, telephone number, place of permanent residence, date of establishment of permanent residence at said location, address of last place of residence, name of spouse and all minor children, complete record of all convictions, guilty pleas and pleas of nolo contendere for violation of all laws, city, state and federal, of outlet manager's spouse. 
(3)  Exact location (street address) of proposed business establishment. 
(4)  Name and address of owner or landlord and resident manager, if any, of property proposed for location and whether or not there is a building proposed to be used already erected thereon. 
(5)  Name or trade name under which the proposed business shall be operated. 
(6)  Name and address of all persons having any financial interest in the business by way of ownership of building or stock, receipt of income from business or otherwise. This shall not apply to any stockholder who owns less than ten (10) percent of the issued and outstanding stock of the corporation. 
(7)  If the applicant is a corporation, the address of the principal place of business, the registered office, and the name of the registered agent or agents of the corporation. 
(8)  Such other information as may be required from time to time by the city through interrogatories or otherwise. 
(d)  The application must be sworn to by all applicants. 
(e)  A copy of applicant's license, application for license, or proposed application for a license from the State of Georgia, if one is required, must be attached to the application. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-155. - Requirements for license; limitations. 
(a)  In addition to evaluating the criteria required to be included with an application under section 4-152 of this division in reaching its final determination as to whether or not to grant an initial license application, the city will also be guided by the following factors: 
(1)  The proximity of other establishments licensed hereunder. 
(2)  The nature of the neighborhood immediately adjacent to the proposed location, that is, whether the same is predominantly residential, industrial or business. 
(3)  Whether the proposed location has adequate off-street parking facilities or other parking available for its patrons. 
(b)  The following limitations apply to licensure under this division: 
(1)  Prohibited premises. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises where the proposed location does not have a front entrance to the premises which is clearly visible from a public street, road or highway. 
(2)  Prohibited persons. It shall be unlawful to grant a license for the sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises to: 
(A)  A person who is not a citizen of the United States for a period of twelve (12) months next preceding the date of filing of the application, and if the applicant is a partnership these requirements apply to all partners in said business, whether a general partner or a limited partner; however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to a corporation. 
(B)  A corporation which is not duly qualified to do business in the State of Georgia and which is not in good standing with all of the rules and regulations of the Georgia Corporation Code and the Secretary of State of Georgia, and which does not have a registered agent for service of process within Walker County, Georgia; however, the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to an individual or a partnership which has no corporate partners. 
(C)  A person who has been convicted of a felony, or any crime of moral turpitude, within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application. 
(D)  A person who has been convicted or who has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any felony or any misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any alcoholic beverages, or taxability thereof within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application. 
(E)  A person who has been convicted or who has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any felony or any misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance within ten (10) years immediately prior to the filing of said application. 
(F)  A person, partnership or corporation whose license under this division has been revoked for cause or who has had a license of any type under this division revoked for cause within five (5) years immediately prior to the filing of the application. 
(G)  A person who is under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(H)  A person who has been declared incompetent by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(I)  An elected official, police officer, or other law enforcement officer of the city. 
(J)  If the applicant is a corporation, subsections (C) through (I), above, do not apply. 
(K)  Any partnership or corporation where any person has an interest, either as owner, partner, stockholder, director, or officer, or his or her spouse, has, within ten (10) years immediately prior to submission of an application, been convicted or has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere for any: 
(i)  Felony; 
(ii)  Crime of moral turpitude; 
(iii)  Misdemeanor involving the manufacturing, possession, transportation or sale of distilled spirits or the taxability thereof, 
(iv)  Misdemeanor involving the illegal possession, transportation, or sale of any drug, narcotic, or controlled substance; or 
(v)  Violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-156. - Renewals of licenses; denial of renewal. 
(a)  All licenses are issued for a period of one (1) year, the same to be a calendar year, running from January 1 through December 31, and shall be renewable as a matter of course upon payment of the appropriate fee, except as is hereinafter set out in subsection (d) of this section and as otherwise provided in this division. 
(b)  Each licensee must make written application for renewal on or before October 1 of each year on forms approved by the city clerk. 
(c)  The renewal application will be referred to the chief of police or a designee, who will report on the licensee's activity, if any, and upon activity at the location of the licensed business, if any, during the year. 
(d)  If the chief of police or designee reports any activity which constitutes probable cause for not renewing a license, the renewal will not be made, and the matter will be referred to the city for its consideration. A public hearing on the denial of a non-renewal will be held no later than December 31. 
(e)  The city will afford the licensee a public hearing after which the city may grant or deny for cause the renewal of any license issued under this division. 
(f)  In passing upon the application for renewal, the city will consider all evidence presented at the public hearing and will be guided by the following factors: 
(1)  All matters contained in sections 4-154 and 4-155 of this division; and 
(2)  Such evidence as is obtained and presented to the city as the result of the investigation provided for in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-157. - Suspension and revocation of licenses. 
(a)  License suspensions initiated by the chief of police, code enforcement officer, or a designee. 
(1)  The chief of police, code enforcement officer, or a designee may suspend and seize any retail license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises if, at any time during the holding of a license granted under this division, it should appear that the licensee has: 
(i)  Violated the provisions of this division; 
(ii)  Violated any laws of the State of Georgia or any federal laws involving possession, transportation or sale of any alcohol, alcoholic spirits, prohibited liquors, alcoholic beverages or taxability thereof or involving illegal possession, transportation or sale of any drug, narcotic or controlled substance; 
(iii)  Become a person, firm or corporation prohibited by this division from having a license granted to him, her, or it; 
(iv)  Submitted an application containing known false information; or 
(v)  Engaged in conduct detriment to the health, safety, or welfare of the public. 
(2)  If the licensee is dissatisfied with such suspension, the licensee may appeal to the city council by filing a written request with the city clerk stating the grounds and reasons. 
(3)  The city council will hold a hearing on the suspension within ten (10) days of the filing of the appeal, after which the city council has the full authority and power to revoke, refuse to renew, further suspend, or place on probation any license which has been suspended as provided by this subsection. 
(4)  The city council must make its final determination within ten (10) business days of the completion of the appeal hearing. 
(b)  Adverse licensure actions initiated by the city council. 
(1)  In addition to the procedures provided in subsection (a), the city council may, of its own volition, suspend, revoke, or not renew a license issued under this division following a hearing. 
(2)  A notice explaining the proposed adverse action, i.e. suspension, revocation, or non-renewal, and the time and place designated for the hearing must be issued to the licensee in writing. 
(3)  The written notice must set forth, in reasonable detail, the ground or grounds for the proposed adverse action and the factual basis supporting the ground or grounds; and advise the licensee of the right to present evidence, witnesses, and arguments and to be represented by counsel at the hearing. 
(4)  The hearing will not be held prior to the passage often days following the date of notice of the proposed adverse action. 
(5)  The city council must make its final determination within ten (10) business days of the completion of the hearing. 
(6)  The city council's decision must be personally served, mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by overnight delivery to the licensee and his attorney, with a copy to the city attorney, within ten (10) business days of the close of the hearing. 
(7)  The decision of the city council constitutes final action by the city, subject to review upon petition for certiorari to the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
(c)  Upon receipt of notice of adverse action against the licensee under this section, the licensee may waive its right to a hearing and stipulate to a sanction, as recommended by the city clerk in consultation with the chief of police. Any stipulation entered under this subsection shall be in writing, signed by the licensee, and is not appealable. 
(d)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, no license will be suspended, revoked, or non-renewed without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-158. - Type of retail establishment where permitted; locations of sales. 
(a)  Distilled spirits may only be sold in the following types of retail establishments: 
(1)  Eating establishments, including those located within a hotel or motel if every entrance to the eating establishment within the hotel or motel is from a public lobby, hallway, mall, or other publicly used interior portion of the primary use structure; or 
(2)  An indoor nonprofit civic and cultural center qualified under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code capable of serving prepared food, with a full-service kitchen prepared to serve food every hour they are open and deriving at least seventy (70) percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods and recreation activities. 
(b)  Distilled spirits may only be sold for consumption on the premises where sold in areas zoned as "business" or in a zoning district which permits eating establishments as conforming uses or where an eating establishment is incidental to a hotel or motel. 
(c)  No license will be issued for the retail sale of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises within one hundred (100) yards of any church building, housing authority property, or alcohol treatment center operated by the State of Georgia, the city, or Walker County, Georgia, or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building. This distance is measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-159. - Hours and days of sale. 
(a)  Distilled spirits must not be sold or distributed for consumption on the premises except Monday through Saturday between the hours of 10:00 a.m. through 12:00 midnight. 
(b)  The sale or distribution of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises is not be permitted on: 
(1)  Sundays; 
(2)  Election days within the city during the hours the polls are open; and 
(3)  Christmas day. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-160. - Prohibited activities; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any distilled spirits if the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale distilled spirits or to make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)  No person shall allow or require a person in his employment under eighteen (18) years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any distilled spirits. 
(c)  It is a violation of this division not to require and properly check identification for such persons as reasonably necessary to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his possession distilled spirits while in a licensed establishment. But nothing in this section requires mandatory checking of the identification of every customer. 
(d)  It is prohibited for any person to bring his or her own distilled spirits in any establishment, i.e. brown-bagging, regardless of whether such establishment is licensed or unlicensed to serve distilled spirits by the drink. 
(e)  No licensee shall keep any distilled spirits at any place except the licensed place of business. 
(f)  No licensee shall buy, arrange to buy, or in any way affect the transfer of any distilled spirits except from a licensed wholesaler. 
(g)  Any violation of the provisions of this division may, upon determination of violation, result in suspension or revocation of a license issued under this division; or the council may in lieu of suspension or revocation thereof impose a civil penalty of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-161. - Regulations as to employees and managers. 
(a)  No person shall be employed to dispense distilled spirits or serve in any managerial position by an establishment holding a license under this division until such person has been fingerprinted and cleared by the chief of police for the city or his designee or city code enforcement officer indicating that the person is eligible for such employment as per the minimum requirements for an applicant under this division. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued until such time as a signed application has been filed with the city clerk or designee and upon payment of a fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a search of the criminal record of the applicant completed. The application shall include, but shall be limited to, the name, date of birth and prior arrest record of the person, though the fact of an arrest record shall be used for investigative purposes only, and shall give rise to no presumption or inference of guilt. Due to the inclusion of the arrest information, the application shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be produced for public inspection without a court order. 
(c)  The city clerk or a designee shall have a complete and exhaustive search made relative to any criminal record of the person fingerprinted. If the person is eligible for employment, the city clerk or a designee shall issue a permit to the person, by mail, stating that the person is eligible for employment. If it is found that the person is not eligible for employment, the chief of police or city code enforcement officer or other designee shall notify the person, in writing, that he or she is not eligible for employment, the cause of such denial and his or her right of appeal. 
(d)  No person shall be granted a pouring permit unless it appears to the satisfaction of the city clerk or a designee that such person has not been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, illegal possession or sale of controlled substances or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages, including the sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to a minor in a manner contrary to law, keeping a place of prostitution, solicitation of sodomy, or any sexually related crime within a period of five (5) years preceding the date of the application and is not on probation or parole. A person's first-time conviction for illegal possession of alcohol as a misdemeanor or violation of a city or county ordinance shall not, by itself, make a person ineligible for an alcohol pouring permit. No person shall be granted a pouring permit who has been convicted, plead guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any federal, state, or local law for any felony within five (5) years preceding the date of the application and is currently on probation or parole. For purposes of this division, a conviction or pleas of guilt or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a person whose sentence was entered under the Georgia First Offender Act, as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored if the person violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the person had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(e)  An alcohol pouring permit shall be issued for a period of three (3) calendar years from the date of the application. As provided in subsection (j) of this section, the alcohol pouring permit must be in the possession of the employee while the employee is working at the licensed establishment and available for inspection by members of the city police department. After application of the pouring permit is completed with the city, the employee may immediately commence work on a temporary basis provided the employee retains the receipt for the permit on his or her person at all times at the premises for which the alcohol license has been issued, and thereafter, if a permit is issued, must maintain on his or her person at the premises the actual pouring permit. If a permit is not issued, the employee must immediately cease work upon being notified that a permit will not be issued to the employee. 
(f)  No person shall be issued a permit if it is determined that the person falsified, concealed or covered up any material fact by any device, trick or scheme while making application to the city clerk for an alcohol beverage pouring permit under this section. If it is determined that a person is in violation of this subsection and a permit is denied for this reason, then ninety (90) calendar days must elapse from the date of notification of the denial of the permit before the person may submit a new application for a permit. 
(g)  All permits issued through administrative error can be immediately terminated and seized by the city clerk or designee. 
(h)  Replacement permits will be issued within thirty (30) days of original date, upon paying one-half (1/2) of the fee charged for alcohol pouring permits. After thirty (30) days of original application date, a new application and fee must be submitted. 
(i)  All permits issued under this division remain the property of the city and shall be produced for inspection upon the demand of any city police officer, city code enforcement officer, city clerk or a designee. 
(j)  No licensee shall allow any employee or manager required to hold a permit to work on premises unless the employee or manager has in his or her possession a current valid city pouring permit. For new employees, a receipt issued by the city clerk may be used for a maximum of ninety (90) days from the date of its issue unless notified that a permit will not be issued. Licensees are required by this division to inspect and verify that each employee required to do so has in his or her possession a valid current alcohol pouring permit. 
(k)  It shall be the duty of all persons holding any license issued under this division to file with the city clerk the name of the establishment, the license number and a list of all employees, with their home addresses and home telephone numbers, twice annually during the month of June and again during the month of December. 
(l)  The permit issued under this section shall be issued to individuals only and as long as the permit is valid, may be used at any employer licensed by this division until said license is revoked, suspended, terminated, or expires. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-162. - Open areas and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the code enforcement officer and is in compliance with any and all other regulations of the city. Also, all sales of distilled spirits under this provision must be in opaque containers and not in bottles or cans. 
(b)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of three and one-half (31/2) feet above the patio floor, but the structure does have to shield or restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. The structure must be permitted and approved by the code enforcement officer and meet all building and fire code regulations. 
(d)  The only exit from the patio/open sales area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit must be of a type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-163. - No consumption outside premises. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open containers of distilled spirits, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open containers of distilled spirits are sold and carried out of the premises. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an establishment and consume distilled spirits. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee of a licensee to allow persons to gather outside an establishment and consume distilled spirits. 
(d)  This section does not apply to open area/outside sales as set forth in section 4-162 of this division. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-164. - Enforcement of division. 
    The chief of police, code enforcement officer, or their designees have the authority to enforce this division and to inspect establishments under this division. These inspections are to be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this division and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other officer to enforce this division or conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this division or state law. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-165. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency. 
    The chief of police or a designee may immediately close an establishment licensed under this division in case of emergency for the safety of the public, as determined in his or her sole discretion or to investigate a crime for a period of time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-166. - Excise tax. 
(a)  In addition to the license fees required in this division and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits. 
(b)  Excise taxes on the wholesale of distilled spirits. There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter which shall be paid to the city on all distilled spirits sold in the city. Such tax shall be paid to the city by the wholesaler on all distilled spirits sold to retail dealers in the city as follows: 
(1)  Each wholesaler selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any retail dealer, shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery to each retail dealer on or before the tenth day of the month following. 
(2)  The twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter rate shall be prorated so that all containers of distilled spirits shall be taxed on the basis of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any wholesaler to sell, ship or deliver in any manner any distilled spirits to a retail dealer without collecting the tax. It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any distilled spirits on which such tax has not been paid. 
(4)  The wholesale dealer shall keep true and correct records of all sales and shipments of distilled spirits to licensees hereunder and shall render a sworn statement of the truth and accuracy of the report accompanying the monthly report to the city, and said report shall show the exact quantities of distilled spirits, by size and type of container and the amount of excise tax collected. 
(5)  The city shall have the right to audit and to require production of records from each wholesaler supplying licensees hereunder within the city and also from each licensee hereunder so supplied with distilled spirits by each wholesaler. 
(6)  Failure to make a timely report and remittance of the above taxes renders a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the total amount due, in addition to the amount of tax due; and, additionally, if a report is not filed or if taxes are not remitted and paid within thirty (30) days from the date either is due, the city has the right to suspend or revoke any wholesale license and further to prohibit the wholesaler from making any deliveries of any type whatsoever within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Excise taxes on retail sales of poured distilled spirits by the drink. There is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of three (3) percent of the charge to the public on sales of distilled spirits by the drink made by pouring outlets. 
(1)  This tax does not apply to the sale of fermented beverages made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented beverage. 
(2)  Such tax shall be paid to the city by the pouring licensee on all distilled spirits sold to customers by the drink in the city on or before the tenth day of the month following such sales. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any pouring licensee to fail to pay such excise tax and no person shall sell at retail for consumption on the premises within the city any alcoholic beverage on which the taxes imposed by this division have not been paid. 
(4)  Every licensee under this division for the sale of distilled spirits in the city shall keep all invoices relating to each purchase of distilled spirits and such other records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the city clerk may require. 
(5)  The city has the right to audit and to require production of records from each licensee. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Sec. 4-167. - Additional considerations. 
(a)  No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee, in connection with the sale or other disposition of distilled spirits for consumption on the premises, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to any person or group of persons; 
(2)  Deliver more than one (1) alcoholic beverage to one (1) person at a time; 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same calendar week, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons an unlimited number of distilled spirits during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver distilled spirits to any person or group of persons on any one (1) day at prices less than those charged the general public on that day, except at private functions not open to the public; 
(6)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver distilled spirits in any container which holds more than sixteen (16) fluid ounces, except to two (2) or more persons at any one (1) time; or 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game or contest which involves the drinking of distilled spirits or the awarding of distilled spirits as a prize. 
(b)  Each licensee shall maintain a schedule of the price charged for all distilled spirits to be served and consumed on the licensed premises or in any room or part thereof. The licensee shall not vary the schedule of prices from day to day or from hour to hour within a single day. 
(c)  No licensee shall advertise or promote in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under subsection (a) of this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine by the bottle or carafe when sold with meals or to more than one (1) person. 
(e)  It is the intent of this section to prohibit activities typically associated with promotions referred to as happy hour or similarly designated promotions. 
(Ord. No. 18-10, § 3, 12-10-2018) 
Chapter 5 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate animals, § 1-21(i). 
Cross reference- Horses or ponies in parks, § 15-2. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for animal control, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(3); animals generally, OCGA Title 4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Horses, cattle, and so forth, running at large; staking, driving and leading requirements; impounding. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any horses, cattle, sheep, goats, or other livestock to run at large on the streets of the city, or to be staked so that they can go upon the streets of the city, or to drive or lead any such animals or livestock along or on the sidewalks in the city, or to drive or lead any such animals or livestock along and over the streets of the city, unless fastened to a rope, chain, or other substantial leading device. Any such rope, chain, or other substantial leading device must be securely held by a responsible person. Animals in violation of this chapter shall be impounded by members of the police department, other authorized employees or agents of the city, or the county animal control officers or their employees or agents. 
(Code 1975, § 2-10) 
Sec. 5-2. - Impounded animals-Sale when unredeemed within certain time; notice. 
    If any animal impounded as provided in section 5-1 shall not be claimed and redeemed by the owner, or keeper thereof, within three (3) days after such impoundment, the chief of police or the assistant chief of police shall advertise the same for sale by posting three (3) written notices of such sale, one (1) such notice to be at the gate or door of the pound or place of confinement of the animal, one (1) at the city hall, and one (1) at the office of the police department. Such notices must be posted for not less than three (3) consecutive days prior to the date of sale. Prior to selling any animal impounded under section 5-1, the chief of police or any officer designated by him shall make a reasonable and diligent inquiry to determine the owner of such animal, and if the owner is determined, such owner shall be notified by telephone or in writing of the impoundment, the method and cost of redemption, and the time and place of any proposed sale of the animal. If the animal is not redeemed by the owner, on the day named for such sale, the chief of police or assistant chief of police shall sell the animal at public auction at the place of impoundment to the highest bidder for cash and shall pay over the proceeds to the city clerk who shall pay out of such proceeds all expenses and shall hold any balance subject to the use and order of the governing body of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-11) 
Sec. 5-3. - Same-Redemption by owner. 
    At any time prior to the sale of any impounded animal, as provided in section 5-2, the owner of such animal may redeem the same by proving ownership of such animal to the chief of police and in his absence to the assistant chief of police and paying the charges provided herein for the impoundment of the animal and the cost of feeding such animal during the period of time that the same has been impounded. 
(Code 1975, § 2-12) 
Sec. 5-4. - Same-Charges for impounding, keeping and selling. 
    The charges for impounding, keeping, and selling any animal as provided under this chapter shall be as set from time to time and a schedule of such charges is on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1975, § 2-13) 
Sec. 5-5. - Record and monthly report of impounded animals by chief of police to city manager. 
    The chief of police shall keep a record, in a book to be kept for such purpose, of all animals impounded. Said record and book shall fully describe the animal, the date impounded, the name of the owner, if known, the day of redemption by the owner, the day of sale of such animal, the charges charged to the owner if the animal was redeemed, the amount received from any redemption or sale and the amount paid to the city clerk. The chief of police shall present to the city manager a monthly copy of such record for the preceding month. 
(Code 1975, § 2-14) 
Sec. 5-6. - Manner of keeping. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or permit any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsanitary condition or to create an obnoxious condition, or to become excessively noisy or to become a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(b)  Should a complaint arise for any one (1) or more of the causes referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the owner of such animal or fowl shall be given an oral or written warning of the complaint by the animal control officer or a police officer and shall be given five (5) days to correct and eliminate the violation. The animal control officer or a police officer shall investigate to determine if the violation has been eliminated within such period of time, and if the violation has not been eliminated or remedied, the owner will be promptly summoned to recorder's court and given a hearing regarding the complaint. If the recorder determines at the hearing that the owner has violated subsection (a) of this section, the recorder may impose a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) on the owner or order such animal impounded and disposed of in the manner provided by section 5-29(d). 
(Code 1975, § 2-15; Ord. of 10-1-85) 
Charter reference- Abatement of nuisances, § 5-24. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07/8, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2007, deleted § 5-7, which pertained to vicious dogs or other animals; keeping, impounding and disposing of and derived from Code 1975, § 2-16. 
Sec. 5-8. - Poisoning animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city which is for the primary purpose of killing or causing harm to any dog, cat, or other domestic or domesticated animal. 
(Code 1975, § 2-17) 
Sec. 5-9. - Dead animals, disposal of carcass. 
(a)  All carcasses shall be disposed of in such manner as complies with the rules and regulations of the county health department and the rules and regulations of all departments and agencies of the state whose primary purpose is to protect and promote the health of the citizens of this state. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has an interest in any animal which has died, to leave the body or carcass thereof anywhere inside the city limits without proper disposal thereof as provided in (a) above. 
(Code 1975, § 2-18) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 5-10. - Commercial raising of poultry prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to raise poultry on a commercial basis within the city limits. 
(Code 1975, § 2-19) 
Sec. 5-11. - Poultry running at large prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of chickens or other fowls to allow them to run at large within the city limits and all owners of such chickens or other fowls are hereby required to keep the same confined in pens on their own premises. 
(Code 1975, § 2-20) 
Sec. 5-12. - Violations. 
    Except where otherwise provided, any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be an offense punishable in accordance with section 1-17. 
(Code 1975, § 2-30) 
Secs. 5-13-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS, CATS AND OTHER DOMESTICATED PETS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dogs generally, OCGA Title 4, Ch. 8. 

Sec. 5-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Animal means any domesticated dog, cat, raccoon, skunk, opossum, or squirrel. 
    Nuisance means, but is not limited to, defecation, urination, disturbing the peace, destroying private property, emitting noxious or offensive odors, emitting noxious or offensive sounds and noises. 
    Owner of an animal is a person who owns, harbors, or keeps, or knowingly permits an animal to be harbored or kept or has an animal in his care, or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises for more than five (5) days. 
    Vaccination is protection against rabies by inoculation with anti-rabies vaccine, given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one (1) year. 
(Code 1975, § 3-10; Ord. No. 07/8, § 2, 9-17-2007) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-22. - Collar, inoculation and identification tags required. 
(a)  All animals over ninety (90) days old within the city shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a metal identification tag of the kind hereinafter prescribed. Identification tags will be provided by the city upon presentation of a certificate of inoculation or vaccination for rabies to an employee of the city designated by the city manager at the city hall and upon a payment of a fee of two dollars ($2.00) if the animal is unaltered and a fee of one dollar ($1.00) if the animal is altered. The application for the identification tag shall state the name and address of the owner, the name, breed, age, color and sex of such animal. The license so granted by the city shall expire on June thirtieth of each calendar year, and shall be renewed on or before July first of each year. 
(b)  Animals belonging to nonresidents of the city who do not keep such animals within the corporate limits of the city for fifteen (15) consecutive days shall be exempt from this section; provided, however, that all the other provisions of this article must be complied with. 
(c)  All monies collected for the issuance of identification tags and licenses shall go into the city treasury to help defray the expense of animal and fowl control. 
(d)  The annual license fees hereinabove provided in subparagraph (a) of this section shall be the license fee for the year beginning July 1, 1975 and ending June 30, 1976. Thereafter the annual license fee shall be as established from year to year by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 3-11) 
Sec. 5-23. - Inoculation. 
    All animals over ninety (90) days old within the city shall be inoculated annually so as to provide immunity from rabies for a period of at least one (1) year. All inoculations shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian or an authorized representative of the public health department. 
(Code 1975, § 3-12) 
State Law reference- Rabies inoculation, OCGA § 31-19-1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-24. - Tags. 
(a)  A valid city identification tag and a valid rabies vaccination tag shall be securely attached to the animal's collar or harness, and must be secured to and on the animal at all times, and it shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner to see that the same is so attached and secured at all times. 
(b)  Each city identification tag shall be so contrived as to permit it to be securely attached to the animal's collar or harness and shall have its respective number, the year in which issued and the "City of LaFayette" indented and impressed thereon. The design or color of such tags shall be varied from year to year so as to permit easy ascertainment as to whether or not the tag is current. 
(Code 1975, § 3-13) 
Sec. 5-25. - Record of tags. 
    A complete record of animal tags issued by the city shall be kept by the city. The record shall show when the tag was issued, the period of time for which the tag is valid, to whom the tag was issued and the address of such person, for what particular animal the tag was issued; and if the owner and keeper of the animal are different persons, then both names and the addresses of each shall be entered. 
(Code 1975, § 3-14) 
Sec. 5-26. - Misuse of tag. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a valid tag from any animal which has been tagged under the provisions of this article, or to place a tag upon any animal for which the same was not issued, or to procure a tag from the city or from any licensed veterinarian by misrepresentation, or to disfigure any tag or to alter the figures or words upon any tag. This provision shall apply to both the city identification tag and the rabies vaccination tag. 
(Code 1975, § 3-15) 
Sec. 5-27. - Restraint of animals. 
    The owner or keeper of each animal within the city shall be responsible for keeping it from becoming a nuisance or from endangering or injuring any other person or property, and accordingly: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal to allow the animal to go on the property of any other person or any public right-of-way, roadway or street. 
(2)  When allowed off the property of the owner or keeper, all animals must be accompanied by the owner or other responsible keeper and be restrained on a leash, rope, chain, or other substantial leading device held by the owner or keeper or be in a vehicle driven or parked from which the animal cannot escape. 
(Code 1975, § 3-16) 
Sec. 5-28. - Impoundment authorized; notice of impoundment and contents of notice. 
(a)  All animals not kept or maintained in accordance with the previously outlined provisions of this article shall be subject to impoundment by the city and its agents and employees or by the county animal control officer in the Walker County Impoundment or in any other impoundment provided for the purpose by the city. 
(b)  In addition, all animals found on the premises of any person other than the owner without permission of the owner of the premises upon which such animal is found and all animals found running loose in the city shall be subject to such impoundment. 
(c)  Notice of the impoundment of any animal must be given immediately by United States mail or by telephone call to the owner as indicated on the registration records of the city or on any other identification tag found on the animal. Such notice is to be given by the county animal control officer, and such notice of impoundment shall contain a general description of the animal impounded, the kind of animal, the breed of animal if readily ascertainable, the color of the animal and the sex thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 3-17) 
Sec. 5-29. - Disposal of animal not claimed; method of disposal. 
(a)  A registered animal shall be confined at the impoundment for a period of at least five (5) days from the date of mailing the notice to the owner or five (5) days from the date of notice being given by telephone. An animal that is not registered shall be confined at the impoundment for a period of at least three (3) days. 
(b)  During the aforesaid period of time the owner of the animal may claim the same and such animal may be redeemed by the owner by the payment to the county control officer of such impoundment fee as is prescribed by the governing body of the county, the cost of feeding the animal during the period of confinement, and the cost of inoculation if such animal has not been inoculated within the preceding twelve-month period. 
(c)  The county animal control officer may dispose of any animals not claimed and redeemed by the owner, as provided for herein, on the first day after the required impoundment period as provided in this section. 
(d)  As methods of disposal, the county animal control officer may have the animal; 
(1)  Placed in an adoptive home; 
(2)  Sold; or 
(3)  Destroyed in such a humane manner as the animal control officer may deem appropriate. 
(e)  In the case of the sale of such animal, the animal control officer is hereby authorized to execute a bill of sale to any such purchaser which shall be sufficient to vest title to the animal in such purchaser. 
(Code 1975, § 3-18) 
Sec. 5-30. - Rabid animal. 
    An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every animal bitten by another animal afflicted with rabies or that has been exposed to rabies shall be confined at once in a secure place by the owner or keeper of such animal. A person who knows or has reason to know that an animal is infected with rabies or has been exposed to rabies shall immediately upon learning of the infection or exposure notify the county animal control officer or the chief of police of the city as to the place where the animal is confined and shall surrender the animal to the county animal control officer or to the city, its agents or employees upon demand. 
(Code 1975, § 3-19) 
Sec. 5-31. - Animals biting people. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of an animal that bites a person and a person bitten by an animal shall have a duty to report that occurrence to the chief of police of the city within twenty-four (24) hours from such occurrence. The owner or keeper of an animal that bites a person shall surrender said animal to the county animal control officer if the chief of police or assistant chief of police deems it necessary to impound the animal for a period of observation. 
(b)  A physician who renders professional treatment to a person bitten by an animal shall report the fact that he has rendered professional treatment to the chief of police or assistant chief of police within twenty-four (24) hours of his first professional attendance of such person. The physician shall report the name, sex and address of the person bitten as well as the type and location of the bite. The physician shall give the name and address of the owner and/or keeper of the animal that inflicted the bite and any other facts that may assist the city and the county animal control officer in ascertaining the immunization status of the animal. 
(c)  An animal that bites a person shall be confined securely for such period of time as may be deemed necessary by the chief of police, or in his absence the assistant chief of police of the city, but not less than ten (10) days. The owner of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement in such place of confinement as is deemed appropriate by the chief of police and the public health authorities of the county. The chief animal control officer of the county or such other public health official as may be designated by the city may consent to confinement on the owner's premises but only if the animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted. The premises where the home confinement is to occur shall be inspected and approved for such purpose by such official or officer. 
(d)  A person who has custody of an animal that has bitten a person shall immediately notify the chief of police, and in his absence the assistant chief of police of the city, if the animal shows any signs of sickness, abnormal behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. If the animal dies while it is in confinement, the person having custody of the animal shall notify the chief of police, assistant chief of police or county animal control officer and shall surrender the carcass of the animal to such officers. 
(Code 1975, § 3-20) 
Sec. 5-32. - Extermination of rabid animals. 
    The authorities of the city and the county animal control officer and his duly authorized agents and employees are authorized to exterminate any rabid animal found within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 3-21) 
Sec. 5-33. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07/8, § 3, adopted Sept. 17, 2007, deleted § 5-33, which pertained to vicious animals; extermination of vicious animals and derived from Code 1975, § 3-22. 
Sec. 5-34. - Authority to go on private property. 
    Employees and agents of the city and county animal control officers and persons under their control and supervision shall have the right to go upon private property within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, provided it is necessary for such purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 3-23) 
Sec. 5-35. - Violations. 
    Except where otherwise provided, any violation of the provisions of this article shall be an offense punishable in accordance with section 1-17. 
(Code 1975, § 3-30) 
Secs. 5-36-5-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VICIOUS ANIMALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07/8, § 5, adopted Sept. 17, 2007 amended the Code by adding Art. III, §§ 5-43-5-51. For purposes of classification and in order to facilitate indexing the editor has redesignated these sections as §§ 5-44-5-51. 

Sec. 5-43. - Definition of vicious animal. 
    Vicious animal is defined as follows: 
(1)  Any animal which shall bite or in any other manner attack or attempt to attack any person within the city, except that any animal that bites, attacks or attempts to attack any person unlawfully upon its owner's or keeper's premises, or which is provoked to attack, shall not be deemed a vicious animal; or 
(2)  The following breeds of dogs are hereby declared, by the nature of the breed, to be vicious animals: any Chow, Rotweiler, or "Pit Bull Terrier." "Pit Bull Terrier" means any Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier breed of dog, or any mixed breed of dog which contains, as an element of its breeding the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier as to be identifiable as partially of the breed of Staffordshire Bull Terrier or American Staffordshire Terrier. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 5-44. - Additional safeguard requirements for a vicious animal. 
    In addition to the requirements set forth in article II of chapter 5, the following safeguard actions shall be taken by the owner of a vicious animal in recognition of the concern for the safety of the residents of the city: 
(1)  An owner or keeper of a vicious animal must keep the animal inside his or her residence at all times unless the animal is directly placed and kept within a proper enclosure. A proper enclosure means a securely enclosed pen or other structure of adequate size to humanely confine the vicious animal. The enclosure must prevent the entry of young children and be designed to keep the vicious animal from escaping. The enclosure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to all sides. The sides must either be buried two (2) feet into the ground or sunken into a concrete pad. The gate to the enclosure shall be inward opening and shall be kept securely locked. 
(2)  The enclosure shall be completely surrounded by a separate perimeter fence. The enclosure may not share common fencing with the perimeter fence. The perimeter fence shall be of sufficient height to prevent the vicious animal from escaping by jumping over the fence. The perimeter fence shall be sufficiently secured to prevent the vicious animal from escaping by crawling or digging under or knocking over the fence. If there is a gate in the fence, the gate shall be kept securely locked. 
(3)  Except when being transported to a licensed veterinary facility, a vicious animal shall not be allowed off the property of the owner or keeper. Should transport for veterinary care be needed, the animal shall be securely and humanely confined within a vehicle. Movement of the animal from the residence of the owner to and from the transporting vehicle and to and from the veterinary facility shall be conducted with the animal securely leashed by a leash no longer than six (6) feet in length and muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting. 
(4)  Except as may be allowed in this article, the owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall at all times keep the vicious animal within either the residence of the owner or keeper or the proper enclosure as set forth in this section. It shall be unlawful to permit the animal to be outside the residence or the proper enclosure of the owner or keeper unless the animal is properly muzzled by a muzzle or device constructed so as to prevent the animal from biting, and the animal is attended by the owner or keeper, who is capable of controlling the animal, and the animal is restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than six (6) feet in length. The animal must be kept at least fifteen (15) feet within the perimeter boundaries of the property, unless the perimeter boundary is securely fenced. 
(5)  The owner or keeper of a vicious animal must maintain at all times either a policy of insurance or a surety bond in a minimum amount of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) to cover claims for any personal injuries inflicted by the vicious animal, which policy or surety bond shall be issued by an insurer or surety, as the case may be, authorized to transact business in this state. A copy of the insurance policy or surety bond, and all renewals thereof, shall be provided by the owner or keeper to the animal control department. 
(6)  The premises where a vicious animal is kept shall be posted with clearly visible signs warning that there is an animal on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall include a symbol sufficient to convey without words the message that there is an animal on the premises that presents a danger to human beings. The signs shall be conspicuously displayed on each exterior side of the enclosure for each fifty (50) feet of the enclosure, with a minimum of two (2) signs, in addition to a sign on each ingress and egress point to the enclosure. The signs shall be a minimum of ten (10) inches tall and fourteen (14) inches long. In addition, signs shall be placed at each door to the house if the vicious animal is kept at any time in the house. The signs shall also comply with the requirements set forth by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. A copy of the Department of Natural Resources' sign requirements are available from the animal control department. 
(7)  The owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall, prior to placing the animal on the premises, have the animal micro-chip registered, at the owner's expense, and provide the registration number to the animal control department. The owner or keeper shall keep the micro-chip registration information updated, and provide the animal control department with the updated registration information. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 07/9, § 1, 10-8-2007; Ord. No. 18-05, §§ 1, 2, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 5-45. - Owner notification requirements. 
    The owner or keeper of a vicious animal shall report to the animal control department within twenty-four (24) hours of any of the following events: 
(1)  Escape of the animal; 
(2)  An attack on a human or domestic animal by the vicious animal; 
(3)  Transfer of location of the animal; 
(4)  Transfer of ownership of the animal; or 
(5)  Death of the animal. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 5-46. - Impoundment of vicious animals. 
(a)  A law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall immediately impound any animal the officer believes poses a threat to the public safety or any vicious animal as defined in this article which is not held, kept, or otherwise maintained according to the requirements of this article. At the time said vicious animal is impounded, the animal control officer shall provide the owner or keeper of said animal with a written citation to appear in the recorder's court regarding the violations of this article. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of the animal shall be responsible for payment of all expenses associated with the impounding of the animal if it is determined by the recorder's court that the owner has violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The recorder's court may order the city animal control department to euthanize an animal if the court determines that the animal is a vicious animal, the owner or keeper is guilty of violating one (1) or more provisions of this article, and the owner or keeper has either not timely exercised his appeal rights or has exhausted his appeal rights regarding the criminal conviction. 
(d)  An animal control officer or any law enforcement officer may pursue a vicious animal onto private property to effect capture of the animal believed to be in violation of this article. Any law enforcement officer or animal control officer shall have the authority to enter onto private or public property for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007; Ord. No. 18-01, § 1, 1-8-2018; Ord. No. 18-05, § 3, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 5-47. - Registration of vicious animal. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner or keeper to have or possess within the city limits a vicious animal without a certificate of registration issued by the animal control department in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The owner or keeper of a vicious animal must obtain a certificate of registration annually. 
(c)  The animal control department shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner or keeper of a vicious animal if the animal control department finds sufficient evidence that the owner or keeper has complied with all of the provisions of this chapter, including those provisions regarding this article. 
(d)  The owner or keeper of any vicious animal who brings a vicious animal into the city must satisfy all of the requirements of this article and register the vicious animal with the animal control department within ten (10) days of the arrival of the vicious animal in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 5-48. - Maximum number of animals that may be kept on one residential property. 
    No owner of a residential property in the city shall permit more than three (3) vicious animals to be kept or maintained upon any residential property. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 5-49. - Additional requirements of chapter 5 of the City Code of Ordinances. 
    The regulations and requirements for vicious animals established by this article are in addition to the remaining requirements for all animals governed by chapter 5 of the City Code of Ordinances. Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to relieve the owner or keeper of a vicious animal from compliance with the remaining provisions and regulations of chapter 5 of the City Code of Ordinances with respect to said vicious animal. In the event of a conflict between any regulations established by this article and the remaining regulations of chapter 5 of the City Code of Ordinances, the more stringent regulations shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 5-50. - Exemptions from vicious animal definition. 
(a)  An animal that is being used by a law enforcement officer to carry out law enforcement duties shall not be considered a vicious animal within the meaning of this article or shall otherwise be in violation of this article. 
(b)  An animal shall not be considered a vicious animal or otherwise in violation of this article if the injury inflicted by the animal was sustained by a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or committing or attempting to commit a crime, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the animal, or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the animal. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007) 
Sec. 5-51. - Violations. 
(a)  The owner or keeper of a vicious animal that violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. In addition to any confinement that might be imposed for a conviction under this article, for the first conviction a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), for the second conviction a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed, and for a third or subsequent conviction a fine of not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) shall be imposed. 
(b)  In addition, the maintenance of any vicious animal in noncompliance with the terms of this article shall also be deemed and declared a public nuisance and shall subject the owner or keeper to any and all penalties and remedies available under the laws of the State of Georgia and the ordinances of City of LaFayette relative to the abatement of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 07/8, §§ 4, 5, 9-17-2007) 
Secs. 5-52-5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIVESTOCK[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02/05, §§ 1-7, adopted July 19, 2002 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as Art. III, §§ 5-61-5-67 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-61. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
    Livestock means any domesticated animals of the type raised on a farm, and includes, but is not limited to, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, horses, ponies, burros, llamas, or mules. 
    The term person carries the same meaning as found in section 1-2. 
(Ord. No. 02/05, § 1, 7-19-2002) 
Sec. 5-62. - Restrictions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or otherwise have livestock, either temporarily or permanently, on lots containing less than two (2) acres of permanent pasture land within the city. Said two (2) acres of permanent pasture land shall be measured so as to exclude any structures from the calculation of the required two (2) acre minimum. 
(b)  Said restriction shall in no way affect the keeping of livestock for the limited and temporary purpose of licensed sales, including, but not limited to, auction sales. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit a show, carnival, fair, rodeo, or circus licensed by the city from displaying or using such animals in entertainment programs. 
(Ord. No. 02/05, § 2, 7-19-2002) 
Sec. 5-63. - Administration. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager, and such employees of the city as he may appoint, to administer and the animal control officer of the city to enforce the provisions of this article. The city manager and animal control officer of the city may enter upon private or public property to determine the presence of livestock thereon and to remove any such livestock existing thereon. 
(Ord. No. 02/05, § 3, 7-19-2002) 
Sec. 5-64. - Violations. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager, or the animal control officer of the city, shall determine livestock to exist within the city in violation of this article, he shall issue a written notice to the owner or occupant of the premises on which the livestock is found specifying the violation of this article and requesting that the livestock be removed from the city within ten (10) days from the date the written notice is served as provided for in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  Such written notice may be served personally, or by certified mail, on the owner of the land as shown on the most recent city ad valorem tax digest, or to the occupant if the owner is not in possession of the premises. 
(c)  If it is not possible to serve notice to the owner by the above specified methods, the notice to him to remove the livestock may be given by posting such notice on the property where the livestock is found and, in addition, by posting such notice to a public bulletin board at the city hall. 
(Ord. No. 02/05, § 4, 7-19-2002) 
Sec. 5-65. - Removal. 
    Ten (10) days after the date of service of the written notice requesting removal of the livestock from the city, the animal control officer of the city shall cause the livestock to be removed from the premises. Such livestock shall be disposed of in accordance with section 5-29. The owner and/or occupant of the premises from which the livestock is removed shall be liable to the city for any expenses incurred in removing and disposing of said livestock. 
(Ord. No. 02/05, § 5, 7-19-2002) 
Sec. 5-66. - Penalty. 
(a)  Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of any owner or occupant so notified to remove such livestock within the designated time given for such removal, the animal control officer of the city shall issue a citation for violation of this article. The citation and summons shall require the owner or occupant to appear in the municipal court of the city for violation of this article. Violation of this article may be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment of thirty (30) days. Each day following the expiration of the ten-day period provided for in the written notice served on the owner and/or occupier of the premises where livestock is found the owner or occupant fails to remove such livestock as set forth above shall be considered a separate offense. 
(b)  The removal of the livestock from the premises prior to the expiration of the ten-day period provided for in subsection 5-64(a) shall be considered compliance with the provision of this article, and no further action shall be taken against the owner of the livestock or the owner or occupants of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 02/05, § 6, 7-19-2002) 
Sec. 5-67. - Liability. 
    Neither the city, the city manager, or the city's agents or employees shall be liable for any loss or damage to the livestock while being removed or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition thereof. 
(Ord. No. 02/05, § 7, 7-19-2002) 
Chapter 6 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to adopt technical codes, § 5-23. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; flood damage prevention, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Buildings and housing. OCGA Title 8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The title to Article II has been changed from "Building Code," to its present title by the editor for classification purposes pursuant to the deletion of building code provisions therefrom. 
Cross reference- Georgia State Building Code adopted, § 6-121; schedule of permit fees, § 6-124. 

Secs. 6-16, 6-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 1987, § 8, repealed the adoption and modifications of the building code set out in §§ 6-16 and 6-17, as derived from Code 1975, §§ 4-10 and 4-11. The city has adopted the Georgia State Building Code, as set out in § 6-121 of this chapter. 
Sec. 6-18. - Flood hazard provisions. 
(a)  The building official shall review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement, including prefabricated and mobile homes, must: 
(1)  Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and 
(3)  Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
(b)  The building official and city planning commission shall review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that: 
(1)  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(3)  Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(c)  The building official shall require new or replacement water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters, and require on-site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1975, § 4-12) 
Cross reference- Flood damage prevention, Ch. 11; planning, Ch. 17. 
Sec. 6-19. - Health inspection. 
    Before any building permit shall be issued for new construction which will not be connected to the city sewer system, the applicant shall furnish proof that the building site has been inspected and approved by the county health department. 
(Code 1975, § 4-13) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 6-20. - Water-saving installations required; exceptions. 
(a)  Definitions. [As used in this section, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:] 
(1)  Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
(2)  Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
(3)  Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)  Residential, prohibited installations. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six tenths (1.6) gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of two and one half (2.5) gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one and zero tenths (1.0) gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow or more than two and zero tenths (2.0) gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and one half (2.5) gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  Commercial, prohibited installations. On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subparagraph (b)(1) through (5) of this section. 
(d)  Repair, renovation or addition. The requirement of subsection (b) shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(e)  Exemptions. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing buildings; or 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this section were installed; or 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(f)  Exemption application; inspection fee. The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subparagraph (e)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at city hall, City of Lafayette. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. The building official shall review the application, and deny said application or issue the exemption. 
(g)  Enforcement; penalty. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by the building official for the city. Citations for violations may be issued by said building official. 
(2)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the recorder's court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of the section may be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) and or imprisonment not to exceed five (5) days. 
(Ord. of 3-11-91, § 6) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Mar. 11, 1991, §§ 1-6, enacted provisions requiring the installation of water-saving facilities and providing for exceptions. Such provisions did not specify manner of codification, but have been designated by the editor as § 6-20. 
Cross reference- Water conservation during drought, § 21-141 et seq. 
Sec. 6-21. - Covering openings of constructions. 
(a)  Purpose and findings. 
(1)  The purpose of this section is to protect against the pernicious effects which result from the placement of boards, including plywood or other wooden materials, over the doors, windows, or other coverings of constructions within the city. The pernicious effects sought to be remedied by this section include the reduction of property value caused by boarding of constructions, the spread of blight, the increase of crime associated with areas in and around such boarded constructions, and to preserve and promote the aesthetics of the city. The provisions of this section represent a balancing of the competing interests of property owners and occupants to protect the openings of constructions from naturally occurring damage and vandalism and the city's interest in protecting against decreases in property valuation, blight, and crime. 
(2)  The city's governing authority finds that constructions boarded with plywood or other wood based materials have been linked with decreases in the property values to both the affected property and other properties within the vicinity, are linked to an increase in crimes such as vandalism, squatting, drug crimes, and in some cases, violent crimes, and otherwise contribute to the spread of blight within a community. The city's governing authority thus finds that it is best to prohibit the usage of such boarding materials on constructions within the city in order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of its citizenry. 
    As used in this section, these terms have the following meanings: 
(b)  Definitions . As used in this section, these terms have the following meanings: 
    City means the City of Lafayette, Georgia. 
    Construction means any building, dwelling, or other structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this section, the term "construction" does not mean or include any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
    Occupant means any person or persons who lease property from an owner as defined in this section or otherwise are in possession of a property and premises. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record, whether a person, firm, association, or corporation. 
(c)  Permit required for covering openings of constructions. 
(1)  Owners and occupants are prohibited from erecting, installing, placing, or maintaining any covering over doors, windows, or any other openings of any construction by any means other than the conventional methods used in the original building and design of the construction without first obtaining a valid permit in accordance with this section. 
(2)  Any construction with boards, including plywood, or any other wood based material, or metal, or any other non-transparent covering any door, window, or other opening and existing at the time of adoption of this section will have sixty (60) days from the date of adoption to remove such boarding and submit an application to the city for a permit in accordance with this section. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the permit requirement imposed by subsection (b)(1), above, a permit is not required to cover the opening of a construction for up to a maximum of thirty (30) days in the event of a temporary emergency situation, including, but not limited to, damage caused by vandalism, theft, or weather. In the event an emergency situation requires the opening of a construction to be covered for more than thirty (30) days, the owner or occupant or his/her authorized representative must obtain either a valid building permit for repair or a valid permit in accordance with this section. 
(d)  Requirements for issuance of permit. 
(1)  The city may issue a permit only upon satisfaction of the following conditions: 
a.  Submission of a written application by the owner or occupant of the property or his authorized representative, including the following information: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of the owner or occupant; 
2.  Name, address and telephone number of any local agent of the owner or occupant; 
3.  Tax parcel identification number of the premises on which the structure is situated; 
4.  Common address of the structure; and 
5.  Any other information as may be required by the city. 
b.  Payment of the required fee by the owner or occupant or his/her authorized representative. 
c.  Submission of a written statement or plan by the owner or occupant of the property or his authorized representative specifying: 
1.  Proposed length of time the owner or occupant expects the covering to continue; 
2.  Proposed plan to cover the opening of the construction, including a detailed description regarding the manner and materials; 
3.  Proposed maintenance plan detailing the monitoring and maintenance of the structure and premises in conformance with this section. 
(2)  Following the issuance of a permit under this section, the city may conduct an inspection of the construction to ensure that its opening is covered in accordance with the plan approved by the department. 
(e)  Rights of owner or occupant to cover openings of construction under permit. 
(1)  A permit issued under this section may authorize an owner or occupant to place a clear and transparent protective material, to be comprised of poly (methyl methacrylate) or polycarbonate or like material, over a door, window, or any other opening of a construction to secure the construction. The use of wooden boards, plywood, other wood based material, metal, or any other non-transparent material to cover or secure any door, window, or other opening of a construction is prohibited within the city. 
(2)  The opening of a construction may be covered or secured under subsection (d)(1), above, for a maximum period of six (6) months. An owner or occupant desiring to continue to use protective material on a construction beyond the six-month maximum term must submit a renewal application to the city prior to thirty (30) days of the expiration of the original permit upon payment of necessary fees. A new permit must be obtained if the original permit is not renewed before thirty (30) days of the expiration of the original permit, a copy of which must be posted on any construction which is covered or secured under this section. 
(3)  The covering or securing of doors, windows, or other openings of any building or structure or any means of securing such openings, other than by the conventional method used in the original construction and design of the building or structure, must be according to the specifications approved under the permit. 
(4)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (d)(1) through (3), above, in the case of an emergency, as described in subsection (b)(3), an opening of a construction may be covered or secured by wooden boards, plywood, or other wood based material for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, after which time a permit must be obtained under this section and the boarding must be removed to be covered or secured in compliance with subsections (d)(1) through (3) of this section. However, any boarding used by an owner or occupant in the event of an emergency must be painted with a minimum of two (2) coats of exterior paint which is of a color compatible with the exterior color of the building or structure. 
(f)  Enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
(1)  This section is to be enforced, including the determination of any violations and administration of any penalties, as provided under the procedures set forth in the city's Blighted and Derelict Property Ordinance as codified in Chapter 6, Article XI, sections 6-218 through 6-228. 
(Ord. No. 18-02, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Secs. 6-22-6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 1987, § 8, repealed the plumbing code adopted and modified in Article III, §§ 6-36 and 6-37, as derived from Code 1975, §§ 5-10 and 5-11. The city has adopted the Georgia State Plumbing Code, as set out in § 6-121 of this chapter. 

Secs. 6-36-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 1987, § 8, repealed the gas code adopted and modified in Article IV, §§ 6-51 and 6-52, as derived from Code 1975, §§ 6-10 and 6-11. The city has adopted the Georgia State Gas Code, as set out in § 6-121 of this chapter. 

Secs. 6-51-6-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 1987, repealed the electrical code and the enabling ordinance thereof, pertaining to the electrical inspector and permits for electrical work, as set out in Article V, §§ 6-71-6-80, deriving from Code 1975, §§ 7-10-7-19. The city has adopted the Georgia State Electrical Code, as set out in § 6-121 of this chapter. 

Secs. 6-71-6-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MOBILE HOMES[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Georgia State Housing Code adopted, § 6-121. 

Sec. 6-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile home means a movable or portable dwelling over thirty-two (32) feet in length and over eight (8) feet wide, constructed to be towed on its own chassis, connected to utilities and designed without a permanent foundation for year-round occupancy, which can consist of one (1) or more components that can be retracted for towing purposes and subsequently expanded for additional capacity, or of two (2) or more units separately towable but designed to be joined into an integral unit. 
    Mobile home toter is a term used by the mobile home industry to denote the vehicle used to tow a mobile home. For vehicles manufactured prior to the 1979 model year, a ten-foot toter is a truck measuring approximately ten (10) feet from the forward edge of the front bumper to the center of the trailer hitch ball, and a fifteen-foot toter measures approximately fifteen (15) feet between these two (2) points and is a two and one-half ton truck. For vehicles manufactured in the 1979 model year and subsequent model years, a ten-foot toter is a truck with a wheel base of seventy-seven (77) inches or more and a manufacturer's GVW rating of sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or more and approximately ten (10) feet between the forward edge of the front bumper and the center of the trailer hitch ball and a fifteen-foot toter is a truck with a wheel base of one hundred sixteen (116) inches or more and a manufacturer's GVW rating of twenty thousand (20,000) pounds or more and approximately fifteen (15) feet between the forward edge of the front bumper and the center of the trailer hitch ball. 
    Modular home means a house composed of two (2) sections of reinforced concrete or reinforced concrete block, each section being no more than fourteen (14) feet wide and capable of assembly into a complete house. 
    Person means a "person" as defined in OCGA section 32-1-3, as well as the operator of a permitted vehicle or load. 
    Portable building means a building not to exceed one hundred forty-four (144) inches in width composed of one (1) section completely preassembled with roof, floor and all outside walls to be used for a purpose other than a dwelling. 
    Sectional house means a preassembled section, not more than fourteen (14) feet wide, composed of a floor, roof and outside walls which does not have a towable chassis, but is designed to be loaded on a trailer or dolly and transported to a site where it is placed on a permanent foundation so that, when attached to one (1) or more other sections, it becomes a dwelling. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-92. - General restrictions on issuance of permits. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to an automobile carrier over sixty (60) feet long or double bottom or twin trailers, regardless of length. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for transporting a load in excess of fifty-five (55) feet in length and of the type load otherwise excepted from such general length limitation by the provisions of OCGA section 32-6-24, if such a load is capable of being sawed, separated, rearranged or otherwise dismantled so as to make inapplicable the provisions of OCGA section 32-6-24. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued if the issuance of the permit in any way jeopardizes federal funds appropriated to this state under the provisions of Title 23 of the U.S. Code. 
(d)  No single trip permit or approved route permit shall be issued authorizing in excess of one (1) allowable travel day, which must be for a day when that type of permitted load is authorized to travel, as specified in this article. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 2) 
Sec. 6-93. - Conditions attached to issuance of permits. 
    In addition to compliance with any other conditions imposed on the issuance of a particular permit, any person receiving a permit from the city thereby certifies that he will comply or has complied (as applicable) with the following conditions governing the operation of the permitted vehicle or load. When intentional, or due to gross negligence, a violation of any of the following conditions is unlawful and punishable as a misdemeanor and may be considered as evidence supporting action to suspend, revoke or deny a permit: 
(1)  Federal and state laws, regulations, city ordinances. The permittee will comply or has complied with the applicable laws and regulations of the United States and of this state and city, including, but not limited to, those of the U. S. Interstate Commerce Commission, the state public service commission, the state department of public safety, the state department of revenue and OCGA Title 32. 
(2)  Movement of vehicle, load. Unless otherwise shown on the permit or further limited by specific rules provided in this article, the permittee will ensure that the movement of a permitted vehicle or load will take place only on Monday through Saturday, from thirty (30) minutes after sunrise to thirty (30) minutes before sunset, Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, whichever is in effect for the period of year during which the movement occurs. Provided further, he will make sure that no permitted vehicle or load will be moved during foggy weather, during snow or icy conditions or during the following legal holidays: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and December 25th. 
(3)  Route of travel. The permittee will not operate the permitted load or vehicle over any public road or street in the city other than those described or allowed in the permit, provided that he will comply with the load limitations of any bridge or which limitation has been established by the posting of an embargo sign on any public road in the state and the city. 
(4)  Distance between vehicles. The operator of a permitted vehicle and load shall maintain fifty-foot intervals between each vehicle load. In addition, when the normal flow of traffic becomes impeded, such vehicle or load shall move off the traveled portion of the public road until such traffic congestion has been cleared. Normal movement may then be resumed until another traffic congestion occurs. 
(5)  Escorts. The permittee will comply with the requirements of section 6-95. 
(6)  Marking of vehicle and load. The permittee will comply with the requirements of sections 6-94-6-96. 
(7)  Liability insurance and other security. The permittee has in effect and shall maintain during the existence of the permit public liability and property damage insurance in at least the following amounts: public liability, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) each accident; one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) each person injured; total property damage, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). However, nothing in this section shall prevent the city from requiring any additional undertaking or security as may be deemed necessary to compensate the city for any injury to any public road therein, including a bridge. Upon request the person receiving a permit shall furnish the city the number of the policy of insurance required in this section as well as the address of the insurance company. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed so as to make the city liable for any damage to a public road or bridge or to persons or private property caused by a permitted load or vehicle, or its escort vehicle. The person receiving the permit thereby promises to hold the city harmless from such claims and to recompense the city or a political subdivision for any expenditures made by the city or other political subdivision for any expenditures made by the city or other political subdivision to repair damages caused by the permitted vehicle or load to a public road of the state highway system, of a county road system or of a municipal street system, as applicable. 
(8)  Leased vehicles. The permittee will ensure that the operator of a leased vehicle carries on his person written proof of the identity of the lessee. 
(9)  Single-trip permit. The permittee will not allow the single-trip permit to be used other than for the movement by the particular vehicle for which the permit was issued. Further, he will not allow the single-trip permit to be transmitted again by facsimile machine, retyping or reproducing. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 3) 
Sec. 6-94. - Special conditions attached to certain permits. 
(a)  Houses. In addition to the conditions set forth in section 6-93, a person receiving a permit for the movement of a house certifies that he will or has complied, as applicable, with the following conditions: 
(1)  He will use the following minimum equipment for moving the house: a tandem truck, one (1) set of tandem dollies in good condition, and one (1) extra skidder or wrecker in good condition or capable of moving the whole load in case of a breakdown; 
(2)  He has measured the house and has, prior to applying for the permit, checked the route stated in this application for permit to ensure obstacle clearance and necessary places periodically to pull off of the road for the purpose of preventing unnecessary traffic congestion; 
(3)  Before moving the house, all masonry will be removed from a masonry-veneered house; 
(4)  All mailboxes, highway signs and other movable obstacles to the move of the house shall be removed as the house approaches such an obstacle and reerected immediately after the house passes such obstacle in equal or better condition than it was prior to removal; 
(5)  The movement of the house will be confined to the route stated in the application, and in no case will exceed the total distance of three (3) miles in city streets; and 
(6)  A house will be moved only on Mondays through Thursdays between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. Application for the movement of a house shall be made at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of movement applied for. 
(b)  Modular homes. The special conditions stated in subsection (a) above, other than the conditions of subsection (a)(6), likewise apply to the movement of a modular home. In addition, before a permit will be issued for a move of a modular home, the applicant for a permit must have provided the city with a plan of the home, certified by a professional engineer to be able to withstand the movement applied for. If the construction plan of such modular home filed with the application for a permit has been changed prior to movement, a new application for a permit must be filed. 
(c)  Mobile homes, modular homes, sectional houses, portable buildings in excess of ten feet wide. In addition to the conditions set forth in section 6-93, a person, by accepting a permit for the movement of a mobile home, modular home or sectional house in excess of ten (10) feet wide up to a maximum of fourteen (14) feet wide, or a portable building in excess of ten (10) feet wide up to and including twelve (12) feet wide, agrees that he will or has complied with or he understands, as applicable, the following conditions: 
(1)  Approval shall be obtained for a specific route for each movement and this movement will follow the approved route stated on the permit. Routes submitted for travel on a street or road with a single travel lane in each direction of travel with lane width less than twelve (12) feet wide and each shoulder five (5) feet wide or routes with bridges with less than twenty-eight (28) feet between curbs will not normally be approved for travel unless there is no alternative. Since certain obstructions may exist on the approved route which occasionally restrict the clear shoulder or pavement width, the driver of the towing vehicle shall be responsible for exercising additional caution at such locations. 
(2)  Unless otherwise shown on the permit, the movement of a mobile home, modular home or sectional house in excess of twelve (12) feet wide will take place only on Tuesdays through Thursdays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m., Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time, whichever is in effect for the period of the year during which the movement occurs. 
(3)  Unless otherwise shown on the permit, the movement of a mobile home, modular home, sectional house or portable building in excess of ten (10) feet wide, up to and including twelve (12) feet wide, will take place only on Mondays through Saturdays, from thirty (30) minutes after sunrise to thirty (30) minutes before sunset. 
(4)  Signs, escorts and flags shall be provided, as required by subsequent sections of this article. 
(5)  For mobile homes, modular homes, sectional houses or portable buildings, in excess of ten (10) feet wide, ensure that the load does not exceed a maximum speed of twenty-five (25) miles-per-hour. The preceding is the maximum authorized speed under any condition. The driver shall be responsible for driving at a speed that is prudent and safe for the conditions. 
(6)  For mobile homes, modular homes and sectional houses in excess of twelve (12) feet wide, using a towing vehicle no smaller than a fifteen-foot mobile home toter, and not exceeding a total overall combination length of eighty-five (85) feet with all axles of the mobile home or trailer or dolly transporting a modular home or sectional house equipped with properly functioning brakes. Brakes of the towing vehicle shall be in accordance with OCGA sections 40-8-50-40-8-54, and the towing vehicle shall have a current state inspection sticker or the equivalent from the state of license. 
(7)  Mobile homes, modular homes or sectional houses up to and including twelve (12) feet wide will not be permitted with an overall length, including the towing vehicle, in excess of eighty-three (83) feet, and shall have a towing vehicle no smaller than a ten-foot mobile home toter. Mobile homes manufactured prior to August 30, 1977, may be permitted with an overall length, including the ten-foot towing vehicle, up to and including eighty-eight (88) feet, when approved by the city. Mobile homes up to and including twelve (12) feet wide will be permitted when the towing vehicle is no smaller than what is commonly referred to as a fifteen-foot mobile home toter. Brakes of all towing vehicles shall be in accordance with OCGA sections 40-8-50-40-8-54, and the towing vehicle shall have a current state inspection sticker or the equivalent from the state of license. Brakes on mobile homes up to and including twelve (12) feet wide shall be in accordance with state law as a minimum, but in no case will less than one-half of the axles be equipped with properly functioning brakes. Brakes on mobile homes or trailers or dollies transporting modular homes or sectional houses up to and including twelve (12) feet wide shall be in accordance with OCGA sections 40-8-50-40-8-54. 
(8)  In addition to the weather conditions mentioned in section 6-93, mobile homes, modular homes or sectional houses in excess of twelve (12) feet wide will not travel when it is raining or when the ground wind exceeds twenty-five (25) miles per hour. When such conditions exist, the driver shall proceed to the first area where the load can be safely removed from the roadway. 
(9)  All necessary safety precautions shall be employed in crossing narrow bridges, including flagging other traffic, to permit safe crossing. 
(10)  Within twenty-four (24) hours the permittee shall notify the city police department, on form SR13, of any accident occurring on a public road regardless of the amount of damage. This report shall include, as part of the information, the specific size of the mobile home, modular home, sectional house or portable building. When audits of records indicate that this provision has not been complied with, the mobile home, modular home, sectional house or portable building permits of the offending company may be revoked. 
(11)  All persons driving a vehicle pulling a mobile home, modular home, sectional house or portable building shall have a class 5 Georgia driver's license or his home state's equivalent license. 
(12)  In addition to complying with all applicable federal and state laws and regulations, comply with applicable county and municipal ordinances when traveling off the state highway system. 
(13)  In addition to the signs required by section 6-96, mobile homes, modular homes and sectional houses in excess of twelve (12) feet wide up to and including fourteen (14) feet wide must have signs stating the permitted load width (e.g., "14 FEET WIDE"). These signs shall be of the same size and color as the "OVERSIZE LOAD" signs and shall be located on both the front and rear upper portion of the mobile home, modular home or sectional house. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 4) 
Sec. 6-95. - Escorts of permitted vehicles or loads. 
(a)  Equipment. An escort vehicle shall be an automobile or pickup truck and shall be equipped with a revolving amber light at least eight (8) inches in diameter, located on top of the vehicle. The light shall have a minimum candlepower of thirty-five thousand (35,000) and shall rotate so as to provide at least eighty (80) revolutions per minute. The operator shall have obtained a permit from the state department of public safety for the use of the light as required by the department under state law. Escort vehicles and the vehicle transporting the permitted load will also be equipped with two-way radios, in good working order, so that the driver will have constant radio contact with the driver of the permitted load and other escorts of the same load. The rear escort vehicle driver will advise the driver of the load and the front escort, when applicable, as to the traffic conditions behind the movement. When four (4) or more vehicles overtake and follow an overdimensional vehicle, the escort vehicles and the permitted load shall pull over and allow the traffic to pass. The driver of the front and rear escort vehicles shall maintain sufficient separation between their vehicles and the permitted load so as to provide adequate warning of the presence of the overdimensional load. Escort vehicles will have current state inspection stickers or the equivalent from the state of license. 
(b)  Signs. A sign shall be mounted on the front of the escort vehicle (for a front escort) and to the rear of the escort vehicle (for a rear escort). Such sign shall contain the wording "OVERSIZE LOAD" for overlength and overwidth movements. The letters shall be black on an orange or yellow backboard and shall be at least eight (8) inches high and four (4) inches wide. The backboard shall be at least one (1) foot high and six (6) feet wide. 
(c)  When escorts required: 
(1)  As a condition to the issuance of a permit, the city, when it deems it necessary in the interest of public safety, in any case may require the use of a front or rear escort, or both. 
(2)  It shall be an unlawful act punishable as a misdemeanor for any person to operate upon a public street or road of the city any equipment exempted from permit requirements by the provisions of OCGA section 32-6-24 or section 32-6-25 when such exempted equipment is wider than one (1) lane of such public road and the operator of such exempted equipment has not provided both front and rear escorts therefor. 
(3)  Otherwise, the following escort requirements apply: 
a.  Boats over twelve (12) feet wide, front and rear escorts; 
b.  Heavy equipment: 
1.  Over seventy-five (75) feet long, rear escort or, in lieu thereof, a revolving amber light located on the rearmost point of the load. The amber light must conform with the requirements of subsection (a) above, including the securing of a permit for its use from the state department of public safety. 
2.  Over twelve (12) feet wide, front and rear escorts. 
c.  House, front and rear escorts, the front escort being a police car. 
d.  Mobile home, modular home, portable building, sectional house, for each unit up to and including twelve (12) feet wide and seventy-five (75) feet overall length, no escorts. For each unit up to and including twelve (12) feet wide and longer than seventy-five (75) feet overall length, not to exceed a maximum of eighty-eight (88) feet overall length, a rear escort or, in lieu thereof, a revolving amber light located on both rear corners of the load. The amber light must conform with the requirements of subsection (a) above, including the securing of a permit for their use from the state department of public safety. For each mobile home or modular home or sectional house unit in excess of twelve (12) feet wide, not to exceed a maximum of fourteen (14) feet wide and eighty-five (85) feet overall length, the city may require both front and rear escort vehicles. 
e.  Poles, logs and other loads exempt from general length limitations by the provisions of OCGA section 32-6-24, longer than seventy-five (75) feet, rear escort or, in lieu thereof, a revolving amber light must conform with the requirements of subsection (a) above, including the securing of a permit for its use from the state department of public safety. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 5) 
Sec. 6-96. - Marking of oversize vehicles or loads. 
    A sign of the same type required for an escort vehicle under the provisions of section 6-95(b) shall be mounted on both the front and rear of a load with eight (8) feet in width. Such signs shall be removed when an oversize load is no longer being transported by a vehicle that is no wider than eight (8) feet. In addition, a square red flag, eighteen (18) inches on a side, shall be displayed at the corners of both sides of such overwidth vehicle or load, at both the front and rear thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 6) 
Sec. 6-97. - Application for permits. 
(a)  Address of office of permits and enforcement. Written applications for a permit required by this article should be addressed to: Clerk of City of Lafayette, P. O. Box 89, LaFayette, Georgia 30728. 
(b)  Procedure: 
(1)  Application for single-trip permit. An application for a single-trip permit may be made by telephone, by letter or in person, giving the applicable information required. The permit fee shall be transmitted to the city clerk prior to the issuance of the permit. Such payment may be made by company check, cash, money order or by certified or cashier's check. A personal check will not be accepted. Checks and money orders shall be made payable to the order of city. 
(2)  Issuance of single-trip permit. The city clerk, as requested in the application, may use any of the following methods to transmit a single-trip permit to the applicant: by mail, Western Union telegram or presentation in person. 
(3)  Fees for permits: 
a.  Movement of houses-The fee for a housemoving permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
b.  All other permits-The fee for all other permits provided by this article shall be as set from time to time and a schedule of such fees is on file in the city clerk's office. 
c.  The fees provided for above are for the purpose of helping to defray the expenses of enforcing the limitations set forth in this article and are to be used for public street maintenance purposes. 
d.  Other fees-In addition to the fees required above, the permittee or applicant shall be responsible for payment to the city for all expenses incurred by the city in providing a police escort, the movement of utility lines, and any other similar expenses incurred by the city in connection with use of the city streets in the manner authorized by the permit. The city, through its city clerk, may require a reasonable advance deposit from the applicant for this purpose prior to issuing a permit. 
(4)  Any other facts indicating that the applicant or permittee is a poor risk with regard to the safety of the traveling public and/or damage to public roads and bridges of this city and the state. 
(c)  Convictions under state laws. Persons convicted of violating the requirements of Section 2, Act 190, (Georgia Laws 1977, p. 321), as amended by Section 1, Act No. 1277 (Ga. Laws 1978), which pertains to the yielding of the roadways to the traveling public by a vehicle towing a mobile home, modular home or sectional house in excess of twelve (12) feet wide shall have their mobile home, modular home and sectional house permits for vehicles wider than one hundred forty-four (144) inches as authorized by Section 2, Act 190 (Ga. Laws 1977, p. 321) and Section 1, Act No. 1277 (Ga. Laws 1978) suspended based on the following: 
(1)  First offense within a two-year period, ninety (90) days' suspension; 
(2)  Second offense within a two-year period, one hundred eighty (180) days' suspension; 
(3)  Third offense within a two-year period, one-year suspension. 
city personnel shall check court records in order to determine when these cases have been made by enforcement agencies not under the control of the city. When a conviction is found, based on this paragraph, the city clerk shall notify the offender of the suspension. The effective date of suspension to grant new permits shall be fifteen (15) days from the date of the notice unless an administrative hearing is requested within ten (10) days from the date that the notice is delivered personally or mailed by U.S. mail to the permittee. Before the suspension for permits becomes final, the person who requested the permit shall have the right to an administrative hearing before the mayor and council of the city. In the event of a hearing request, the suspension of the permit shall become effective as of the date of the order which finally disposes of the administrative review. 
(d)  Violations of city ordinances. Any person who has violated any provision of this article may be denied a permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of such violation. 
(e)  Appeal. Appeals from revocation, suspension or denial of application shall be made directly to the mayor and council. Such appeal must be in writing and must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days from the date of such revocation, suspension or denial of application. The appeal must state briefly the grounds for the appeal and the proper mailing address of the person filing the appeal. The mayor and council must have a hearing on the appeal within twenty (20) days from the date the same is filed with the city clerk, and the person filing the appeal must be notified of the date, place and time of the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Notification by U.S. mail at the address of the appellant shown in the records of appellee or delivered personally to the appellant be deemed sufficient for the purposes of this article. The mayor and council shall render its decision in writing within twenty (20) days after the hearing. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 7) 
Sec. 6-98. - Revocation, suspension or denial of application or renewal of permits. 
(a)  Authority to revoke, suspend or deny permits. The city clerk is hereby designated as the official authorized to refuse, cancel, suspend or revoke the permit requested by an applicant or issued to a permittee. 
(b)  Reasons justifying revocation, suspension or denial of permit. Permits may be revoked, suspended or denied for just cause, including, but not limited to, any one (1) of the following reasons: 
(1)  Repeated past violations by the permittee or applicant, of a relatively minor nature; 
(2)  A single, but aggravated violation; 
(3)  A material misrepresentation made by the applicant for a permit. 
(Ord. of 12-10-79, § 8) 
Secs. 6-99-6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TECHNICAL CODES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 1987, §§ 1-7, not expressly amendatory of the Code, has been included as Ch. 6, Art. VII, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 6-121. - State minimum standard codes enforced by the City of LaFayette. 
(a)  The City of LaFayette enforces the following mandatory state minimum standard codes, which are applicable statewide, but do not require adoption by local ordinance under O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a): 
(1)  International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)  International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)  International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC); 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); 
(8)  International Fire Code (ICC); and 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(b)  The City of LaFayette enforces the following permissive state minimum standards codes, which are adopted, by reference as if fully stated in this section, as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 5-2-25(b): 
(1)  International Existing Building Code (ICC); 
(2)  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC); 
(3)  National Green Building Standard; and 
(4)  Any other codes deemed appropriate by the Board of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
(c)  The City of LaFayette also enforces all appendices of the state minimum standard codes listed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section that are adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs with the approval of its board as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 5-2-21(3). 
(d)  The city also adopts the Administrative Procedures (Chapter I) of the above stated codes, except as may be modified by this section, as if said administrative procedures were set forth verbatim in this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, 7-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-04, § 1, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 8-10-87, § 1; Ord. No. 10-88, § 1, 11-14-88; Ord. of 10-14-91, §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 99-7, § 2, 9-13-99. 
Sec. 6-122. - Incorporation of new amendments, appendices, and editions of state minimum standard codes as approved by the Board of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
    The state minimum standard codes listed in subsections (a) and (b) of section 6-121 refer to the current editions of each code, including any appendix, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs with the approval of its Board, as of January 1, 2017. If the department of community affairs, with the approval of its board, adopts any new edition or appendix, or amends any of the state minimum standard codes listed in subsections (a) and (b) of section 6-121, under the authority granted by O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-21 and 7-2-23, the new edition, appendix, or amendment will automatically become part of the applicable code without any further action required by the governing authority of the City of LaFayette, as if the new edition, appendix, or amendment were included in the code as listed in subsections (a) and (b) of section 6-121. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 2, 7-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-04, § 2, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 8-10-87, § 2. 
Sec. 6-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-04, § 3, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed § 6-123, which pertained to Standard Unsafe Building Code and derived from Ord. of 8-10-87, § 3. 
Sec. 6-124. - Schedule of fees. 
    Applicable fees for permits, inspections, and any other services rendered by the city's codes enforcement department may be determined from time to time by the city's governing body. The fees, as determined by the city's governing body, must be set forth in a unified schedule. The schedule may be published by the city's codes enforcement and engineering department. An official copy of the schedule of building permit fees must also be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 4, 7-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-04, § 4, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 8-10-87, § 4. 
Sec. 6-125. - Enforcing officials. 
(a)  Within the aforesaid codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein, that designated official of the City of Lafayette who has duties corresponding to those of such named official in said code shall be deemed to be the official authorized and responsible for enforcing the provisions of said code. 
(b)  Services on the City of LaFayette distribution system are under the exclusive purview of the codes enforcement officer who will direct all matters relating thereto. Responsibility for services installation will be the owner's expense under the direction of the codes enforcement officer. For the purpose of this subsection, services are defined as that portion of an electrical connection to a structure extending from the transformer to the ground rod and including the service drop, mast head, mast, meter, meter base, first disconnect, ground wire, ground rod and all wiring and connections thereto and therein. 
(Ord. of 8-10-87, § 5; Ord. No. 17-04, § 5, 7-18-2017) 
Sec. 6-126. - Violations, noncompliance; penalty; additional remedies. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall breach a provision of any of the aforesaid codes, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, or who shall erect, construct, alter, demolish or move any structure, or has erected, constructed, altered, repaired, moved or demolished a building or structure in violation of any of the aforesaid codes, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Each such person, firm, corporation or agent shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of the aforesaid codes is committed or continued, and in addition to any and all other penalties which may be imposed, each violation shall be punishable by the recorder's court, City of Lafayette, which may impose a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each violation. 
(b)  Whenever a violation of this article is not corrected within ten (10) days after notice thereof, the building official shall, in addition to other remedies, be empowered to discontinue municipal services and any public utility service which is provided by the City of Lafayette to the violating premises until such violation is corrected. 
(Ord. of 8-10-87, § 6) 
Sec. 6-127. - Administration and enforcement generally. 
    All provisions for hearings, appeals from decisions of the building official and any other provisions and procedures necessary to the proper administration and enforcement of the aforesaid codes and this article shall be as set forth in said codes, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 8-10-87, § 7) 
Sec. 6-128. - Code compliance inspection. 
    A code compliance inspection is required to meet current requirements of the mandatory Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes and Optional Codes as adopted by the City of LaFayette, Georgia, upon the occurrence of one (1) of the following: 
(1)  Sale or conveyance of the subject property; 
(2)  Electricity to subject property has been turned off for a continuous twelve-month period; 
(3)  Finding of a code violation by the electric or codes department; 
(4)  Finding of a code violation under the existing building code; 
(5)  Finding of a violation under the property maintenance code; 
(6)  Following any fire; 
(7)  Upon a change of occupancy (use); or 
(8)  Finding a manifestly unsafe condition. 
(Ord. of 08/2, § 1, 1-14-2008; Ord. No. 17-04, § 6, 7-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08/2, § 1, adopted Jan. 14, 2008, repealed the former § 6-128, and enacted a new § 6-128 as set out herein. The former § 6-128 pertained to electrical services to be upgraded, when and derived from Ord. of 10-88, § 2, 11-14-88; Ord. No. 99-7, § 3, 9-13-99; Ord. No. 07/4, § 1, 7-9-2007. 
Sec. 6-129. - Licenses required for electrical work; inspections. 
(a)  All persons, firms or corporations contracting or doing electrical work within the City of Lafayette must possess a current Georgia electrical license and a current electrical contractor business license issued by the city. 
(b)  Inspections conducted by authorized inspectors of the city under this article shall be prepared in triplicate and distributed as follows: 
Original: Property owner or representative thereof Copy one: Inspecting office's file Copy two: As directed by law or the city manager for the City of Lafayette.    
(Ord. No. 10-88, § 3, 11-14-88) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 6-128. 
Sec. 6-130. - Statutory requirements for self-inspection not applicable. 
    The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), pertaining to the self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, are not applicable within the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-04, § 7, 7-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-04, § 7, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 96-14, § 1, 8-12-96. 
Secs. 6-131-6-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WATER SUPPLY WATERSHEDS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-1, §§ I-VII, adopted Jan. 8, 2001 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as §§ 6-151-6-156 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-151. - Purpose. 
    In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of the public drinking water be assured. The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted development. Land disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated and expensive and rendering waters unusable for recreation. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport, and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby public drinking water supplies. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply of the city; to minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply; and to maintain the yield of the water supply watershed. This article shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds in the city. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § I, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 6-152. - Definitions. 
    Buffer means a natural or enhanced vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed. 
    Corridor means all land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setback areas specified in section 21-164 of this article. 
    Impervious surface means a manmade structure or surface that prevents infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
    Large water supply watershed means a watershed equal to or greater than one hundred (100) square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
    Perennial stream means a stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on a USGS quad map. 
    Reservoir boundary means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
    Small water supply watershed means a watershed that contains less than one hundred (100) square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
    Utility means public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
    Water supply reservoir means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing drinking water to one (1) or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U. S. Army Corp of Engineers. 
    Water supply watershed means the area upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water intake. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § II, 1-8-2001; Ord. No. 01-6, § I, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 6-153. - Establishment of a water supply watershed district. 
    The Dry Creek Water Supply Watershed District is hereby designated and shall comprise the land that drains to the city public water supply intake. The boundary of the overlay is defined by the ridgeline of the watershed and the boundary of a radius of seven (7) miles upstream of the public water supply intake or reservoir. This overlay shall be further delineated and defined on the Water Supply Watershed Protection District Overlay Map of the city LaFayette ("map"). The map is hereby incorporated into and made part of this article by reference. 
    The following water supply watershed district is hereby defined and the boundary shall be identified on the map. 
Dry Creek is a small water supply watershed. An intake for the city is located on this creek. This water supply watershed does not contain a reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § III, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 6-154. - Protection criteria. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the Dry Creek water supply watershed identified on the map as a small water supply watershed. 
(1)  The corridors of all perennial streams within a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria. 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred (100) feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a one hundred fifty-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the one hundred fifty-foot setback area as described in subsection (1)b. above. 
(2)  The corridors of all perennial streams outside a seven-mile radius upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake or water supply reservoir must be protected by the following criteria. 
a.  A buffer shall be maintained for a distance of fifty (50) feet on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
b.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a seventy-five-foot setback area on both sides of the stream as measured from the stream banks. 
c.  Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the seventy-five-foot setback area as described in subsection (2)b. above. 
(3)  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
(4)  New facilities which handle hazardous material of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds on any one (1) day or more shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements or the requirements of the Standard Fire Prevention Code. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § IV, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 6-155. - Exemptions. 
    The following uses shall be exempted: 
(1)  Land uses existing prior to the adoption of this article. 
(2)  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
(3)  Utilities from the stream corridor buffer and setback area provisions in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the buffer or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside of these areas: 
a.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank as reasonably possible. 
b.  The installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
c.  The utilities shall not impair the quality of the drinking water system. 
(4)  Specific forestry and agricultural activities in the stream corridor buffer and setback areas in accordance with the following conditions: 
a.  The activity shall be consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
b.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water system. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § V, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 6-156. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The city building official shall review all building permits and site construction plans to insure full compliance with the requirements of this article. All administrative procedures as outlined in the City of Lafayette Zoning Ordinance as amended and as applicable, will be followed, and are incorporated herein by reference. 
(b)  Any person who attempts to construct or constructs a facility, or disturbs land as covered by this article without first having obtained the necessary permits as required by the city shall be deemed in violation of this article. Any responsible party or person convicted by a court of person guilty of violation of the ordinance on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
(c)  If any building, facility, and/or land disturbance is initiated without first obtaining the required permits, the city, in addition to any other remedies may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction/activity. Each and every day such unlawful construction/activity continues will be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 01-1, § VI, 1-8-2001) 
Secs. 6-157-6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-04, §§ I-VI, adopted Mar. 12, 2001 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as §§ 6-181-6-186 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-181. - Purpose. 
    In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic, climate within the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the city and the surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
    Groundwater resources are; contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rack beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04, § I, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-182. - Definitions. 
    Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
    Drastic means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-97-035. 
    Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other human activities in the recharge area. 
    Pollution susceptibility map means the relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia) 
    Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
    Significant recharge areas means those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition). 
(Ord. No. 2001-04, § II, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-183. - Establishment of the groundwater recharge area protection district. 
    The groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of Lafayette, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
    Determination of Pollution Susceptibility: Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based an the Georgia Pollution & Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04, § III, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-184. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the building official or his designee first approves the proposed septic rank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual), and subsections (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum, lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drainfield systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums. set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. 
(1)  One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility areas; 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; 
(3)  One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  New agricultural waste impoundment sizes shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifteen (15) acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifty (50) acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10-7cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resource and Conservation Service. 
(e)  New above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons. shall have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
(f)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one (1) day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(g)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04, § IV, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-185. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in subsections 21-184(b) and (c) of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04, § V, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-186. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the Groundwater Recharge Area District shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1" = 50' with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any groundwater recharge district boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions, and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of two hundred (200) feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within two hundred (200) feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two (2) feet, and no greater than one (1) foot for slopes less than or equal to two (2) percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official or his designee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemption to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments am exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five (5) parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the building official or his designee and will be reviewed within fifteen (15) days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and groundwater recharge area district boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the building official or designee. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the building official or his designee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the building official or his designee. If the review process is not completed within thirty (30) days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the building official or designee may be appealed to the mayor and council for the city. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall automatically expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall automatically expire twelve (12) months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building official or his designee. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building official or his designee. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the building official or his designee. 
(3)  If the building official or his designee discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the mayor and council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The building official or his designee may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the, permit. The building official or his designee shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the groundwater recharge area district is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city, concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, the mayor and council or its designee may, within the time specified by the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an casement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the mayor and council. 
(i)  Amendments. These regulations and the groundwater recharge area district may from time to time be amended in accordance with procedures and requirements in the general statutes and as new information becomes available. 
(j)  Separability and abrogation. All sections and subsections of this article are considered separate and distinct. Should any section, subsection, paragraph or part of this article be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid for any reason, it shall not invalidate any other section, subsection, paragraph, or part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2001-04, § VI, 3-12-2001) 
Secs. 6-187-21-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WETLANDS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2001-05, §§ I-VII, adopted Mar. 12, 2001 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as §§ 6-211-6-217 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-211. - Purpose. 
    The wetlands in their indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education: scientific study, and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the state. 
    Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote wetlands protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational, and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § I, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-212. - Definitions. 
    Generalized wetlands map means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for the City of Lafayette, Georgia. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Jurisdictional wetland determination means a delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1344, as amended. 
    Regulated activity means an activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § II, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-213. - Establishment of the wetlands protection district. 
    The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands; within the jurisdiction of the city that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
    The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the city, and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § III, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-214. - Protection criteria. 
    Requirement for local permit or permission: No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the city. If the area proposed for development is located within fifty (50) feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the building official or his designee using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 Permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § IV, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-215. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be allowed as of right within the wetlands protection district, to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 Permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding, and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed, and that approved Agricultural Best Management Practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research, and nature trails. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § V, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-216. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district. 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants; 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills; 
(3)  Additional prohibited uses as from time to time determined by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § VI, 3-12-2001) 
Sec. 6-217. - Administration and enforcement procedures. 
(a)  Site plans. Application for a local development permit within the wetlands protection district shall include a site plan, drawn at a scale of 1" = 50' with the following information: 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions, and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of two hundred (200) feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within two hundred (200) feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two (2) feet, and no greater than one (1) foot for slopes less than or equal to two (2) percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(b)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of storm water runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the building official or his designee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(c)  Exemption to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans. 
(1)  Single-family detached homes constructed within a subdivision of fewer than five (5) parcels. 
(2)  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
(3)  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(d)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the building official or his designee and will be reviewed within fifteen (15) days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee as specified by the city. Filing fees up to the larger of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre may be required to evaluate the application. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation, and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the building official or designee. The review period shall include the preparation of findings (approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval) by the building official or his designee. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the building official or his designee. If the review process is not completed within thirty (30) days, the application is considered to be approved. Decisions of the building official or designee may be appealed to the mayor and council for the city. 
(e)  Duration of permit validity. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall automatically expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall automatically expire twelve (12) months after the date that work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building official or his designee. 
(f)  Penalties. 
(1)  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the building official or his designee. 
(2)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the building official or his designee. 
(3)  If the building official or his designee discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the mayor and council shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the landowner. 
(g)  Suspension, revocation. The building official or his designee may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the, permit. The building official or his designee shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the area where the wetland is located. 
(h)  Judicial review. 
(1)  Jurisdiction. All final decisions of the city, concerning denial, approval or conditional approval of a permit shall be reviewable in the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
(2)  Alternative actions. Based on these proceedings and the decision of the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, the mayor and council or its designee may, within the time specified by the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia elect to: 
a.  Institute negotiated purchase or condemnation proceedings to acquire an casement or fee interest in the applicant's land; 
b.  Approve the permit application with lesser restrictions or conditions (i.e., grant a variance); or 
c.  Institute other appropriate actions ordered by the court that fall within the jurisdiction of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2001-05, § VII, 3-12-2001) 
ARTICLE XI. - BLIGHTED AND DERELICT PROPERTY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-03, §§ 1-11, adopted Feb. 12, 2018, amended Art. XI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. XI, §§ 6-218, 6-219, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 02-17, § 1, 12-9-2002; Ord. No. 02-18, § 1, 12-9-2002. 

Sec. 6-218. - Short title. 
    This article is known as the "Blighted and Derelict Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-219. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, these terms have the following meanings: 
    Blighted or derelict means any construction, as defined in this section, or property within the city which (i) is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes; (ii) is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; (iii) poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; (iv) is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; (v) is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; (vi) is abandoned; (vii) has graffiti on any exterior wall or facade visible from other private or public property; (viii) has wooden boards, plywood, other wood based material, or any other non-transparent material covering any window or door; (ix) has visible exterior deterioration, including, but not limited to, faded, chipped, or peeling paint, broken, loose or missing siding material, broken, cracked, or otherwise compromised doors, windows, or other openings; or (x) otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    City means the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    City's codes means the standard codes adopted by the city under section 6-121 of this Code. 
    Closing means causing a construction, as defined below, to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    Construction means any building, dwelling, or other structure, or part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "construction" does not mean or include any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
    Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. Title 16, Chapter 13, Article 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
    Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
    Governing authority means the City Council of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    Interested party means: 
(1)  The "owner"; 
(2)  Person or persons in possession of a property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the city or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party does not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded and this interest remains unaffected. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record whether a person, firm, association, or corporation. 
    Property means any real property located within the city, whether improved or unimproved, and includes any unimproved premises on which a construction is sited. 
    Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county, or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning any construction, as defined above, or use of private property within the city. 
    Public officer means the city manager, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he or she delegates such authority. 
    Repair means altering or improving a construction so as to bring it into compliance with the city's codes and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any construction. 
    Resident means any person residing in the city's jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 2, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-220. - Duty of owners of property and constructions thereon. 
    The owner of any construction and any property within the city must construct and maintain such construction and property in conformance with the city's codes and any other laws and ordinances which regulate or prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any construction or of use private property in violation of such codes, laws, or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 3, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-221. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    Any blighted or derelict construction or property within the city constitutes a public nuisance. Any property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including all applicable zoning ordinances, also constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 4, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-222. - Powers of the public officer. 
(a)  In carrying out duties under to this article, the public officer has, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him or her by the charter and other ordinances of the city, the power to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of any construction and private property within the city to determine if the structure and property uses are in violation of this article. Entries onto private property must be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer cannot enter into any occupied construction without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists. 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys. 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he or she deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his or her functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees, or agents as he or she may designate. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the public officer may issue citations for violations of the applicable codes or conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance and seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 5, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-223. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a public official determines that any construction or property constitutes a public nuisance under section 6-221 of this article or a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any construction or property constitutes a public nuisance under section 6-221 of this article, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific construction or property and make a written report of his findings. The public officer may be guided in his or her investigation by documenting conditions, which may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; or 
(7)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any construction or property constitutes a public nuisance under section 6-221 of this article, the public officer will file a complaint in rem in the city's municipal court against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such construction is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such construction or property. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a set date and time. The hearing must be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the service of a complaint filed in the municipal court. The interested parties have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the construction or property constitutes a public nuisance under this article, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the construction can be made at a reasonable cost, which is not more than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the construction as determined from the tax records of the city, in relation to the present value of the construction requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such construction so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the construction in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost, which is not more than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value of the construction as determined from the tax records of the city, in relation to the present value of the construction requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such construction and all debris from the property. 
(d)  For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the construction without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the construction must not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, chapter 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(e)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the construction, the public officer must cause the construction to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within two hundred seventy (270) days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the two hundred seventy (270) days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer must cause to be posted on the main entrance of the construction a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(f)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(g)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(h)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a) of section 6-224 of this article. The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within ninety (90) days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(i)  The amount of the lien shall be collected in the manner as all other ad valorem taxes are collected by the city. 
(j)  The tax commissioner must remit the amount collected to the city. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any amount retained for administration must be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(k)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the construction on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(l)  Review of a municipal court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a construction must be by writ of certioari. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 6, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-224. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons must be conspicuously posted on the construction or property within three (3) business days of filing of the complaint and at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer must mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons must also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the construction or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. 
(b)  The public officer must cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. This affidavit constitutes a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and constitutes sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint must be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing waives all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 7, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-225. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
    It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life, safety, and general welfare of residents and visitors of the city, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property does not guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that the property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees, or agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or later be created. To the extent any federal or state law or regulation requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan, or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees, or agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection does not constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it remains the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 8, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-226. - General cleanliness of premises. 
    The owner and occupant of property within the city is independently responsible for keeping the premises, including any construction thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish, or other offensive materials. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 9, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-227. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 10, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-228. - Violations; enforcement penalties. 
    Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this article will be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, may be punished according to the provisions of Chapter VII, section 7-18 of the city's charter. 
(Ord. No. 18-03, § 11, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 6-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FOR NEW DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-03, adopted Aug. 9, 2010, did not specify manner of inclusion. Hence to facilitate indexing, said provisions have been codified as Ch. 6, Art. XII. 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 21; Subdivisions and land development, App. A, § 29-36(28). 

Sec. 6-230. - Introduction. 
It is hereby determined that: 
    Land development projects and other land use conversions, and their associated changes to land cover, permanently alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, which in turn increase flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
    Land development projects and other land use conversions also contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters; 
    The impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quantity and quality can adversely affect public safety, public and private property, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of lands and waters; 
    These adverse impacts can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff quantity and quality from new development and redevelopment, by the use of both structural facilities as well as nonstructural measures, such as the conservation of open space and greenspace areas. The preservation and protection of natural area and greenspace for stormwater management benefits is encouraged through the use of incentives or "credits." The Georgia Greenspace Program provides a mechanism for the preservation and coordination of those greenspace areas which provide stormwater management quality and quantity benefits; 
    Localities in the State of Georgia are required to comply with a number of both state and federal laws, regulations and permits which require a locality to address the impacts of post-development stormwater runoff quality and nonpoint source pollution and 
    Therefore, the City of LaFayette, Georgia ("city") has established this set of stormwater management policies to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of post-development stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. The city has determined that it is in the public interest to regulate post-development stormwater runoff discharges in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, post-construction soil erosion and sedimentation, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 6-231. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. It has been determined that proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public health, safety, environment and general welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources; 
(2)  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)  Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include greenspace; 
(6)  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety; and 
(7)  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term follow up. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection (b)(2) below. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
a.  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the city's building official to be a hotspot land use; or, 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a and b above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(2)  The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the city manager and/or building official or designee. 
(c)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The city manager or city building official or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(d)  Compatibility with other regulations. This article is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this article are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall control. 
(e)  Severability. If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be adjudged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(f)  Stormwater design manual. The city's code enforcement/engineering department will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and its latest revisions and addendum which automatically become part of this article upon adoption by of the State of Georgia, and any relevant local addenda for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, 8-9-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-03, § 1, subsections 1.1-1.6, have been redesignated as § 6-231, subsections (a)-(f). 
Sec. 6-232. - Definitions. 
    Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
    Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    Conservation easement means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    Developer means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    Development means a land development or land development project. 
    Drainage easement means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. The easement must be formally approved and accepted by the city through city council vote for the city to be responsible for the easement. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
    Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
    Extreme flood protection means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
    Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
    Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. Maintenance of such is the responsibility of the developer, adjacent land owners or the home owners association or like group unless formally accepted by the city through city council vote. 
    Hotspot means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater or concentrated runoffs that damage adjacent properties. 
    Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four (4) runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete or asphalt surface. 
    Industrial stormwater permit means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies onsite pollution control strategies. 
    Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    Land development means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
    Land development activities means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    Land development project means a discrete land development undertaking. 
    Land disturbance means any activity that disturbs the existing soil so as to make the disturbed land less stable and allowing it to be removed from the site by natural occurrences such as moderate to heavy rains or from strong winds. 
    Inspection and maintenance agreement means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
    New development means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    Nonstructural stormwater management practice or nonstructural practice means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    Offsite facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site. 
    Onsite facility means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site. 
    Overbank flood protection means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e. flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through twenty-five-year frequency storm events. 
    Owner means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    Permit means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    Person means, except to the extent exempted from this article, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Post-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
    Pre-development refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
    Project means a land development project. 
    Redevelopment means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
    Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for onsite controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
    Site means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
    Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
    Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
    Stormwater management plan means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this article. 
    Stormwater management system means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    Stormwater runoff means the flow of surface water resulting from precipitation. 
    Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
    Subdivision means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one (1) or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 2, 8-9-2010) 
Sec. 6-233. - Permit procedures and requirements. 
(a)  Permit application requirements. No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
    Unless specifically exempted by this article, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city codes department a permit application on a form provided by said department for that purpose. 
    Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
(1)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with subsection (b) of this section; 
(2)  Stormwater management plan in accordance with subsection (c) of this section; 
(3)  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with subsection (d) of this section, if applicable; 
(4)  Performance bond in accordance with subsection (e) of this section, if applicable; and, 
(5)  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting. Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the applicable departments of the city for a consultation meeting to include a discussion on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting, among other purposes, is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
a.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
b.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
c.  Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
All local watershed plans and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
(c)  Stormwater management plan requirements. The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in section 6-234 below. 
    This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and be prepared under the direct supervisory control of either a registered professional engineer or a registered landscape architect licensed in the State of Georgia. Subsections (c)c. through f. below shall be prepared under the direct supervisory control of a registered professional engineer, who shall seal and sign the work. Portions of the overall plan may be prepared and stamped by a registered land surveyor licensed in the State of Georgia as his license and training allows, such as boundary surveys, contour maps, erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
    The stormwater management plan must ensure that the requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the stormwater design manual. This includes: 
a.  Common address and legal description of site. 
b.  Vicinity map. 
c.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types and land cover of areas for each sub basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by offsite areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
d.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 6-234 of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than fifty (50) percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in section 6-234 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
e.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, which shall include: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in section 6-234; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
f.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual. 
g.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act (or reference to the local erosion and sedimentation control ordinance) or NPDES permit for construction activities. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
h.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
The city will not take responsibility for ongoing maintenance of any private stormwater management facility. Ongoing maintenance must be done as part of a subdivision agreement or as part of owning the business. 
i.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
j.  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. 
k.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an onsite stormwater management facility or practice is formally dedicated to and accepted by the city through a city council vote as provided in subsection (d) below the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an onsite stormwater management facility or practice in accordance subsection (d). 
l.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the city codes department that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Stormwater management inspection and maintenance agreements. Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an onsite stormwater management facility or practice is formally dedicated to and accepted by the city through council vote, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the deed records of Walker County upon final plat approval. 
The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
As part of the inspection and maintenance agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
In addition to enforcing the terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may also enforce all of the provisions for ongoing inspection and maintenance in section 2-236 of this article. 
The city in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement, may at the discretion of the city accept formal dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(e)  Performance and maintenance bonds. The developer/contractor shall provide to the city a performance bond be in an amount equal to the actual cost for the contractor/developer to complete the stormwater management facilities/measures (shown in line item form and attached with bond paperwork) plus twenty (20) percent contingency, and said bond shall remain in full force and effect until the completion of the stormwater management facilities/measures, and the work being approved as complete by the city. No stormwater inspection and maintenance agreement shall be approved until the city manager or city building official or designee has received a legally binding commercial surety bond, letter of credit, or other satisfactory assurance of financial security, in an amount sufficient to provide for the maintenance of all improvements required by this article. The amount of such bond or other assurance of financial security shall be based on reasonable estimate of the cost of routine maintenance, as set forth in the maintenance agreement, based upon prevailing costs of labor, materials and equipment, to perform annual maintenance requirements, as from time to time established by the city. Such evidence of financial security shall remain in force until such time as the city unconditionally accepts dedication of the improvements. 
(f)  Application procedure. 
(1)  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the codes and engineering department of the city. 
(2)  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in subsection (a) of this section (two (2) copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
(3)  The codes and engineering department shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(4)  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of such fact in writing. The applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same, in which event subsection (f)(3) above and this subparagraph shall apply to such resubmittal. 
(5)  Upon a finding by the city that the permit application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the city may issue a permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. BEFORE ANY LAND DISTURBING ACTIVITY, THE BUILDING PERMIT PROCESS MUST BE STARTED AND PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF THE PROJECT GIVEN REGARDING SUPPLY UTILITIES, ZONING, PARKING REGULATIONS AND OTHER APPLICABLE REGULATIONS. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the issuance of the permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan; 
b.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan; 
c.  The city personnel shall be allowed to conduct inspections as necessary of the project; 
d.  No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city manager or his designee and, 
e.  Upon completion of the project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans required by subsection 6-235(b). 
(g)  Application review fees. The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
The application shall be accompanied by twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per plan, with any and all other costs including, but not limited to, filings, recordings, as built drawings, etc. being borne exclusively by the developer. 
(h)  Modifications for offsite facilities. The stormwater management plan for each land development project shall provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an offsite or regional facility. The offsite or regional facility must be located on property legally dedicated for the purpose, must be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by onsite practices and there must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the offsite or regional stormwater facility. In addition, onsite measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the offsite facility. 
A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city which shows the adequacy of the offsite or regional facility. 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the use of an offsite or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
(1)  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; or 
(5)  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 3, 8-9-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-03, § 3, subsections 3.1-3.8, have been redesignated as § 6-233, subsections (a)-(h). 
Sec. 6-234. - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
    The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this article: 
(a)  Water quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
(1)  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
(2)  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; and, 
(3)  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
(b)  Stream channel protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three (3) approaches: 
(1)  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
(2)  Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. 
(3)  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
(c)  Overbank flooding protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four-hour storm under subsection (b) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five-year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
(d)  Extreme flooding protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one hundred-year, twenty-four-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
(e)  Structural stormwater controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(f)  Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures. The use of one (1) or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under subsection (a) of this section. The applicant may, if approved by the city take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
(g)  Drainage system guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public right-of-ways. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the stormwater design manual; 
(2)  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the stormwater design manual; and, 
(3)  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the stormwater design manual. 
(h)  Dam design guidelines. Any land disturbing activity that involves a site which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 4, 8-9-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-03, § 4, subsections 4.1-4.8, have been redesignated as § 6-234, subsections (a)-(h). 
Sec. 6-235. - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
(a)  Inspections to ensure plan compliance during construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the personnel of the city or conducted and certified by a professional engineer who has been approved by the city. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
(1)  The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
(b)  Final inspection and as built plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city authorized personnel is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 5, 8-9-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-03, § 5, subsections 5.1, 5.2, have been redesignated as § 6-235, subsections (a), (b). 
Sec. 6-236. - Ongoing inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities and practices. 
(a)  Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices. Stormwater management facilities and practices included in a stormwater management plan which are subject to an inspection and maintenance agreement must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of the agreement, the plan and this article. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible person in accordance with the approved inspection and maintenance agreement. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail or by an overnight delivery service to the person specified in the inspection and maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the agreement and the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city may correct the violation as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
Inspection programs by the city may be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(b)  Right-of-entry for inspection. The terms of the inspection and maintenance agreement shall provide for the city personnel to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(c)  Records of maintenance activities. Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the codes department of the city. 
(d)  Failure to maintain. If a responsible person fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the inspection and maintenance agreement, the city, after thirty-days' written notice (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four-hours' notice shall be sufficient). The city may bring the responsible party to city court to bring about compliance or assess a fine or may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance requirements by performing the necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition and then assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work which shall be a lien on the property, and may be placed on the ad valorem tax bill for such property and collected in the ordinary manner for such taxes. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 6, 8-9-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-03, § 6, subsections 6.1-6.4, have been redesignated as § 6-236, subsections (a)-(d). 
Sec. 6-237. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
    Any action or inaction which violates the provisions of this article or the requirements of an approved stormwater management plan or permit may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section. Any such action or inaction which is continuous with respect to time is deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. The imposition of any of the penalties described below shall not prevent such equitable relief. 
(a)  Notice of violation. If the city determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a permit, an approved stormwater management plan or the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to such applicant or other responsible person. Where a person is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit therefore, the notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person; 
(2)  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the permit, the stormwater management plan or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and 
(6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city's zoning board of appeals by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days after the notice of violation (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four-hours' notice shall be sufficient). 
(b)  Penalties. In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one (1) or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed. Before taking any of the following actions or imposing any of the following penalties, the city shall first notify the applicant or other responsible person in writing of its intended action, and shall provide a reasonable opportunity, of not less than ten (10) days (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four-hours' notice shall be sufficient) to cure such violation. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to cure such violation after such notice and cure period, the city may take any one (1) or more of the following actions or impose any one (1) or more of the following penalties. 
(1)  Stop work order. The city may issue a stop work order which shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
(2)  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The city may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
(3)  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The city may suspend, revoke or modify the permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated upon such conditions as the city may deem necessary to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
(4)  Civil penalties. In the event the applicant or other responsible person fails to take the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or otherwise fails to cure the violations described therein within ten (10) days, or such greater period as the city shall deem appropriate (except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, twenty-four-hours' notice shall be sufficient) after the city has taken one (1) or more of the actions described above, the city may impose a penalty not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) (depending on the severity of the violation) for each day the violation remains unremedied after receipt of the notice of violation. 
[5]  Criminal penalties. For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the city may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in the city municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for sixty (60) days or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-03, § 7, 8-9-2010) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10-03, § 7, subsections 7.1, 7.2, have been redesignated as § 6-237, subsections (a), (b). 
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; planning, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Dead bodies, OCGA Title 31, Ch. 21; city as trustee of cemetery funds, property, OCGA §§ 36-37-4, 36-37-5; cemeteries generally, OCGA § 44-3-130 et seq. 

Sec. 7-1. - Sale of lots; receipt; deed. 
    The selling of lots in the city-owned cemeteries shall be done by the city clerk, who shall make out and deliver a deed to the purchaser upon receipt of the purchase money; all deeds shall be signed by the mayor and the city clerk, upon behalf of the city. All deeds shall contain the stipulation that they are issued pursuant to this chapter and are subject to the terms hereof. 
(Code 1975, § 13-10) 
Sec. 7-2. - Price of cemetery lots to residents, to nonresidents; cost of opening and closing graves. 
(a)  The city shall sell cemetery lots to its residents for two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per grave site. The city shall sell cemetery lots for four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) to nonresidents. 
(b)  The charge for opening and closing a grave in the city owned cemeteries from Monday through Friday shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for residents and four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for nonresidents. 
(c)  The charge for opening and closing a grave in the city owned cemeteries on Saturdays and/or Sundays shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for residents and nine hundred dollars ($900.00) for nonresidents. 
(d)  For purposes of this article, nonresident(s) shall include persons who do not physically live within the municipal boundaries of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
(Code 1975, § 13-11; Mo. of 3-14-77; Ord. No. 93-1, § 1, 4-12-93; Ord. No. 00/13, § 1, 10-9-2000) 
Sec. 7-3. - Certain vehicles in cemeteries; prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any automobile, truck, dray, wagon, taxicab or other business vehicle to enter or pass through the city-owned cemeteries except when such vehicles are actually engaged in delivering or receiving materials, articles or passengers in such cemeteries. 
(Code 1975, § 13-12) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 7-4. - Funeral processions. 
    Funeral processions, upon entering a city cemetery, shall be under the control and subject to the direction of the sexton. Automobiles or other vehicles shall not be allowed to proceed at a greater speed than ten (10) miles per hour when within the cemetery enclosure. Such vehicles shall not turn around in the driveways but must continue to the next street intersection before turning. All vehicles shall remain at all times within the confines of the established driveways. 
(Code 1975, § 13-13) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 7-5. - Enclosures prohibited. 
    No fences, walls, copings or other enclosure shall be placed upon or around any private burial lot in any cemetery owned by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 13-14) 
Sec. 7-6. - Permit required for improvements. 
    The erection of all monuments and the planting of flowers, shrubs or any other effort to improve or beautify any lot within the cemetery shall be done only after the plans for such work shall have been submitted to the proper city authority, approved thereby and a permit issued therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 13-15) 
Chapter 8 - CIVIL DEFENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; flood damage prevention, Ch. 11; police, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Emergency management, OCGA Title 38, Ch. 3. 

Sec. 8-1. - Definition. 
    As used in this chapter the term "emergency management" shall include measures necessary to provide for the mobilization, organization, and direction of civilian populace and necessary support agencies to prevent or minimize the effect of fire, flood, storm, earthquake and epidemic as well as the effects of enemy or subversive activities directed against the populace, communities, industrial plants, facilities and other installations. 
(Code 1975, § 24-10; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 8-2. - Council of defense-Created, composition. 
    The council of defense is hereby created and shall include the following: 
Mayor; 
Director of emergency management (as appointed); 
Police chief; 
Fire chief; 
County or city welfare officer; 
American Red Cross representative; 
Others including representatives of business, labor, civic and patriotic organizations as appointed by the council. 
(Code 1975, § 24-11; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 8-3. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the council of defense and it is hereby empowered: 
(1)  To develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. 
(2)  To prepare and recommend for consideration by the governing body ordinances necessary to implement the emergency management plan. 
(3)  To consider and recommend to the city council for approval mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(Code 1975, § 24-12; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 8-4. - Emergency management director; office created, appointment, powers and duties. 
(a)  It is hereby created the office of the emergency management director. Such officer shall be appointed by the mayor. 
(b)  The emergency management director is hereby appointed: 
(1)  To represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)  To require and direct cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans. 
(3)  During periods of emergency to direct the services of any city officers or employees. 
(4)  During periods of emergency to obtain vital supplies and equipment needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the cost of such supplies and equipment. 
(c)  The emergency management director, created under subsection (a), shall possess and maintain the following minimum qualifications: 
(1)  The director shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(2)  The director shall not have been convicted of a felony. The mayor, upon nomination of the director, will furnish the director of emergency management two (2) sets of fingerprints of the nominee. The director of emergency management shall forward fingerprints received concerning each nominee to the Georgia Crime Information Center of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation for the purpose of criminal identification through the fingerprint system of identification established by the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and the fingerprint system of identification established by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The Georgia Crime Information Center shall report the findings of its records search and the records search of the Federal Bureau of Investigation to the director of emergency management; 
(3)  The director shall have completed a high school education or its equivalent and shall have successfully completed all initial courses required by the director of emergency management within one hundred and eighty (180) days following the date of nomination to office or within an extended period as determined by the director of emergency management and shall have successfully completed subsequent courses required by the director of emergency management within an appropriate period as determined by the director of emergency management; 
(4)  The director shall be capable of writing plans for responding to and recovering from disasters in his jurisdiction and shall be routinely available to respond to emergency scenes, command posts, or operation centers; to coordinate emergency response of public and private agencies and organizations; to attend training; and to attend meetings convened by the appointing authority or the director of emergency management; and 
(5)  The director shall not be self-employed or have any other occupation in the private sector which conflicts with his duties as local director. 
(d)  (1)  If the director, appointed pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (a) of this subsection, is a part-time director, he shall meet the minimum qualifications in subparagraphs (1) through (4) of paragraph (c) of this subsection. If such director is employed under a forty (40) to ninety (90) percent (time required on job) work contract, he shall be required to devote at least eighty (80) hours per month on emergency management matters but not more than thirty (30) hours in any one (1) week during normal business hours of other county offices. If such director is employed under a twenty-five (25) to thirty-nine (39) percent (time required on job) work contract, he shall be required to devote at least forty (40) hours per month on emergency matters but not more than fifteen (15) hours in any one (1) week during normal business hours of other county offices. 
(2)  If the part-time paid director is also a part-time paid employee of the federal or state government, he must have written authorization from the appropriate appointing authority to hold the position of director and to comply with the provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph and subparagraph (4) of paragraph (c) of this subsection. 
(3)  If the part-time paid director is also a part-time paid employee of the county or the municipal government in another capacity, the "city" will enact an ordinance specifying that such director will be permitted to comply with the provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph and subparagraph (4) of paragraph (c) of this subsection. The ordinance will also specify that the individual, when acting as director, will relinquish authorities and responsibilities associated with his other governmental employment and will name a person to assume those authorities and responsibilities until such time as the director shall cease to function as director. The "city" may neither seek nor receive any reimbursement for the part-time director's salary if such director is employed and compensated by the county or municipality in another capacity. 
(4)  If the part-time paid director is also a part-time paid employee in the private sector, he shall have a letter from his employer stating that he shall, without penalty, be permitted to comply with the provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph and subparagraph (4) of paragraph (c) of this subsection. 
(5)  If the part-time director is self-employed, he shall certify, by letter, that his schedule will permit him to comply with the provisions of subparagraph (1) of this paragraph and subparagraph (4) of paragraph (c) of this subsection. 
(6)  Except as provided in this subparagraph, any director or deputy director of the "city's" emergency management organization appointed after July 1, 1999, shall be a certified emergency manager under the Georgia Emergency Management Agency's Certified Emergency Manager Program. The curriculum of the certified emergency manager program and requirements for certification shall be determined by the director of emergency management and shall include, but not be limited to, professional development series training, independent study courses, emergency preparedness courses, and field-delivered courses. Certification may be obtained by an appointed director or deputy director within six (6) months of his or her appointment. Certification shall expire biennially. As a condition of certification renewal, such emergency management personnel shall be required to satisfactorily complete continuing education requirements provided for in subparagraph (7) of this paragraph. 
(7)  The "city's" emergency management personnel, certified under the certified emergency manager program, shall complete annually a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours of continuing education to maintain certification. The continuing education shall include programs and courses sponsored or approved by the director of emergency management. 
(e)  If the director position is filled by a volunteer director, the "city" will furnish assistance to enable the volunteer director to effectively carry out his duties. 
(f)  The "city" will designate an office in a building owned or leased by the "city" as the office of emergency management. Such office of emergency management will have appropriate equipment and supplies, including but not limited to telephone and communication equipment, connections to the "911" system if available, desks, typewriters, file cabinets, and necessary office supplies. No such equipment shall be used for personal business. The director will post on the front door of the office the schedule of hours of the work week in which he will be attending to emergency management matters. Citizens of the "city" shall have accessibility to the office of emergency management and the director or his designee shall be available or on call at all times beyond working hours. 
(g)  To the extent that the "city" is reimbursed in part or in full by the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for salaries paid to its local director, said director will also meet all requirements which may be imposed by the federal emergency management agency or its successor. 
(h)  If the director no longer meets the qualifications or complies with the requirements of this subsection is subject to removal by the director of emergency management. In the event that the director is removed pursuant to this paragraph, the mayor shall nominate another director. 
(Code 1975, § 24-13; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 7-8-2002; Ord. No. 02-09, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 8-5. - Emergency management corps-Composition. 
    Officers and employees of the city, with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law shall be charged with duties necessary for the protection of the life and property in the city and during such an emergency shall constitute the emergency management corps. 
(Code 1975, § 24-14; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 8-6. - Same-Divisions. 
    The functions and duties of the emergency management corps shall be distributed among the divisions as listed below. Each division to be under the direction of a chief and deputy chief appointed by the council of defense. The chief of division will include public officials such as sheriffs, chiefs of police and fire departments, and heads of agencies dealing with transportation, communications, and other sundry services as well as private businessmen who through their profession, knowledge and experience are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized knowledge and experience. The divisions are established as follows: 
    Law enforcement division; 
    Fire service division; 
    Transportation division; 
    Medical and health division; 
    Communications division; 
    Welfare division; 
    Information and education division. 
(Code 1975, § 24-15; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 8-7. - Volunteers. 
    All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering in service pursuant to this chapter shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as persons and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
(Code 1975, § 24-16) 
Sec. 8-8. - Unlawful acts during emergencies. 
    It shall be an offense punishable by the recorder's court, for any person during an emergency: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management corps, and enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  To wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the council of defense. 
(Code 1975, § 24-17; Ord. No. 02-08, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Chapter 9 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Recorder's court, Ch. 7. 
Cross reference- General penalty, § 1-17; administration, Ch. 2; police, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. VI, Sec. 1, Para. I; municipal courts generally, OCGA Title 36, Ch. 32. 

Sec. 9-1. - Sessions. 
(a)  All sessions of the recorder's court of the city shall be convened at the city hall. 
(b)  A regular session of the municipal court shall be held once each month at a fixed hour of a fixed day as may be determined and scheduled by the judge, provided such session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court and no cases ready for trial. No change in the fixed hour or fixed day or both shall take effect any sooner than sixty (60) days from the date of the change by the judge. 
(c)  The municipal court may hold special sessions of court when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary in order to keep the docket current. The necessity shall be presumed from the fact of such a special session being held. 
(Code 1975, § 33-10; Ord. of 11-13-78; Ord. No. 08-10, §§ 1, 2, 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 9-2. - Compensation of recorder. 
    The recorder shall be paid one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each regular session of court held in any calendar month; provided, however, that the maximum salary of the recorder for holding regular sessions of the recorder's court shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) per calendar month. The recorder shall not be paid any other or additional compensation for holding special terms of the recorder's court. 
(Ord. of 11-13-78) 
Sec. 9-3. - Service by mayor as recorder; compensation. 
    As provided for in the Charter of the city, in the absence or disability of the recorder or during any vacancy of the office of recorder, the mayor shall serve as recorder, shall be clothed with all of the rights, powers and privileges of the recorder, and shall perform the duties of the office of recorder so long as such absence, disability or vacancy shall continue. The mayor shall be paid the additional sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each regular session of the recorder's court over which the mayor presides in any calendar month, but not to exceed the total of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month. If the mayor holds any special sessions of the recorder's court he shall not be paid any additional compensation for holding such special sessions. 
(Ord. of 11-13-78) 
Sec. 9-4. - Table of standard fines. 
    The recorder may, for the purpose of promoting uniform sentencing for violations of this Code or other city ordinances, create a table of offenses and corresponding standard penalties and punishments, which he may use as a guide in passing sentences and imposing fines. 
(Code 1975, § 31-11) 
Sec. 9-5. - Technology surcharge. 
    There shall be imposed by the municipal court a technology surcharge in the amount of twelve dollars ($12.00) per offense for all offenses except O.C.G.A. §§ 40-8-76 and 40-8-76.1, said technology surcharge to be in addition to all other fines, fees, and surcharges imposed by the municipal court. All revenue derived from the technology surcharge shall be utilized by the city to provide technology support for the police department and municipal court functions. 
(Ord. No. 07-5, § 1, 7-11-2007) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; burning, § 12-16 et seq.; police, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for fire protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(1); fire protection and safety, OCGA Title 25. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Local fire departments generally, OCGA Title 25, Ch. 3. 

Sec. 10-16. - Powers and duties of fire chief. 
(a)  The fire chief shall establish rules and regulations for the general operation of the fire department which, upon approval of the city council, shall be obeyed by all members of the department. 
(b)  The fire chief may make provisions in the rules and regulations for the use of volunteers in the fire department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the fire chief to visit the firehouse once in every twenty-four (24) hours and see that the house, apparatus and equipment are in proper condition and that all rules and regulations established for the department are being carried out. 
(Code 1975, §§ 20-10, 20-11) 
Sec. 10-17. - Suspension of fire department members. 
(a)  The fire chief shall have authority to suspend any member of the fire department who violates any rule or regulation issued pursuant to section 10-16 or who fails to pass any inspection made pursuant to section 10-16. 
(b)  The fire chief shall report such suspension immediately to the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 20-12) 
Sec. 10-18. - Fire or fire alarms, presence of fire department required. 
    The chief of the fire department or other officer of the department designated by the chief shall be present at all fires or alarms and fully equipped. 
(Code 1975, § 20-13) 
Sec. 10-19. - Firemen in private vehicles, traffic regulations, lights on vehicles. 
    All personnel of the fire department in proceeding to perform their duties as members of the fire department in their private vehicles shall obey all traffic laws and ordinances; however, all firemen shall be allowed to have and display on their privately owned vehicles red lights so as to enable them to proceed with dispatch in performing their duty. 
(Code 1975, § 20-14) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 10-20. - Chief and officers vested with police powers. 
    The chief and other officers of the fire department are hereby vested with the powers of police officers and are authorized to make arrests within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 20-15) 
Sec. 10-21. - Fire chief and officials to cooperate with state commissioner. 
    The fire chief together with all other city officials, department heads, and employees shall lend their cooperation to the state safety fire commissioner, state fire marshal, and his deputies or assistants, whenever called upon by them in the enforcement of the state safety fire law, and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1975, § 20-16) 
Sec. 10-22. - Electric wires, authority to cut. 
    The chief of the fire department or other authority acting under him is hereby authorized to cut any electric wire which they shall deem necessary to cut on the occurrence of any fire, without expense to the city for so doing; provided that nothing herein contained shall imply that the city authorizes any person to undertake the risk of cutting wires or renders itself liable for any injury to the person so doing. 
(Code 1975, § 20-17) 
Cross reference- Electrical code, § 6-71 et seq. 
Sec. 10-23. - Fire hydrant examination and subsequent report and repairs. 
    The chief of the fire department shall be responsible for an examination of all fire hydrants in the city, such examination to be made at least every six (6) months, and shall file a report concerning the condition of the fire hydrants with the city manager. However, if any fire hydrant is in need of immediate repair, he shall immediately notify the city manager who shall take immediate action to have the fire hydrant repaired. 
(Code 1975, § 20-18) 
Sec. 10-24. - Obstructing fire hydrants and cisterns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally or not, to obstruct any cistern or fire hydrant in a manner which prevents access by the fire department and its equipment. No person shall put any installation of any nature whatsoever nearer than eighteen (18) inches to any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 21-10) 
Sec. 10-25. - Obstructing fire house. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or knowingly to put any trash or obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any engine house or hook and ladder house or place where fire department equipment is located. 
(Code 1975, § 21-11) 
Sec. 10-26. - Persons allowed in vicinity of fire; unlawful to disobey fireman in charge. 
(a)  No person, except firemen, members of the city council, members of the police department, the owners of the property on fire, their agents, and the agents of insurance companies, shall be allowed within two hundred (200) feet of any fire without being ordered there by the fire chief or officer of the fire department in charge at the time. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief or other fireman in charge at a fire. 
(Code 1975, § 21-12) 
Sec. 10-27. - Right-of-way of apparatus. 
    The fire department, including its apparatus, when going to a fire in the city or returning therefrom, shall have the right-of-way over the streets, lanes and ways of the city to the exclusion of all other persons and over all vehicles and railroad trains of every kind, except vehicles carrying United States mail. 
(Code 1975, § 21-13) 
Sec. 10-28. - Obstructing fire apparatus, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct in any manner any fire apparatus or any of the officers or members of the fire department while in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1975, § 21-14) 
Secs. 10-29-10-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt fire codes, OCGA § 25-3-4. 

Sec. 10-41. - Adopted. 
    For the purpose of prescribing regulations designed to control conditions which produce hazards to life and property from fire or explosion, the Standard Fire Prevention Code, 1985 edition, as amended, published by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of the laws of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 21-20) 
Chapter 11 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 07/6, Arts. 1-6, adopted Aug. 14, 2007 amended by deleting in its entirety Ch. 11, §§ 11-1-11-10, 11-16-11-19, 11-26-11-30 and enacted a new Ch. 11 as set out herein. The former Ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; civil defense, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of LaFayette, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of LaFayette, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, and; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(d)  Objectives. The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 1, §§ A-D, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building official or city engineer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one (1) to three (3) feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 11-3. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before February 9, 1987 [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 9, 1987 [i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this chapter, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after February 9, 1987 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [* i.e., the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after February 9, 1987. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 6, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-3. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of LaFayette, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § A, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-4. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), with an effective date of September 5, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
    For those land areas acquired by the City of LaFayette through annexation, the current effective FIS with an effective date of September 5, 2007 hereinafter, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Walker County are hereby adopted by reference. 
    Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
    The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the City of LaFayette Codes and Engineering Department. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § B, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-5. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § C, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-6. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § D, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-7. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § E, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-8. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § F, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-9. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of LaFayette, Georgia or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § G, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-10. - Penalties for violation. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of LaFayette, Georgia from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 2, § H, 8-14-2007) 
Secs. 11-11-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 11-16. - Designation of ordinance/chapter administrator. 
    The City of LaFayette Building Official or City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 3, § A, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-17. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official or engineer on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
    Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of subsection 11-27(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The building official or city engineer shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 3, § B, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-18. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the building official or city engineer shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 11-3, then the building official or city engineer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 11-17(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with subsection 11-17(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building official or city engineer shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 11-17(1)c and 11-27(2) or subsection 11-29(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official or city engineer shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the building official or city engineer and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 3, § C, 8-14-2007) 
Secs. 11-19-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 11-26. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings-All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade; and, 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 4, § A, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-27. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 11-26(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one (1) foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 11-18(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one (1) foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. subsection 11-26(6) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a, c, above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-3, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. 
    Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article III. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 4, § B, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-28. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-3, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 11-3, then the building official or city engineer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of article III. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one (1) foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 11-26(4) "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three (3) feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
    The building official or city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 4, § C, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-29. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-3, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet (3) above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 11-26(4), "elevated buildings". 
    The building official or city engineer shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one (1) foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 11-17(1)c and 11-17(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 4, § D, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-30. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 4, § E, 8-14-2007) 
Sec. 11-31. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the one hundred-year floodplain or the five hundred-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the five hundred-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 4, § F, 8-14-2007) 
Secs. 11-32-11-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 11-45. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board of zoning appeals as established by the City of LaFayette shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official or city engineer in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of zoning appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Walker County Georgia, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board of zoning appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building official or city engineer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the board of zoning appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07/6, Art. 5, 8-14-2007) 
Chapter 12 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, adopted Apr. 9, 2018, repealed former Art. I, §§ 12-1-12-12, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. Former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1975, §§ 37-10-37-13, 37-20-37-26; Ord. No. 00-9, § 1, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 04-16, § 1, 12-13-2004. 

Sec. 12-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of LaFayette, to protect against the degradation of the aesthetics of real property within the city, and to prevent the pollution of the city's land, waters, and air. In furtherance of this purpose, this article sets forth the city's expectations for the care and maintenance of real property within the city. This legislation is necessary to control and reduce the pollution of the land, water, and atmosphere of the city and to prevent the degradation of the quality of life and value of property within the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 12-2. - Definitions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, the below terms are defined as follows: 
(1)  Dwelling means any building or structure, including a mobile home, having a roof supported by columns or by walls and which is designed for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind and designed or used for residential occupancy by one (1) or more families or individuals. 
(2)  Junk means old or discarded articles that are useless or of little to no value in their present state, including, but not limited to, any unused or unusable: 
a.  Glass, plastics, or metals; 
b.  Building materials not located on a building site subject to a valid city issued building permit; 
c.  Carpet, rugs, or any other interior flooring coverings; 
d.  Motor vehicle components or parts, including tires and wheels; 
e.  Lawnmowers, weed eaters, chainsaws, leaf blowers, and other yard equipment; 
f.  Home appliances, whether minor or major, including, but not limited to, air conditioners, dishwashers, clothes dryers, washing machines, ovens and stoves, microwave ovens, induction cookers, refrigerators, or freezers; 
g.  Household electrical devices, including, but not limited to, computers, monitors, televisions, and stereo equipment; and 
h.  Child outdoor play toys or play houses. 
(3)  Occupant means any person or persons who lease property from an owner as defined in this section or otherwise are in possession of real property. 
(4)  Owner means a person, as defined in this section, holding the title to real property in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(5)  Person means an individual human being, firm, association, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or any other legally recognized entity. 
(6)  Real property means land and any improvements attached to it and includes any developed lot or parcel of land occupied by any dwelling or place of business as well as all undeveloped land. 
(7)  Refuse means garbage, rubbish, leaves, brush, and refuse as those terms are generally defined except that dead animals and fowl, body wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks, and similar materials are expressly excluded therefrom and shall not be stored therewith. 
(8)  Refuse container means a strong, durable, rodent and insect proof container made of plastic, metal, or like material, having a capacity of not less than twenty (20) nor more than thirty-two (32) gallons, except that this maximum capacity does not apply to larger containers which the city handles mechanically. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 12-3. - Duties of owners and occupiers of real property. 
(a)  All real property must be maintained by its owner or occupant in a clean and sanitary condition and must be kept clear of all junk, refuse, standing water which may lead to the breeding of mosquitos, and any other noxious material of any kind. 
(1)  The following are illustrative examples of potential violations of this subsection: 

(b)  All landscaped or lawn areas of real property containing any grass, weeds, shrubs, plants, trees, or other vegetation must be maintained by its owner or occupant in such a condition that the maximum height of any grass or weeds does not exceed twelve (12) inches in height and all other vegetation is kept trimmed and cut so as to prevent overgrowth. 
(1)  The following is an illustrative visual example of permissible yard care: 

(2)  The following is an illustrative example of impermissible yard care: 

(c)  Since access to potable water and proper treatment of sewage waste is essential to prevent hazards to human health and the creation of a public nuisance, every owner or occupier of real property who inhabits a dwelling thereon must, at all times, maintain an active connection from the dwelling to: 
(1)  A source of potable water; and 
(2)  A septic tank, when allowed by the LaFayette City Code, a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of Chapter 21, Article V of the LaFayette City Code, or the city's sewer system. 
(d)  Every owner or occupier of real property must, to the greatest extent practicable, properly store refuse while awaiting collection. In accordance with this requirement, such owners and occupiers must: 
(1)  Store refuse within an appropriate refuse container while awaiting collection for disposal by the city which will collect refuse for disposal under the supervision of such officer as the city council designates, such collection to be made regularly and in accordance with an announced schedule. 
(2)  Limit the amount of refuse placed in a refuse container at any one (1) time to seventy-five (75) pounds or less. 
(3)  Drain refuse of all free liquids prior to storage in a refuse container. 
(4)  Trim or cut all organic refuse, such as tree trimmings, hedge clippings, and similar materials to a length not to exceed four (4) feet and securely tie such refuse in individual bundles weighing not more than seventy-five (75) pounds each and being not more than two (2) feet thick before being deposited for collection. 
(5)  Place refuse containers, at the time scheduled by the city for collection, on or within six (6) feet of the alley line in such a position as not to intrude upon the traveled portion of the alley if alleys are used by city refuse collectors or place refuse containers adjacent to and back of the curb, or adjacent to and back of the ditch or street line if there is no curb if streets are used by the city refuse collectors. 
(6)  Remove refuse containers, as soon as practicable after the refuse is collected, to a space within, or to the rear of, the property and away from the street line until the next scheduled time for collection. 
(7)  Place refuse only in the refuse container owned by or assigned to him or her and not in any other garbage can or container owned by assigned to any other person or entity, except that refuse may be disposed of in any garbage container placed by the city on its commercial square area located on each side of Main Street or a city park or recreation area for the purpose of collection of small amounts of liter. In furtherance of this subsection, no unauthorized person shall enter, go through, or in any other manner disturb any refuse container that is owned by or is assigned to any other person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 12-4. - Burning. 
(a)  Unpermitted burning is prohibited. To protect against the pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, fly ash, products of complete or incomplete combustion, and other emissions into the atmosphere which cause damage to the comfort, health, safety, and welfare of the people and property within the city, no person shall burn any building, barn, outbuilding, or structure of any kind or openly burn any substance, material, good, or product, whether natural or manufactured, including, but not limited to, any refuse or junk, unless a valid permit is first obtained in accordance with subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Burning permits; application, issuance by fire department, conditions. 
(1)  Any person desiring to conduct an open burn must first obtain a burning permit from the city's fire department, which is responsible for the intake and evaluation of burning permit applications and is vested with the authority and discretion to determine whether a burning permit will be issued to an applicant. 
(2)  Application for burning permits may be made in person at the fire department or by telephone. 
(3)  The fire chief, or his or her designee, has the discretion to select the date and time when burning will be permitted based on consideration of the prevailing weather conditions, air pollution levels, and fire hazard conditions. Provided, there shall be no burning on Sunday and no burning earlier than 9:30 a.m. 
(4)  The permit must contain the day and time so chosen for the limited burning, must specify what materials are permitted to be burned, and must be signed and dated by the fire chief or his or her designee. 
(5)  The applicant for the permit must be present and have the permit in his or her possession at all times during any burning permitted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 12-5. - Enforcement. 
    This section may be enforced by the city manager or his or her designee, the city building official or his or her designee, or any law enforcement officer with jurisdiction within the city. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Sec. 12-6. - Violations. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article is an offense punishable by the Municipal Court of the City of LaFayette. In the case of a violation of the burning provisions of this article, the municipal court of the city may levy an additional fine to be determined by computing the total cost to the city for providing firefighting equipment and firemen in connection with the fighting or putting out of any fire in violation of this article may be imposed by the recorder. 
(Ord. No. 18-06, § 1, 4-9-2018) 
Secs. 12-7-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED 

Secs. 12-16-12-35. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 18-06, § 3, adopted Apr. 9, 2018, repealed Art. II, §§ 12-16-12-19, which pertained to burning and derived from Code 1975, §§ 37-10-37-13. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNK MOTOR VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Junkyards prohibited, § 13-1; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt junked motor vehicle ordinances, OCGA § 36-60-4. 

Sec. 12-36. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following words, terms, and phrases have the following meanings: 
    Enforcement officer means any law enforcement officer of the city and any codes enforcement officer of the city or his or her designee. 
    Junk motor vehicle means, in addition to the plain meaning of the term, any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, including any and all of its parts whether attached to the motor vehicle or not, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Abandoned; 
(2)  Discarded; 
(3)  Wholly or partially dismantled; 
(4)  Wrecked; 
(5)  Scrapped; 
(6)  Ruined; 
(7)  Missing material parts from the body of the vehicle, i.e., windshield, door, lights, hood, wheel, etc.; 
(8)  Inoperable due to the absence of, or damage to, any key component, such as a motor, transmission, wheels, tires, or body parts, rendering the motor vehicle incapable of normal operation in the manner intended; or 
(9)  lacking a current license tag or registration or failing to display a current tag as required by Georgia law. 
    Motor vehicle means a vehicle having two (2) or more load-bearing wheels of a kind required to be registered under the laws of this state relating to motor vehicles designed primarily for operation upon the public streets, roads, and highways and driven by power other than muscular power. The term includes a trailer drawn by or attached to such a vehicle and also includes without limitation a low speed vehicle. 
    Owner means the owner of the subject real property or premises as shown on the deed records of Walker County, Georgia, the occupant in possession including a tenant or lessee, and any person designated by the owner or occupant to manage the premises. When known to the enforcement officer, the term "owner" also includes the person to whom the motor vehicle is currently or was formerly titled or who last purchased a license tag or decal for the vehicle. 
    Person means every natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, trust, or other form of recognized business entity in the State of Georgia, including governmental authorities, but excludes a federal agencies, the state and its agencies, counties, municipal corporations, and school districts. 
(Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, 11-13-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06, § 1, adopted Nov. 13, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1975, § 35-10; Ord. No. 99-6, § 1, 8-9-99. 
Sec. 12-37. - Nuisance; creation of nuisance unlawful; exceptions. 
(a)  To preserve and promote public health, safety, and welfare, and to prevent the proliferation of unsightly nuisances; the parking, keeping, storing, depositing, or discarding of any junk motor vehicle on any real property within the city, whether public or private, is prohibited and constitutes a nuisance per se. 
(b)  The intentional parking, keeping, storing, depositing, or discarding of any junk motor vehicle on any private or public real property, including any street, adjoining street right-of-way, or on property owned or leased by the city and designated for off-street parking, except in accordance with this article and the zoning and business regulations of the city, is unlawful. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section, it is not a nuisance or unlawful for a junk motor vehicle to be: 
(1)  Stored on real property when it is within a completely enclosed building or structure, lawfully erected on the property, so that the junk motor vehicle is not visible from any other adjoining properties or from a public street right-of-way; or 
(2)  Stored on real property in connection with a business of a licensed motor vehicle sales or service dealer, motor vehicle repair or mechanic shop, automobile paint shop, wrecker or towing service, impound yard, junkyard, or other commercial business operated in a lawful manner, located in other than a residential zoning district within the city, when the storage of the junk motor vehicle is necessary for the operation of the business or when the storage of the junk motor vehicle is appropriate because the business operates as a lawful storage place, repair facility, or depositary for junk motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, 11-13-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06, § 2, adopted Nov. 13, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1975, § 35-11. 
Sec. 12-38. - City manager to administer; any law enforcement officer of the city and the codes enforcement officer of the city or his or her designee to enforce. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager, and such employees of the city as he may appoint, to administer and the codes enforcement office of the city to enforce the provisions of this article. The city manager and codes enforcement officer of the city may enter upon private or public property to examine a junk motor vehicle, to obtain information as to the identity of such vehicle and to remove any such vehicle which shall finally be determined to constitute a public nuisance by the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 35-12; Ord. No. 99-6, § 2, 8-9-99; Ord. No. 17-06, § 3, 11-13-2017) 
Sec. 12-39. - Intentional violations; punishment of violators. 
(a)  The enforcement officer has the authority and discretion to issue a citation to any person found to be in violation of the provisions of section 12-37 of this article. The citation may either be personally served on the owner or mailed to the owner via certified United States mail, return receipt requested, at the last address of record of the owner. 
(b)  The citation will require the owner accused of violating section 12-37 to appear before the city's municipal court. Following a trial on the allegations contained in the citation, any owner found in violation of section 12-37 by the municipal court may be fined or incarcerated, or both. The owner may also be required to remove and properly dispose of the junk motor vehicle, at the owner's expense, within a deadline determined by the municipal court. 
(c)  In the event of noncompliance by the owner with the municipal court's order of removal, the city, including any agent, employee, or private person retained by agreement or contract with the city, is authorized to enter upon the real property where the junk motor vehicle is located and cause its removal via towing or whatever means may be necessary. After removal of the vehicle by the city, the city is authorized to dispose of the vehicle by any means allowed by law, including, but not limited to, delivery of the vehicle to an impound yard. Any junk motor vehicle removed by the city in accordance with this subsection is deemed a derelict motor vehicle and may be disposed of under O.C.G.A. § 40-11-9. 
(d)  If the city causes the removal or disposal, or both, of the junk motor vehicle under subsection (c) hereof due to an owner's noncompliance with a municipal court order, the owner is required to pay restitution to the city for all costs incurred by the city. And, such costs are may be collected by the city in the same manner as taxes and levies are collected. 
(Ord. No. 17-06, § 4, 11-13-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06, § 4, adopted Nov. 13, 2017, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1975, § 35-13; Ord. No. 99-6, § 3, 8-9-99. 
Secs. 12-40-12-60. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 17-06, § 5, adopted Nov. 13, 2017, repealed §§ 12-40-12-45, which pertained to nuisances and derived from Code 1975, §§ 35-14-35-16, 35-18, 35-19; Ord. No. 99-6, §§ 4-7, 8-9-99. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, Ch. 3. 

Sec. 12-61. - Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited. 
    The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in the city is prohibited, and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, make or contribute to creating any loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise, and noises of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or such noises as unduly disturb the quiet and peace of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 36-10) 
Sec. 12-62. - Acts declared to he unnecessary noises. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of section 12-61, but said enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Advertising. The use or mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks, airplanes or other vehicles for advertising or other purposes except where specific license is received from the proper city officials. 
(2)  Attracting attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display or advertisement of merchandise. 
(3)  Blowing horns, etc. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal, the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(4)  Building operations. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the proper city officials, which permit may be renewed for a period of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. 
(5)  Business noises in residential sections. The operation of any garage, filling station, auto repair business, taxi business, plant, store, factory or other place of business, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to create loud and disturbing noises of such frequency or volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, peace or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel, boardinghouse or other type of residence. 
(6)  Compressed air device. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(7)  Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Keeping of animals. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(9)  Loading or unloading operations. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or repairing any vehicle, or opening and destroying bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Noises near schools, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library or sanitarium, or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital or any church during services, which unreasonably interferes with the work or worship at such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church, library, sanitarium or court street. 
(11)  Peddlers, hawkers, etc. The shouting, loud-talking, crying and soliciting of peddlers, hawkers, taxi drivers, solicitors and vendors, which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Playing of radio, phonograph, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type residence. 
(13)  Sounding of bell or gong. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(14)  Sounding of steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work, or as a warning of danger. 
(15)  Use of vehicles. The operation of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner, or the repair of any such vehicle in such manner, as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, riveting or other loud or disturbing noises. 
(Code 1975, § 36-11) 
Sec. 12-63. - Authority of council to permit exceptions. 
    Upon application, duly filed with the mayor and council, the mayor and council in their discretion may grant such permits allowing speaking, singing or blowing of instruments for such period of time and in such volume as they deem proper. 
(Code 1975, § 36-12) 
Chapter 13 - LICENSES, PERMITS AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Authority to regulate businesses and occupations, § 5-20. 
Cross reference- Noises, § 12-61 et seq.; motel-hotel excise tax, § 13.5-1 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; utilities, Ch. 21; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Business and occupational taxes, OCGA § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Junkyards prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle junkyard within the city limits of the city, except as specifically provided by the Zoning Ordinance of LaFayette, Georgia. 
(Code 1975, § 8-10; Ord. No. 99-7, § 4, 9-13-99) 
Cross reference- Junk motor vehicles, § 12-36 et seq. 
Sec. 13-2. - Newspapers, distribution to carriers prohibited on streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who acts as a distributor of newspapers, whether weekly or daily, to distribute the same to its carriers on any street, sidewalk or alley within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-11) 
Secs. 13-3-13-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRIVILEGE LICENSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Licenses and occupational taxes, §§ 4-19, 5-20. 
State Law reference- Business and occupational taxes, OCGA, § 48-13-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-16. - License required, date payable, table of fees. 
    Every person, whether a resident of the city or not, engaging in or about to engage in any business, trade, calling or profession within the corporate limits of the city from whom any license is required by this chapter shall pay to the city treasurer on or before March fifteenth of each year such license fee as is prescribed by the license fee schedule which is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 15-10) 
Sec. 13-17. - Penalty for late licenses; refusal to pay, punishable offense. 
(a)  Failure to pay when due any license fee required by section 13-16 shall subject such payment to a penalty tax in the amount of ten (10) percent of the license fee per month. 
(b)  Willful refusal of any part to pay any license fee required by section 13-16 shall be an offense punishable by the recorder's court of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 15-11) 
Sec. 13-18. - Licenses nontransferable. 
    No license shall be transferred from one (1) person to another. 
(Code 1975, § 15-12) 
Sec. 13-19. - Levy and execution upon default. 
    Upon default of payment of any license fee chargeable and required to be paid under this chapter, an execution shall issue against the person making such default, and such execution shall be issued and enforced as provided for by the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 15-13) 
Sec. 13-20. - Chief of police authorized to collect delinquent fees. 
    The chief of police is authorized to collect delinquent privilege license fees. 
(Code 1975, § 15-14) 
Sec. 13-21. - Decal, required on specified items; nontransferable. 
    Every taxi, truck, vending machine, music machine and any other item that is required by the city to have a stamp shall have affixed to itself a decal issued by the city. The decal shall be affixed in such a manner as to make it impossible for the decal to be transferred to another item of any kind or character. 
(Code 1975, § 15-20) 
Sec. 13-22. - Cafes; food permit prerequisite to license. 
    No license for cafes or any business serving food shall be issued until a valid food service permit is obtained from the county health department. 
(Code 1975, § 15-21) 
Secs. 13-23-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS 

Sec. 13-36. - Insurer license fees. 
(a)  There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). For each separate business location in excess of one (1) not covered by section 13-37, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  For the purpose of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in OCGA section 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83(1), § 1; Ord. of 2-11-86(1), § 1; Ord. of 11-14-94, § 1) 
Sec. 13-37. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance such insurer shall pay an additional license fee of seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50) per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83(1), § 2; Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2) 
Sec. 13-38. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 13-36, in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83(1), § 1; Ord. of 2-11-86(1), § 3; Ord. of 11-14-94, § 3) 
Sec. 13-39. - Gross premiums tax imposed on insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one (1) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with OCGA section 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in OCGA section 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 13-36. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83(1), § 4; Ord. of 11-14-94, § 4) 
Sec. 13-40. - Gross premiums tax; all other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of OCGA § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half (2.5) percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with OCGA § 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in OCGA § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 13-36 hereof. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83(1), § 5; Ord. of 11-14-94, § 4) 
Sec. 13-41. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 13-36, 13-37 and 13-38, shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83(1), § 6; Ord. of 11-14-94, § 6) 
Sec. 13-42. - Administrative provisions. 
    The city clerk is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of the ordinance from which this article derives to the state insurance commissioner within forty-five days of its enactment. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83(1), § 7; Ord. of 11-14-94, § 7) 
Secs. 13-43-13-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Peddlers and itinerant trades, OCGA Title 43, Ch. 72 

Sec. 13-51. - Peddler and solicitor defined. 
    For the purpose of this article, the terms "solicitor" and "peddler" have the meanings ascribed below: 
    Peddler shall mean any person traveling from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who without traveling from place to place shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. Anyone who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers shall be deemed a peddler. 
    Solicitor shall mean any individual traveling from place to place, from house to house or from street to street attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future. Such definition shall include any person who, for himself or for another person, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-52. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler or solicitor within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 9-11) 
Sec. 13-53. - Application for permit. 
    Applicants for peddler's or solicitor's permits must file with the city clerk a sworn application, in duplicate, which shall give the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of applicant. 
(2)  Address, legal and local. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number or other means of identification. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within sixty (60) days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two (2) inches by two (2) inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two (2) reliable property owners of this county who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Code 1975, § 9-12) 
Secs. 13-54-13-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CHARITABLE SOLICITORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Regulation of professional fund raising, OCGA § 43-17-1 et seq. 

Sec. 13-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Charitable means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
    Person means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock organization or league, church, religious sect, religious denomination, society and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof. 
    Promoter means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign or solicitation. 
    Religious and religion does not mean and include the word "charitable" but these terms are to be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
    Solicit and solicitation means the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea of representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this article. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose: 
(1)  Any oral or written request; 
(2)  The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publication of any handbill, written advertisement or publication; 
(3)  The making of any announcement to the press, over the radio, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith; 
(4)  The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose. 
Solicitation shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-72. - Solicitation permit required. 
    No person shall solicit contributions within the city without a permit from the city manager authorizing such solicitation. However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established persons organized and operating exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for the making of such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person. 
(Code 1975, § 10-11) 
Sec. 13-73. - Application for permit. 
    An application for a permit to solicit shall be made to the city manager upon forms provided by the city. The application required in this article shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reason or reasons why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)  The name and address or headquarters of the person applying; 
(2)  The purpose of the solicitation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitations; 
(4)  An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitations; 
(5)  The time when such solicitations shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation; 
(6)  The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitations, and the names and addresses of all such persons; 
(7)  A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city; 
(8)  Such other information as may be reasonably necessary and required by the city manager in order for the city manager to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare. 
(Code 1975, § 10-12) 
Sec. 13-74. - Investigation of application. 
    The city manager shall examine all applications filed under this article and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation as he deems necessary for him to perform his duties hereunder. Upon request by the city manager any applicant shall make available for inspection by the city manager, or any person designated by him as his representative, all of the applicant's books, records and papers at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1975, § 10-13) 
Sec. 13-75. - Standard for issuance of permit. 
    The city manager shall issue the permit provided for in this article whenever he shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)  That all of the statements made in the application are true; 
(2)  That the applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual, that every person responsible for such organization is of good character and has a reputation for honesty and integrity; 
(3)  That the control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons; 
(4)  That the applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(5)  That the solicitation is promoted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(Code 1975, § 10-14) 
Sec. 13-76. - Use of fictitious name. 
    No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this article. 
(Code 1975, § 10-15) 
Secs. 13-77-13-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNBROKERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate and license pawnbrokers, OCGA § 44-12-136. 

Sec. 13-91. - Records; information required. 
    Any pawnbroker operating a business in the city shall keep a book in which shall be legibly written, in ink or type and in the English language, at the time of each loan, purchase or receipt of personal property, an accurate account and description of the goods, articles or thing pawned, purchased or received, the amount of money loaned or advanced thereon or paid therefor, the date, the time including both day and hour of pawning, purchasing or receiving such goods, articles or thing, and the name, residence and description of the person pawning, selling or delivering such goods, articles or thing, and no entry made in such book shall be erased, obliterated or defaced. The book so kept for this purpose shall be used for this purpose only. 
(Code 1975, § 12-10) 
Sec. 13-92. - Copies of records, delivery to chief of police. 
    Every pawnbroker shall deliver to the chief of police on Wednesday of each week before the hour of 11:00 a.m. a correct copy of all entries made in the book required by section 13-91 during the immediately preceding seven-day period. 
(Code 1975, § 12-11) 
Sec. 13-93. - Records to be open to inspection. 
    The book required by section 13-91, as well as every article or thing pawned, pledged, sold or deposited, shall, at all reasonable times and specifically including all hours during which the business is open, be open to the inspection of any police office of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 12-12) 
Sec. 13-94. - Identification of persons offering property; records required. 
    If a pawnbroker does not know the person offering to sell or pawn personal property, he shall make inquiry to learn the true identity of such person, and he shall require the production of his draft registration card, if any, his social security card, if any, and his driver's license, if any, and he shall note in the book or register kept by the pawnbroker as required by section 13-91 the draft board, if any, with which such person is registered, the address and social security number of such person, the driver's license number and any other information be obtained as to the identity of such person. This information shall be kept in addition to the description required by the provisions of section 13-91. 
(Code 1975, § 12-13) 
Sec. 13-95. - Pawned property, segregation for ten days. 
    The pawnbroker shall keep any article or thing pawned or sold separate and apart from other goods or articles or things for a period of ten (10) days after receipt of same in order that such articles can be readily identified and easily inspected by the officers of the police department. 
(Code 1975, § 12-14) 
Sec. 13-96. - Pawned property; required holding period. 
    It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to deliver to the person who pawned, pledged, sold or delivered the same, any goods, article or thing, or to deliver the same to any other person or to sell or otherwise dispose of the same for a period of twenty-four (24) hours from the date of receiving such goods, article or thing, or for an additional period of seventy-two (72) hours if requested by a police officer to retain the same. 
(Code 1975, § 12-15) 
Sec. 13-97. - Persons offering property, certain persons restricted. 
    No pawnbroker shall take in pawn, pledge or as security, or purchase, any article from any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or from any person appearing to be intoxicated or known to be an habitual drunkard, nor from anyone appearing to be under the influence of any drug or controlled substance or known to be a drug addict of any type whatsoever, nor from any person known to such pawnbroker to be a thief or to have been convicted of larceny, burglary, or any felony without first notifying the police department of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 12-16) 
Sec. 13-98. - Return of pawned property to owner. 
    If any person is found to be the owner of stolen property which has been pawned, pledged or sold to a pawnbroker, such property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the payment of the amount advanced by the pawnbroker or any costs or charges of any kind which the pawnbroker may have placed upon the same. 
(Code 1975, § 12-17) 
Sec. 13-99. - Violation, revocation of privilege license. 
    Violation of any of the terms and conditions of this article shall be grounds for revocation of the city privilege license for any pawnbroker or pawn shop. 
(Code 1975, § 12-18) 
Secs. 13-100-13-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WRECKERS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Codification of §§ 1-9 of nonamendatory Ordinance No. 3-88, adopted Feb. 8, 1988, as Article VII, §§ 13-111-13-119, has been at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference- Junk motor vehicles, § 12-36 et seq.; automobile junkyards prohibited, § 13-1; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 

Sec. 13-111. - "Wrecker" defined. 
    The term "wrecker" as used in this article, means an automotive vehicle with hoisting apparatus and equipment for towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" also includes any vehicle otherwise equipped and used for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 1, 2-8-88) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-112. - Operation of wrecker; compliance with article required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, either as principal, agent or employee, to use or operate upon any of the streets of the city, any wrecker or towing car without complying with this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 2, 2-8-88) 
Sec. 13-113. - Responsibility of wrecker operators. 
(a)  The wrecker operators shall be responsible to the owner of the vehicle being towed for all damage done during towing and storage of any vehicles entrusted to them under this article. 
(b)  Wrecker operators shall fully cooperate with all duly authorized law enforcement officers in the protection of any evidence or in any investigation arising out of a wreck or seizure of a vehicle by any officials. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the wrecker operator, prior to leaving the scene of any collision, to clean the pavement of all debris of the collision, including all glass. 
(d)  The wrecker operators shall not release any vehicle placed on hold from storage unless authorized by the officer who placed the hold on the vehicle, or the highest ranking officer on duty. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 3, 2-8-88) 
Cross reference- Impoundment and enforcement, § 14-106 et seq. 
Sec. 13-114. - Required information to be printed on side of wrecker. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation, either as principal, agent or employee, to operate or cause to be operated within the city any wrecker as defined herein unless said wrecker shall have lettered in permanent paint on each side in plain view the following information: the name of the person, partnership, firm, association or corporation owning and causing its wrecker to operate on the streets of the city, the address from which the wrecker is operating and the telephone number. This lettering shall be in contrasting color to the color of the wrecker and shall be at least two and one-half (21/2) inches in height. Temporary or removable magnetic signs shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 4, 2-8-88) 
Sec. 13-115. - Call to scene of accident by certain persons only. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, or his agent, representative or employee to go to any place where an accident has occurred unless called by the driver or the owner of the disabled vehicle or by the owner's authorized representative, or by the police department dispatcher. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any wrecker, or his agent, representative or employee, to go to the place of a wreck by reason of information received by police radio. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 5, 2-8-88) 
Sec. 13-116. - Solicitation of towing work along city streets, etc., prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive along any city street or bridge and solicit towing work. Solicitation of towing work by the operator or an occupant of a wrecker while parked on any city street or bridge is also prohibited. A wrecker operator shall not proceed to the scene of a disabled vehicle without having been requested or notified to do so, as provided in section 13-115. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 6, 2-8-88) 
Sec. 13-117. - Procedures for city police officers and employees. 
(a)  A schedule shall be set up on a rotating basis of all qualified wrecker services operating within the city, which wrecker service shall be used as hereinafter provided, except in an extreme emergency where persons are trapped or pinned in or under vehicles, or in burning vehicles, or in danger of drowning by submersion, or where traffic is blocked to prevent the normal flow of vehicles, in which event, and only in which event, said police officer shall be authorized to call the nearest, most qualified wrecker service, to prevent serious injury or death. 
(b)  The police officer or lawfully authorized officer shall determine whether or not a wrecker is needed, and if a wrecker is needed, shall ascertain if the owner or operator is in a condition to make a preference known what wrecker service the owner or operator desires called, and shall call the preferred service desired by the owner or operator of the vehicle. No police or other authorized officer when on official duty shall recommend to any person the wrecker service company to be called or employed. 
(c)  In the event the owner or operator is unable, due to injury or due to physical or mental impairment, to make a choice, or does not have any preference, then said police officer or other authorized officer shall call the wrecker service on said schedule. 
(d)  In the event the dispatcher is unable to reach or if for any reason the wrecker service on schedule is unable to furnish the service, then the next succeeding wrecker service, which shall be the service that was listed next on the schedule, shall be called to provide the needed wrecker service. 
(e)  Except in extreme emergencies, the police officer or other authorized officer shall await the arrival of the wrecker and shall in the meantime make the scene of the accident safe for other vehicles, using the road in the vicinity thereof, giving warnings and directing traffic. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 7, 2-8-88) 
Sec. 13-118. - Responsibility for payment. 
    All charges and fees for towing and storage of the vehicle shall be at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, and against the vehicle itself, as provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 8, 2-8-88) 
Sec. 13-119. - Penalties for violation of this article. 
    Any person, partnership, firm, association or corporation that violates any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction in recorder's court, be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for thirty (30) days, or both. Each unlawful violation shall constitute a separate offense hereunder. The chief of police or his delegate shall have authority to issue citations for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 3-88, § 9, 2-8-88) 
Sec. 13-120. - Removal for violations; period. 
    Violations of this article shall result in the violator being removed from the wrecker service call list. 
    Removal shall not be for a period of more than six (6) months from the date of removal. 
    Repeated violations could result in permanent removal from the wrecker call list. 
    Any violator removed from the wrecker service call list will be afforded a hearing before the director of public safety upon a request made by the violator within three (3) work days from notice of removal when the violator takes exception to being removed from the wrecker service call list. The decision of the director of public safety shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 13-121. - Insurance. 
    A wrecker service must at all times maintain a comprehensive form of automobile and general liability insurance, including death to said service's employees and all others, and claims for property damage and/or all claims which may arise out of or as a result of services performed at the request of the department of public safety. Owners of said wrecker services shall indemnify the city, its agents, servants and employees, for all claims and damages arising from services performed by the wrecker service. Each wrecker service listed on the wrecker service call list shall possess at all times the following minimum amounts of insurance: 
Type of 
Coverage Per Person Per Incident Bodily injury $100,000.00 $300,000.00 Property damage $100,000.00  
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 12-13-99) 
Sec. 13-122. - Towed vehicle storage area. 
    Each wrecker service which has an area for storage within the city shall comply with the standards set forth in the ordinances of the city pertaining to junk yards. In the event any participating wrecker service does not have adequate storage space, said wrecker service shall store its towed vehicles at a location outside the city or at a location within the city meeting established criteria. No vehicle shall be stored at a wrecker service location within the city, which is not a licensed junk yard, more than sixty (60) days and no more than ten (10) vehicles shall be stored at any wrecker service location, which is not a licensed junk yard. 
(Ord. No. 99-12, § 1, 12-13-99) 
Secs. 13-123-13-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GAME ROOMS, BILLIARD AND POOL ROOMS, AMUSEMENT DEVICES, ETC.[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 12, 1989, §§ 1-12, enacted provisions pertaining to license and regulation of game rooms, pool and billiard rooms, mechanical and coin-operated amusement devices. Such provisions have been designated herein as Art. VIII, §§ 13-131-13-142 by the editor. For the specific derivation of each section, the user's attention is directed to the history note parenthetically enclosed following the section. 

Sec. 13-131. - Billiard rooms, operation subject to state law and this article. 
    The operation of a billiard room within the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette shall be subject to all of the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to the same as codified in Title 43, Chapter 8, O.C.G.A., except as may hereinafter be amplified by the subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 1) 
Sec. 13-132. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term: 
    Billiard room shall mean the same as defined in O.C.G.A. section 43-8-1; 
    Billiards shall mean the same as defined in O.C.G.A. section 43-8-1; 
    Game room means any public place or business establishment where a person is permitted to play and/or operate a mechanical amusement device and/or a coin-operated amusement device as defined herein, but which does not contain any billiard table or billiard tables of any type whatsoever. 
    Mechanical amusement device and coin-operated amusement device mean each machine which, upon the insertion of a coin, trade-token or slug, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement of any kind or description, and which contains no automatic pay-off device for the return of money or trade-tokens or slugs, or which makes no provision whatsoever for the return of money to the player. A "mechanical amusement device" and "coin-operated amusement device" is hereby further defined as any machine, apparatus, or contrivance which is used or which may be used as a game of skill and amusement wherein or whereby the player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by the machine. Additionally, the term "mechanical amusement device" and the term "coin-operated amusement device" is further defined to be and include any machine, apparatus or contrivance which, upon the insertion of a coin, trade-token or slug, operates or may be operated as a game or contest of skill or amusement, including but not limited to, pinball machines and video game machines. The term "mechanical amusement device" and the term "coin-operated amusement device" shall not for the purposes of this article include a machine vending recorded music or a period of radio or television entertainment in return for the insertion or deposit therein of a coin, trade-tokens or slugs and shall not include what is sometimes referred to as a jukebox. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 2) 
Sec. 13-133. - Applicability of article; license fee for excluded establishments. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section, this article shall be applicable to all billiard rooms and all game rooms and all combination billiard room/game room business establishments which are operated within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No provision of this article shall apply to a place of business that is an eating establishment as defined by the terms of Section 4-103 of this Code, so long as such eating establishment is operating in accord with the regulations set forth in Division 4 of Chapter 4 (otherwise known as the City of LaFayette Malt Beverage/Wine by the Drink Ordinance) and has on the premises no more than four (4) billiard tables, pool tables, mechanical amusement devices, coin-operated amusement devices or any combination thereof. 
(c)  Except for the annual licensing fee provided in this subsection, this article shall not apply to business places which do not contain any billiard tables and/or pool tables but which do contain mechanical amusement devices and/or coin-operated amusement devices, so long as the combined gross revenues per month from such devices are less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total monthly gross revenues of such place or business. Businesses which operate in any combination no more than two (2) such devices shall pay an annual licensing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). Businesses which have within the premises in any combination more than two (2) such devices shall pay an annual licensing fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall cover the licensing of the first two (2) devices, and an additional fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each device beyond the first two (2). The annual licensing fee required by this subsection shall be in addition to, and does not exclude, any other fees that may be required by this Code. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 3; Ord. No. 12-01, 1-18-2012) 
Sec. 13-134. - Business license required, when. 
    Any place of business which shall have any billiard table, pool table, mechanical amusement device, or coin-operated amusement device as defined herein, in addition to any other business licenses required of such establishment, must purchase and exhibit in the place of business a city business license to operate such billiard room, game room or combination billiard room/game room. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 9) 
Sec. 13-135. - License fee. 
    The annual business license for each such billiard room, game room or combination billiard room/game room shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) which shall cover the establishment and the first two (2) such devices or tables located therein. In addition to the aforesaid annual license, such business establishment must pay an additional annual business license license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each such table and/or such device located within the establishment, exclusive of the first two (2) tables or devices. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 10) 
Sec. 13-136. - Unobstructed visibility of interior required. 
    No person who operates a billiard room, game room, or combination billiard room/game room shall permit screens, curtains, blinds, partitions, or other obstructions to be used to prevent a clear view of the interior of the business establishment. No partitions forming rooms, stalls, or other enclosures shall be permitted which would inhibit, obstruct or interfere with such clear view of the interior of the business establishment. However, this shall not be construed to prohibit the maintenance of washrooms and toilet rooms for proper purposes nor the maintenance of closets for storage purposes exclusively. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 8) 
Sec. 13-137. - Full-time supervision required. 
    All billiard rooms, all game rooms and all combination billiard room/game room business establishments must have full-time supervision at all times that the place of business is open. Such supervision must be an attendant who is present at all times and is at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 4) 
Sec. 13-138. - Persons under twelve years of age not admitted; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached the age of twelve (12) years to be permitted in any billiard room, game room, or combination billiard room/game room for any purpose, unless such minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or by an adult who has in his possession written consent of a parent or guardian of the minor to be with said adult and to enter such billiard room, game room, or combination billiard room/game room and operate and play billiards, the various amusement devices, mechanical amusement devices and/or coin-operated amusement devices in such business establishment. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 7) 
Sec. 13-139. - Prohibited acts, items and substances. 
    Any business establishment that has therein any billiard table, pool table, mechanical amusement device, and/or other coin-operated amusement device is hereby prohibited from having therein or allowing therein or on the premises of such business establishments any of the following acts, action, behavior, conduct, goods, or items, to wit: 
(1)  No gambling and/or betting of any type whatsoever shall be conducted either in the building or on the premises where such business is conducted. 
(2)  No beer, wine or alcoholic beverage of any type whatsoever shall be sold, offered for sale, consumed, stored, displayed, and/or brought into any such place of business or on the premises of such business establishment. 
(3)  No person shall be allowed to have in his or her possession or to sell, use, drink, consume, inhale or intake in any manner whatsoever while in the business establishment or while on the premises of the business establishment any of the following: 
a.  Marijuana; 
b.  Any controlled substance, as defined in Chapter 13 of Title 16, O.C.G.A., listed and contained in Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V as found in O.C.G.A. sections 16-13-25, 16-13-26, 16-13-27, 16-13-28 and 16-13-29; 
c.  Any dangerous drug as defined in O.C.G.A. section 16-13-71; 
d.  Model glue as defined in O.C.G.A. section 16-13-90; 
e.  Any imitation controlled substance as defined in O.C.G.A. section 16-13-21. 
(4)  No person shall be allowed within such business establishment who is under the influence of beer, wine, or any alcoholic beverage or under the influence of any of the drugs and/or substances listed or referred to in subparagraph (3), above. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 5) 
Sec. 13-140. - Times when closed to operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to operate a billiard room or a game room or any combination billiard room/game room between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. or to permit any person to remain in such billiard room and/or game room between such prohibited hours, except regular employees performing necessary labor on the premises. Additionally, it shall be unlawful for any billiard room and any game room or any combination billiard room/game room to be operated or to be open on Sunday of any week of any year. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 6) 
Sec. 13-141. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    Nothing in this article shall in any way be construed to authorize, license or permit any gambling devices whatsoever, or any device or mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device, or in any way contrary to the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 12) 
Sec. 13-142. - License subject to revocation for violation. 
    The business license of any billiard room, game room or combination billiard room/game room licensed under this article shall be subject to revocation for violation of any of the terms or provisions of this article or for violation of any of the laws of the State of Georgia pertaining to (1) billiard rooms, (2) gambling, (3) pinball machines, (4) coin-operated amusement devices, (5) the use of, sale of or possession of beer, wine or alcoholic beverages, or (6) controlled substances, marijuana, dangerous drugs, or imitation controlled substances. 
(Ord. of 5-12-89, § 11) 
Secs. 13-143-13-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OCCUPATION TAXES, ADMINISTRATIVE FEES AND REGULATORY FEES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 98-1, adopted June 8, 1998, repealed former Art. IX, §§ 13-151-13-168 in its entirety, and added a new Art. IX, §§ 13-151-13-167 as herein set out. Former Art. IX pertained to similar subject matter and derived from § 1 of an ordinance adopted Jan. 9, 1997. 
Cross reference- Taxation, Ch. 20. 

Sec. 13-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
    Administrative fee is the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    City means the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    Employee is any individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
    Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site located in the city for the purpose of serving a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city. 
    Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations are those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. section 48-13-9(C)(1)-(22) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. A list of said practitioners of professions and occupations shall be as follows: 
Architects 
Chiropractors 
Dentists 
Embalmers 
Engineers (civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical) 
Funeral directors 
Land surveyors 
Landscape architects 
Lawyers 
Marriage and family therapists, social workers and professional counselors 
Motor vehicle dealers as defined in paragraph (1) of O.C.G.A. section 10-1-622 
Optometrists 
Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 O.C.G.A. 
Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43 O.C.G.A. 
Podiatrists 
Practitioners of physiotherapy 
Psychologists 
Public accountants 
Veterinarians 
Owners or operators of bona fide coin operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. section 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordances with O.C.G.A. section 48-17-9. 
Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. section 48-5-354 as to their deliveries to businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use. 
Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession, or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98; Ord. No. 02-07, § 1, 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 13-152. - Administrative fee. 
    A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-153. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Business and individuals engaging in the occupations or business set forth below must pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth as follows: 
Carnivals ..... 1,000.00 
Taxicab and limousine operators ..... 100.00 
Tattoo artists ..... 100.00 
Pawnbrokers ..... 100.00 
Newspaper vending boxes ..... 100.00 
Massage parlors ..... 500.00 
Businesses which provide appearance bonds ..... 250.00 
Fortunetellers ..... 500.00 
Escort services ..... 500.00 
(b)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to the building official, his/her deputies, any police officer or city clerk upon request. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-154. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon number of employees 1 [] in the state is levied upon businesses with one (1) or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the State of Georgia in accordance with the following schedule: 
Number of Employees Tax 0-1 $ 50.00 2-5 75.00 6-10 100.00 11-50 150.00 51-100 200.00 101-200 300.00 Over 200 400.00  
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one (1) occupation tax for each location of a business [or practitioner.] 
(c)  A business which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's sales or services in this state, then the business shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business. This limitation shall only apply when the business has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business which has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax by more than one (1) local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business in more than one (1) municipal corporation or county and the business submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  If a business commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
(e)  If a business does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business during the current calendar year, then the business shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31 the business shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business' account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
An employee who works forty (40) hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than forty (40) hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by forty (40) to produce full-time position equivalents. 

Sec. 13-155. - Occupation tax certificate. 
    Every business and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to the building official, his/her deputies, any police officer or city clerk upon request. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-156. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioners of professions and occupations as defined by section 13-151(g) herein provided; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 of Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperation marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 2-10-105; 
(6)  Motor common carriers pursuant to O.C.G.A. section 46-7-15; 
(7)  Person purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within ninety (90) days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93; 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States; or 
(11)  Businesses that rent or lease real estate, excluding hotels and motels, consisting of two (2) or less rental units. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-157. - Evidence of state registration when required. 
    Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the Examining Boards of the Secretary of State's Office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-158. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-159. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before November 1 of each year, an individual, or business subject to this occupation tax ordinance shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals and businesses doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within thirty (30) days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee(s). 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-160. - Confidentiality. 
    Information provided by an individual or business to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-161. - Date due; penalty. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual or business subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for ninety (90) days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-162. - Enforcement; violations. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals and businesses for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals and businesses for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. section 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one (1) percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual or business liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by city clerk of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Individuals and businesses who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to a fine up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(e)  Individuals and businesses who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension or revocation of the right to conduct business within the city, as provided in section 13-163 hereof. 
(f)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any persons, officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons or businesses who fail to obtain make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-163. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No license issued under this article shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause as defined hereunder, and only after a hearing before the mayor and council of the city upon a prior written notice to the licensee at the address shown on the license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the reason the license would be suspended or revoked. Three (3) days notice prior to the hearing shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor and council may deem the circumstances justify. 
(b)  "Due cause" for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the following, to-wit: 
(1)  A licensee engages in any fraudulent business transaction which is made punishable by the laws of this state; 
(2)  Violation of any laws, ordinances or resolutions regarding such business or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted by the purpose of regulating such business; 
(3)  A licensee supplies false information to the building official, his/her deputies, any police officer or the city clerk, regardless of when the false information is discovered; 
(4)  The licensee has failed to obtain or has suffered the expiration, suspension or revocation of any paper or document by any officer, agency, authority or department of the city, state, any other state or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance or resolution of the city, state, any other state or the United States regulating such business; 
(5)  The licensee violates any provisions of the zoning ordinances of the city; or 
(6)  The licensee has failed to comply with any provision of this article. 
(c)  The violation of the provisions of this article by any person may be enjoined by instituting appropriate proceeding for injunction in the courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies exist at law. Such actions may be instituted in the name of the governing authority of this city or in the name of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-164. - Public hearing. 
    After January 1, 1998, the city shall conduct at least one (1) public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in section 13-154. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-165. - Prior ordinance. 
    To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-166. - Severability. 
    In the event any portion of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the city council of the city that such adjudication shall in no matter affect the other sections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally part of the article. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Sec. 13-167. - Amendability. 
    The provisions of this article may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. No. 98-1, § 1, 6-8-98) 
Chapter 13.5 - MOTEL-HOTEL EXCISE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-01, adopted Feb. 9, 2015, repealed former Ch. 13.5, §§ 13.5-1-13.5-11, and enacted a new Ch. 13.5 as set out herein. Former Ch. 13.5 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 14-2, 1-13-2014. 
Charter reference- Power to regulate and license, § 5-20. 
Cross reference- Licenses, permits and miscellaneous business regulations, Ch. 13; taxation, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Excise tax on rooms, lodgings, and accommodations, OCGA § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 13.5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
    City means the City of LaFayette and the incorporated territory of the City of LaFayette wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
    City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the city or his/her designee. 
    Due date means the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
    Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
    Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
    Guest room means accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one (1) or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel means any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, motel, motor hotel, automobile or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, timeshare or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest accommodations and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
    Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
    Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
    Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
    Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than thirty (30) continuous days next preceding such date. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
    Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this chapter, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-2. - Tax rate. 
    There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight (8) percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 13.5-4. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-3. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
    Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of eight (8) percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 13.5-4. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus any applicable penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-4. - Exceptions. 
    No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-5. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date that this chapter becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-6. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes . All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date . A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the failure is for one (1) month or less; and an additional five (5) percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent or twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one (1) percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements . If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority . O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud . In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of fifty (50) percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in any three (3) consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than fifty (50) percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than twelve (12) consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred (100) percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten (10) days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one (1) percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three (3) percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-7. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he/she may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his/her possession or that may come into his/her possession. One (1) or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one (1) or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 13.5-6. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three (3) years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three (3) years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-8. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 13.5-7(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 13.5-6. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-9. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three (3) years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three (3) years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three (3) years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the mayor and city council, or their designee, at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The mayor and city council, or their designee, shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-10. - Administration of chapter; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three (3) years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he/she may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him/her may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of the lodging provider, unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Sec. 13.5-11. - Violations. 
    Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 13.5-3 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 13.5-6, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or confinement for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 15-01, 2-9-2015) 
Chapter 14 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Vehicles in cemeteries, §§ 7-3, 7-4; junk motor vehicles, § 12-36 et seq.; wreckers, § 13-111 et seq.; police, Ch. 18; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, OCGA Title 40; municipal authority to regulate traffic on streets and highways under its jurisdiction, OCGA § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Rules of the road adopted; amendment of Georgia Open Container Law; penalties. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to Chapter 6 of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Code Sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, Code Sections 40-6-1 to 40-6-395, with the exception of Code Section 40-6-253, of that Chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in Code Section 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as cited herein. Said Code Sections being herein adopted by reference are adopted as currently in force and effect and as may be amended from time to time by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia. 
(1)  Amendment. 
a.  Code Section 40-6-253, otherwise known as the Georgia Open Container Law, shall be amended to read as follows: 
"No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while a passenger in a vehicle in this municipality. An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger." 
"No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage in any parked vehicle within this municipality unless said container is located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked, non-passenger area of the vehicle. An open container found in a parked vehicle not in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle shall be considered to be in the possession of the owner and/or operator of a vehicle if located in the passenger compartment of the vehicle." 
b.  This section shall not apply to: 
1.  A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; 
2.  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; or 
3.  A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of twenty-one (21) feet. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 8-12-91, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Aug. 12, 1991, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as superseding former provisions contained in § 14-1 was at the discretion of the editor. Said former provisions pertained to similar subject matter as the newly included superseding provisions and derived from the Code of 1975, §§ 30-10, 30-11; Ord. of 9-22-79. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4. 
Sec. 14-2. - Vehicles and employees of department of sanitation to have right-of-way on streets. 
    All employees and vehicles of the department of sanitation when engaged or used in performance of the services rendered by such department, shall have the right-of-way in the use of the streets, and are hereby given permission to use any part thereof in the operation of such vehicles in cleaning up and washing the streets of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 30-60) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 12. 
Sec. 14-3. - Through streets designated; traffic must stop before crossing. 
(a)  Generally. The city council shall alone have authority to designate streets or parts of streets as through streets. 
(b)  Enumerated streets. The following streets are through streets for traffic, and all vehicles entering such streets from intersecting streets, or crossing such streets, shall be required to come to a full stop before entering or crossing such streets, and shall not enter or cross such streets, until the way is clear therefor, except when governed by a traffic light or sign: 
(1)  North Main Street and South Main Street; 
(2)  Cove Street and Patton Avenue, from the public square to Chattanooga Street; 
(3)  Chattanooga Street; 
(4)  Villanow Street. 
(Code 1975, § 30-61) 
Sec. 14-4. - Limitations on turning around. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street within a business district, or upon any street between intersections. Such turns may be made outside of a business district at intersections not controlled by a traffic signal. 
(Code 1975, § 30-62) 
Sec. 14-5. - Bicycle warning bell required; sirens and whistles prohibited. 
    No person shall ride a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or other device suitable for giving a signal audible at a distance of one hundred (100) feet, except no bicycle shall be equipped with any siren or whistle. 
(Code 1975, § 30-63) 
Sec. 14-6. - Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted. 
(a)  Definition. For purpose of this section, skates, coasters, sleds, skateboards and toy vehicles shall be deemed to mean and shall include all nonmotorized instruments used to transport a person or persons by means of wheels, rollers, runners, etc., propelled solely by the force of its rider or another person or persons, but shall not include bicycles. 
(b)  Prohibited activities. No person shall use, operate or permit the use or operation of any skates, coasters, sleds, skateboards or other toy vehicles upon any street, sidewalk, highway or other public ways within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Every person convicted of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation. 
(Code 1975, § 30-64; Ord. of 7-9-90, §§ 1-3) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate skates, coasters, sleds and other toy vehicles, OCGA § 40-6-371(a)(18). 
Sec. 14-7. - Permits for parades and processions. 
    No procession (except funerals) or parade containing twenty-five (25) or more persons or five (5) or more vehicles, shall occupy, march or proceed along any street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the city manager or by the office of the chief of police at the city manager's direction. 
(Code 1975, § 30-65) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 14-8. - Railroad trains-Blocking streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any engineer or conductor or person in charge of any railroad train, cars or engine to obstruct any street crossing within the city for a longer period than five (5) minutes. 
(Code 1975, § 30-66) 
Sec. 14-9. - Same-Maximum speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any engineer, conductor or other person to run any railroad train, engine or car within the city limits at a speed greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(Code 1975, § 30-67) 
Sec. 14-10. - Towing. 
    No vehicle shall tow more than one (1) other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. 
(Code 1975, § 30-68) 
Sec. 14-11. - Driving past city or public utility employees working on streets. 
    When approaching or driving past city employees or public utility employees who are working in the street or roadway, the maximum rate of speed shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(Code 1975, § 30-69) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
Secs. 14-12-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-31. - Speed limits generally. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle of any sort whatever within the corporate limits of the city in excess of the posted maximum speed limits. 
(Code 1975, § 30-51) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to alter or establish speed limits, OCGA §§ 40-6-183, 40-6-371(a)(10). 
Sec. 14-32. - Maximum speed in parks and school zones. 
    No person shall drive a motor vehicle in parks in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour nor on streets adjoining school property during school days in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour, nor within three hundred (300) feet on the approach to any street adjoining school property during school days in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour. 
(Code 1975, § 30-52) 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, Ch. 16. 
Sec. 14-33. - Speed zones. 
(a)  Speed zones are hereby created on State Road 193 as follows: 
(1)  From milepost 0.20 (intersection of State Route 1) to milepost 1.11 (intersection of Pine Street), a distance of 0.91 mile, the speed limit shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(2)  From milepost 1.11 (intersection of Pine Street) to milepost 1.20 (intersection of Cavender Street), a distance of 0.09 mile, the speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(3)  From milepost 1.20 (intersection of Cavender Street) to milepost 1.60 (west city limits), a distance of 0.40 mile, the speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour. 
(b)  Signs will be erected by the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. of 9-22-79) 
Sec. 14-34. - Trucks-Purpose of regulations, definitions. 
(a)  Purpose of sections 14-34 through 14-39. To reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of the prohibited streets by trucks and combination of vehicles; to protect the safety of the public and their lives and property in the use of the prohibited streets; and to protect the prohibited streets from unusual wear and damage. 
(b)  Definitions. For the purpose of sections 14-34 through 14-39, the following terms shall have the meanings given herein: 
(1)  Truck: A motor driven vehicle designed or operated for the transportation of property, including raw materials, but the following trucks are specifically excluded from the operation of sections 14-34 through 14-39: 
a.  All trucks which have only two (2) axles and which have a load capacity of no more than eight (8) tons; and 
b.  All trucks which have a load capacity of no more than eight (8) tons. 
(2)  Combination of vehicles: A semitrailer pulled by a truck tractor or a semitrailer and trailer pulled by a truck tractor operating in a truck tractor-semitrailer-trailer combination. 
(3)  Semitrailer: A detachable load-bearing unit designed to be attached to a coupling on the rear of a truck tractor by which it is partly supported. 
(4)  Trailer: A detachable load-carrying unit designed to be attached to a coupling at the rear of a semitrailer and capable of support and operation without the truck tractor. 
(5)  Truck tractor: The noncargo-carrying power unit that operates in combination with a semitrailer or trailer. 
(Ord. No. 7-88, §§ 1, 2, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 15-03, § 1, 5-11-2015) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 7-88, §§ 1-5, adopted Aug. 15, 1988, was non-amendatory of the Code; treatment of the provisions thereof as superseding §§ 14-34 and 14-35 and inclusion as new §§ 14-34-14-36 has been at the editor's discretion. Former §§ 14-34 and 14-35, pertaining to prohibition of truck traffic on Foster Mill Boulevard, derived from Code 1975, § 30-50, as amended by Ord. of Feb. 9, 1976. 
Sec. 14-35. - Same-Designated prohibited streets. 
    Those city streets to which sections 14-34 through 14-39 apply and which shall be referred to as prohibited streets are as follows: 
(1)  All portions of Foster Mill Drive within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  All portions of Jefferson Street which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(3)  All portions of West North Main Street which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(4)  All portions of Gordon Pond Road which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(5)  All portions of Probasco Street which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(6)  All portions of Warthen Street which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(7)  All portions of East West Main Street; 
(8)  All portions of Duke Street; 
(9)  All portions of Hillsdale Road which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(10)  All portions of Indiana Street; 
(11)  All portions of North Chattanooga Street; 
(12)  All portions of West Villanow Street; and 
(13)  All portions of Grant Street; 
(14)  All portions of Shinbone Ridge Road which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(15)  All portions of West Culberson Street and Hickory Street which lie between Chattanooga Street and Second Avenue and all portions of Second Avenue; 
(16)  All portions of Foster Boulevard which lie within the corporate limits of the city; 
(17)  All portions of Patterson Road which lie within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7-88, § 3, 8-15-88; Ord. No. 8-88, 9-12-88; Ord. of 7-9-90; Ord. of 1-13-92; Ord. No. 03-03, § 1, 3-11-2003; Ord. No. 15-03, § 2, 5-11-2015) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 14-34. 
Sec. 14-36. - Same-Application of prohibited street regulation; violations. 
(a)  No truck or combination of vehicles shall be operated on or over a prohibited street, unless in accordance with the exceptions hereinafter set out: 
(1)  Provided the same does not violate any state law, any truck or combination of vehicles may be operated over a prohibited street where the same is absolutely necessary to reach a destination point within the city for the conduct of business, provided that the same constitutes only crossing a prohibited street, or provided that streets other than prohibited streets are used until reaching the intersection of the prohibited street and the nonprohibited street nearest to the destination and leading directly to the destination. 
(2)  Provided the same does not violate any state law, any truck or combination of vehicles may be operated over a prohibited street where necessary to leave a point of origin within the city for the conduct of business, provided it leaves such prohibited street at the nearest intersection of a nonprohibited street to such point of origin. 
(3)  Provided the same does not violate any state law, any truck or combination of vehicles may be operated over a prohibited street listed herein if owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or materialman, while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  An emergency vehicle may be operated on any street within the city. 
(b)  Violations. Any violation of sections 14-34 through 14-36 shall be an offense punishable by the recorder's court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7-88, §§ 4, 5, 8-15-88) 
Note- See the editor's note following §§ 14-34 and 14-37. 
Sec. 14-37. - Same-Parking restriction. 
    No trucks shall be allowed to park on either side of South Main Street between the south side of Patton Avenue and the north side of West Main Street in the city. 
(Ord. of 2-9-76) 
Editor's note- The above section, concerning truck parking restrictions, has been redesignated from § 14-36 to § 14-37 in order to accommodate expansion of previous sections concerning trucks, at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-38. - Prohibition of oversized loads. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any truck with an oversized load to travel upon Main Street, Business U. S. 27, within the corporate limits of the city and lying between its intersection on the north and south with the U. S Highway 27 By-Pass (Lyle Jones Parkway), except when either the Georgia or United States Department of Transportation specially permits the oversized load to travel upon Main Street within the corporate limits of the city, as aforesaid. An oversized load shall be any load: 
(1)  Transported by a truck; and 
(2)  Required to have a permit by the Georgia or United States Department of Transportation. 
(b)  Any violation of this section shall be an offense punishable by the city municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 09/05, § 1, 9-14-2009) 
Sec. 14-39. - Truck routes. 
(a)  The city clerk shall maintain on file an accurate map of the truck routes within the corporate limits of the city. Said map, as may be amended from time to time, is incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. The map shall be available for inspection by the public at the office of the city clerk. A copy of the map showing the truck routes within the corporate limits of the city adopted by this section is attached hereto as exhibit "A." 
(b)  The city shall post and maintain signs designating and providing additional information regarding the truck routes within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 15-03, § 1, 5-11-2015) 

Secs. 14-40-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEVICES 

Sec. 14-51. - Erection of traffic-control devices, city manager to have complete authority. 
    The erection and removal of all traffic-control lights, electric signal devices, signs, markers, buttons and other traffic-control devices shall be performed solely upon order of the city manager, unless contrary provision is made by this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 30-20) 
Sec. 14-52. - School zone signs. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the chief of police or any person designated by him to place and remove school zone signs. 
(Code 1975, § 30-21) 
Sec. 14-53. - Through streets, duty of superintendent of public works to erect stop signs. 
    Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of this city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to place and maintain a stop sign or yield right-of-way sign on each and every intersection of such through street. 
(Code 1975, § 30-22) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks. Ch. 19. 
Sec. 14-54. - Designation of crosswalks, safety zones and traffic lanes. 
    The superintendent of streets is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain crosswalks by means of appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway; 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; 
(3)  To make lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable. 
(Code 1975, § 30-23) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 14-55. - Play streets; use limited. 
(a)  The city manager shall have the authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices indicating this fact. 
(b)  No person shall drive a vehicle upon any play street except drivers of vehicles having business or residences within such closed area. At no time shall such driver's speed exceed five (5) miles per hour. 
(Code 1975, § 30-24) 
Secs. 14-56-14-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, OCGA § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 14-71. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
    The superintendent of streets when directed by the city manager is authorized to erect signs upon the left-hand side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of any vehicle, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such left-hand side in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1975, § 30-30) 
Sec. 14-72. - Standing or parking on one-way roadways. 
    If a highway includes two (2) or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one (1) direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city manager is authorized to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 30-31) 
Sec. 14-73. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The city manager is hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs any place not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized herein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1975, § 30-32) 
Sec. 14-74. - No parking zone established. 
    There shall be no parking on either side of Shattuck Industrial Boulevard from the point where the same is intersected by the main line of the Central of Georgia Railway Company to the point where the same intersects the east right-of-way line of Broomtown Road, also known as Georgia State Highway No. 337. 
(Ord. of 11-8-76) 
Sec. 14-74.1. - Provisions of OCGA Section 40-6-252 regarding parking, standing or driving of vehicles in private parking areas adopted by reference. 
    Provisions of OCGA Section 40-6-252 shall be codified in this Code of Ordinances as follows: 
(1)  The Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 40-6-252 provides in subsection (a) thereof that there shall be no parking, standing or driving any vehicle in private parking areas after there has been a request not to do so; and 
(2)  Subsection (c) of the aforesaid Code Section provides that the governing authority of a municipal corporation may by ordinance adopt the provisions of subsection (a) thereof by reference; and 
(3)  The City of LaFayette, Georgia is desirous of adopting the provisions of subsection (a) of the aforesaid Code Section and therefore, the City of LaFayette, Georgia hereby adopts all of the provisions of subsection (a) of Section 40-6-252 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(4)  Any person violating the provisions of this Section shall be subject to a monetary fine, as follows: 
a.  Not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first such violation; 
b.  Not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second such violation; and 
c.  Not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third or each subsequent violation. 
(Ord. of 9-10-92) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Sept. 10, 1992, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, its inclusion herein as § 14-74.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-75. - City manager to designate curb loading zones; definitions. 
(a)  Authorized. The city manager is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Passenger curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading and unloading of passengers. 
(2)  Freight curb loading zone. A place adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers. 
(Code 1975, § 30-33) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-76. - Passenger curb loading zone. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective. 
(Code 1975, § 30-34) 
Sec. 14-77. - Freight curb loading zone. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading or loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. 
(b)  The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight curb loading zone for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers. 
(Code 1975, § 30-35) 
Sec. 14-78. - City council, city manager to designate public carrier stands. 
    The city manager, at the direction of the city council, shall represent the city in approving the location of bus stops and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets, in such places and in such number as shall be determined to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such stop, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1975, § 30-36) 
Cross reference- Vehicles for hire, Ch. 22. 
Sec. 14-79. - Parking within white lines required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, in parking any vehicle on any street on which white lines indicate the proper parking area, to park the vehicle on or across the while lines, but every person shall park the vehicle within the white lines, leaving sufficient space for the parking of other vehicles in the adjoining spaces. 
(Code 1975, § 30-37) 
Sec. 14-80. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The superintendent of streets, as directed by the city manager, is hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one (1) side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1975, § 30-38) 
Sec. 14-81. - Authority of city manager to prohibit and restrict parking. 
(a)  The city manager shall have authority to designate those streets or parts of streets in the city upon which parking shall be prohibited, or time limits shall be established, or parking shall be otherwise restricted. 
(b)  When signs are erected giving notice of such prohibition or restriction on parking, it shall be unlawful for any person to disobey the directions of such signs. 
(Code 1975, § 30-39) 
Sec. 14-82. - Unlawful to park facing traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the edge of a roadway so that such vehicle is headed in the opposite direction of lawful traffic movement. 
(Code 1975, § 30-39.2) 
Secs. 14-83-14-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - IMPOUNDMENT AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 14-106. - Chief of police authorized to establish vehicle pounds. 
    The chief of police is hereby authorized to create a vehicle pound or pounds to which automobiles and other vehicles may be removed by police officers in the manner hereinafter provided. Such pound or pounds shall be located at such places as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1975, § 30-70) 
Sec. 14-107. - When vehicle may be impounded. 
    Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police department, to a vehicle pound. 
(Code 1975, § 30-71) 
Sec. 14-108. - Immediate record of impounding to be made. 
    It shall be the duty of the officer impounding a vehicle to immediately report the fact of such impounding, together with any other information which will identify the vehicle, to the chief of police, who shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 30-72) 
Sec. 14-109. - Release of impounded vehicle. 
    Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall produce evidence of his identity and ownership or right of possession to the chief of police and pay to such officer the fees for removal and storage, for which a receipt shall be given and an order issued to the officer in charge of the pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver the same to such person. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the officer in charge thereof, who shall take a receipt for such impounded vehicle. Such receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle and shall become a permanent record of the police department. 
(Code 1975, § 30-73) 
Sec. 14-110. - Protest and bond permissible. 
(a)  In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fee, the chief of police may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge the same upon the following terms and conditions. 
(b)  Such person shall be charged with violation of this article or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for his appearance and trial before the recorder. Thereupon, the chief of police shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. If such person is convicted of violating this article or other traffic ordinance by the recorder, in addition to other costs, the recorder shall assess as cost the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of such vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 30-74) 
Sec. 14-111. - Pound record and fee accounting. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a permanent record of all vehicles committed to the pound, the names and addresses of such owners of the vehicles, the numbers of their state license tags, and the nature and circumstance of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case, and to account for all fees collected under this chapter and pay the same into the city treasury. 
(Code 1975, § 30-75) 
Sec. 14-112. - Impounding does not preclude other prosecution. 
    The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this article or any other ordinance relating to traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 30-76) 
Sec. 14-113. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformity with traffic laws, provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1975, § 30-80) 
Sec. 14-114. - Authority of chief of police to delegate power and duties. 
    The chief of police shall have the power to delegate to any other officer in the police department the duties and responsibilities conveyed to him by this article. 
(Code 1975, § 30-81) 
Sec. 14-115. - Charging violations of speed restrictions. 
    In every charge of violation of any speed regulation herein provided, the summons or notice to appear shall specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, also the lawful speed applicable within the district or at the location. 
(Code 1975, § 30-82) 
Sec. 14-116. - Procedure upon arrest. 
    Except when authorized or directed under state law immediately to take a person arrested before the recorder, any police officer, upon making an arrest for violation of the state traffic laws or traffic ordinances of the city, shall take the name, address and operator's license number of the alleged violator and the registered number of the motor vehicle involved and shall issue to him in writing on a form provided by the city manager a notice to answer to the charge against him at a specified place and time. 
(Code 1975, § 30-83) 
Sec. 14-117. - Penalty for failure to appear when served with copy of charges. 
    Any person who has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in the recorder's court and shall fail to appear at the time and place indicated in such copy of charges shall be guilty of a punishable offense punishable by the court. 
(Code 1975, § 30-84) 
Sec. 14-118. - Disposition of traffic fines and forfeitures. 
    All fines or forfeitures collected upon conviction or upon the forfeiture of bail of any person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Code 1975, § 30-86) 
Chapter 15 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses, OCGA Title 16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Selling fruits, vegetables or wares, in certain areas. 
    The selling of fruits, vegetables, or wares on North or South Main Street from the curb or sidewalk, and the sale of fruit and vegetables from the curb or sidewalk within one (1) block of the public square is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 32-10) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 
Sec. 15-2. - Curfew for minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to be abroad at night between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless going directly to or from a lawful activity or upon a legitimate errand for, or accompanied by, a parent, guardian or other adult person having lawful custody of such minor. 
(Code 1975, § 32-11) 
Sec. 15-3. - Halloween curfew. 
    On October 31 of every year, the curfew provided for by section 15-2 shall begin at 9:00 p.m. and extend until 5:00 a.m. of the succeeding day. 
(Code 1975, § 32-12) 
Sec. 15-4. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Use of obscene, abusive or profane language; 
(2)  Making of any threats of violence to or against any other person; 
(3)  Being drunk, or the extravagant use of spirituous liquors; 
(4)  Being noisy and disorderly in or upon any street or other public place in the city; 
(5)  Making any indecent or immoral exposure of the person; 
(6)  The reckless and dangerous use of firearms or dangerous weapons; 
(7)  Any noisy or riotous conduct to the disturbance of the public peace and tranquility; 
(8)  Engaging in, promoting, encouraging, aiding or abetting any fight, riot or noisy and disorderly proceeding on any street or public place, or in any private building or dwelling when persons residing in the vicinity are disturbed; 
(9)  Assault and battery upon any person on any street or public place, or in any private building or dwelling when persons residing in the vicinity are disturbed. 
(Code 1975, § 32-13) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to pass laws to punish disorderly conduct within their respective limits, OCGA § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 15-5. - Drunkenness on city property. 
    The drinking of intoxicants or appearing on city property in a drunken condition or under the influence of intoxicants is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1975, § 32-14) 
Sec. 15-6. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, irrespective of age, to loiter or loaf upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleyways within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 32-16) 
Sec. 15-7. - Trespassing on city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any property owned by the city at a time when the same is closed to the general public. 
(Code 1975, § 32-19.1) 
Sec. 15-7.1. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit the offense of criminal trespass by motor vehicle as set forth in OCGA § 16-7-29(a) and pursuant to OCGA § 16-7-29(c), OCGA § 16-7-29(a) is hereby adopted and all of the provisions of OCGA § 16-7-29(a) are incorporated herein and are made a part hereof by reference as if said provisions were set forth verbatim herein. 
(b)  Any violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be punishable by the recorder's court of the city, and any person found to be in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be subject to a monetary fine: 
(1)  Not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second such violation; and 
(3)  Not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the third or subsequent such violation. 
(Ord. No. 4-88, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-87) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4-88, adopted Dec. 14, 1987, and effective Jan. 13, 1988, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 as § 15-7.1 was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 15-8. - Trees; cutting and defacing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface or destroy any shade tree on public property in the city unless authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 32-19.2) 
Sec. 15-9. - Discharge of firearms. 
    There shall be no discharge of firearms within the boundaries of the city limits except in defense of oneself or others or property in accordance with Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 13-2, § 1, 10-14-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 13-2, § 1, adopted Oct. 14, 2013, repealed the former section and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former section pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 12-03, § 1, 9-10-2012. 
Sec. 15-10. - Wearing of masks and hoods. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to appear on or in any public way or place while wearing any mask, device, or hood whereby any portion of the face is so hidden or covered as to conceal the identity of the wearer. The following are exempted from the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Children under the age of ten (10) years; 
(2)  Workers while engaged in work wherein a face covering is necessary for health and safety reasons; 
(3)  Persons wearing gas masks in civil defense drills and exercises or emergencies. 
(Code 1975, § 32-19.4) 
Sec. 15-11. - Throwing of missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw any stone, snowball, bottle or any other missile maliciously upon or at any vehicle, building, tree, or other public property. 
Sec. 15-12. - Littering. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. 
a.  The purpose of this section is to provide for the protection and preservation of the public health, safety, and general welfare through the provision of a uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property. 
b.  The intent of this section is to curb the desecration of the beauty of the city and to prevent harm to the public health, safety, and general welfare and degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by the presence of litter through a prohibition on all littering imposed by ordinance as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 16-7-48. 
(2)  Applicability . 
a.  This section is applicable to all public and private property within the city. 
(3)  Compatibility with other ordinances. 
a.  This section provides the exclusive regulation of littering within the city. 
b.  This section provides the exclusive penalties for littering within the city and controls over any other ordinance or regulation. 
(b)  Definitions . 
(1)  Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, paper, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, cigarette butts, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal containers, glass containers, broken glass, tires, dead animals, or discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51(6). 
(2)  Public or private property means any right-of-way of any road, street, highway, sidewalk; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; any residential or farm properties, including timberlands or forests; and any business properties. 
(c)  Prohibition against littering. 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city unless: 
a.  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; or 
b.  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(2)  It is unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in the vehicle unless the load on or in the vehicle is adequately secured, via a tarp or whatever means necessary, to prevent the dropping or shifting of the load onto the roadway. 
(d)  Violations . 
(1)  Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions and penalties outlined in this subsections (e) and (f) of this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in any manner provided by law. 
(2)  Violations may be determined based on evidence, which includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  The throwing, depositing, dropping, or dumping of litter from any conveyance, including any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance, in violation of this section constitutes prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
b.  Any litter discovered on public or private property in violation of this section which contains or displays the name of the person in a manner indicating that the article belongs or belonged to the person creates a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. 
c.  It is a rebuttable presumption that the owner or tenant in possession of private property has committed the offense of littering in violation of this section, if the owner or tenant has willfully failed or refused to remove litter dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on the private property within five calendar days after notice by any officer authorized to enforce this section. 
(e)  Enforcement . 
(1)  The provisions of this section may be enforced by any of the following: 
a.  Any law enforcement officer of the city; 
b.  Any codes enforcement officer of the city or his or her designee; 
c.  Any law enforcement agency, officer, or official of the State of Georgia or Walker County, Georgia. 
(f)  Penalties . 
(1)  Any person who violates this section may be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, a violator of this section must reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter if the litter is removed by the city. 
(3)  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, a violator of this section may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one (1) mile any litter he or she is deemed to have deposited. 
(4)  In the sound discretion of the municipal court, a violator of this section may be directed to pick up and remove from any public property, private right-of-way, or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he or she deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence. 
(5)  The municipal court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-05, § 1, 10-9-2017) 
Sec. 15-13. - Urban camping and improper use of public places. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrase, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bridge means a structure, including the approaches thereto, erected in order to afford passage over any obstruction in any public road, railroad, or other right-of-way; or to afford passage under or over existing public roads, railroads, or other rights-of-way. 
    Camp means to reside in or use a location for private living accommodations, such as erecting tents or other temporary structures or objects providing shelter; sleeping in a single place for more than an hour at a time; cooking or preparing meals; or other similar activities. 
    Public park means and includes all municipal parks and trails, public playgrounds, public plazas and squares, attractions, and monuments. 
    Public street means and includes all public streets and highways, public sidewalks, public benches, public parking lots, and medians. 
    Store or storing personal property means leaving one's personal effects, such as, but not limited to, clothing, bedrolls, cookware, sleeping bags, luggage, knapsacks, or backpacks, unattended for more than one (1) hour. This term shall not include parking a bicycle or other mode of transportation. 
(b)  Public parks. It shall be unlawful to camp or to store personal property in any public park. 
(c)  Public streets. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, sit, or lie down on any public street. 
(d)  Underneath bridges. It shall be unlawful to camp or store personal property underneath any bridge. 
(e)  Other property; blocking ingress or egress. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property, or to sit or lie down on any public property so as to interfere with the ingress or egress from buildings. 
(f)  Private property. It shall be unlawful to camp, sleep, store personal property on any private property without express permission of the property owner, but not in violation of any ordinance of the city including, but not limited to, the city's zoning ordinance. 
(g)  Warning. No person may be arrested for violating this section until he has received an oral or written warning to cease the unlawful conduct. If the violator fails to comply with the warning issued, he is subject to arrest for urban camping. 
(h)  Exceptions. This section shall not be construed to prohibit the following behavior: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs in public parks, public streets, or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing sidewalk cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or abutting private property owner; provided, however, that this exception shall not be construed so as to allow persons to camp on such a chair or bench; 
(6)  Persons sitting while waiting in an orderly line outside a box office to purchase tickets to any sporting event, concert, performance, or other special event; 
(7)  Persons sitting waiting in an orderly line awaiting entry into any building or awaiting social services, such as provisions of meals; or 
(8)  Children sleeping anywhere while being carried by a supervising adult or while sitting or lying in a stroller or baby carriage. 
(j)  Punishment. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, violator shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), incarceration not to exceed twenty (20) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 19-03, § 15-12, 3-11-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-03, adopted Mar. 11, 2019, enacted provisions to be designated as § 15-12. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 15-12, said new provisions have been redesignated as § 15-13. 
Sec. 15-14. - Prohibited solicitation. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggressive manner means: 
(1)  Following a person during or after solicitation if the conduct is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(2)  Continuing to solicit from a person after the person had given a negative response to such solicitation, if continuing the solicitation is intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or is intended to, or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation; 
(3)  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with a person, without that person's consent, in the course of soliciting; 
(4)  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation. Acts authorized as an exercise of one's constitutional right to picket or legally protect and acts authorized by a permit issued by the city shall not constitute an obstruction of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or 
(5)  Using abusive or threatening language or gestures intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon property in the person's possession, or intended to, or reasonable likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the solicitation. 
    Automated teller machine means a device linked to a financial institution's account records which is able to perform transactions, including, but not limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries, or mortgage and loan payments. 
    Automated teller machine facility means the area comprised of one (1) or more automatic teller machines and the adjacent space which is made available to financial institution customers after regular financial institution hours. 
    Check cashing business means any person duly licensed to engage in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration pursuant to Georgia law. 
    Financial institution means any bank corporation or credit union as defined by Georgia law. 
    Public area means an area to which the public or a substantial group of person has access, including, but not limited to: Alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, plazas, sidewalks, and streets that are open to the general public. 
    Solicit means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value from another person, regardless of the solicitor's purpose or intended use of the money or other thing of value, including employment, business, or contributions, or to request the purchase of goods of services. The solicitation may be, without limitation, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication. 
(b)  Aggressive solicitation prohibited. It shall be unlawful to solicit in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
(c)  Other prohibited solicitation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to solicit in any public transportation vehicle or at any bus or public transportation station or stop. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to solicit within fifteen (15) feet of any entrance or exit of any financial institution or check cashing business or within fifteen (15) feet of any automated teller machine without the consent of the owner or other person legally in possession of such facility. When an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, the distance of fifteen (15) feet shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful to solicit on private property in the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to solicit any operator or other occupant of motor vehicle while such vehicle is on any public street for the purpose of performing or offering to perform a service in connection with such a vehicle or otherwise soliciting the sale of goods or services. This subsection shall not apply to services rendered in connection with emergency repairs requested by the operator or passengers of such vehicle. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to solicit from any operator or occupant of a motor vehicle on a public street in exchange for blocking, occupying, or reserving a public parking space. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to solicit in any public parking lot or public parking structure. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to solicit within ten (10) feet of an entrance to any building. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to solicit while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to solicit after sunset or before sunrise. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make a false or misleading representation in the course of soliciting. False or misleading misrepresentations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  Stating that the solicitor is from out of town and is stranded when this statement is not true; 
b.  Stating or suggesting falsely that the solicitor is either a present or former member of the armed services; 
c.  Displaying any indication of physical disability when the solicitor does not suffer the disability indicated; or 
d.  Stating the solicitor is homeless when he or she is not. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful to solicit in a group of two (2) or more persons. 
(d)  Applicability. This section regulates the time, place, and manner of solicitations and shall not apply to any persons exercising their clearly established constitutional right to picket, protest, or engage in other constitutionally protected activity. 
(e)  Punishment. Upon conviction of a violation of this section, a violator shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), incarceration not to exceed ten (10) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 19-04, § 1(15-13), 3-11-2019) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 19-04, adopted Mar. 11, 2019, enacted provisions to be designated as § 15-13. Inasmuch as there already exists a § 15-13, said new provisions have been redesignated as § 15-14. 
Secs. 15-15-15-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-3, §§ 1-7, adopted Jan. 8, 2001 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions as §§ 15-31-15-37 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 15-31. - Definitions. 
    Alarm administrator means a person or designee designated by director of public safety to administer, control and review false alarm reduction efforts. 
    Alarm registration means the alarm registration is the notification by an alarm company or an alarm user to the alarm administrator that an alarm system has been installed and is in use. 
    Alarm system means an alarm system is a device or series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an alarm condition and intended to summon the Lafayette Police Department, LaFayette Fire Department or Walker County EMS, including local alarm system. Alarm system does not include an alarm installed on a vehicle or person unless the vehicle or personal alarm is permanently located at a site. 
    False alarm means a false alarm is the activation of a fire, burglary and/or robbery or personal alarm by other that a medical emergency, fire, unintentional smoke, forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no fire has occurred, no emergency medical treatment is needed or no burglary, theft, robbery or forcible entry is being committed or attempted on the premises. False alarms shall include negligently activated alarm, alarms which are the result of equipment which has been improperly installed or maintained, and alarms which are purposefully activated to summon the police, firemen or EMT in nonemergency situations, but does not include an alarm caused by violent weather conditions, acts of God or other causes which are beyond the user's control. 
    Multiple alarm sites means more than one (1) alarm system on the premises. 
    Panic or personal alarm means an alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring EMS, fire or law enforcement response. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 15-32. - Registration (or permit). 
(a)  Registration required. It shall be unlawful to maintain within the city, an alarm system on commercial or residential premises unless the person owning or operating the business or residential location, where such alarm system is maintained, shall file with public safety department, a valid alarm registration issued by the alarm administrator or designee. A separate registration is required for each alarm site (multiple alarm sites). Fire alarms, burglary or robbery alarms, or panic alarms (any combination) on one (1) site will be considered as one (1) registration. 
(b)  Completed application. Upon receipt of a completed application form, the alarm administrator shall register the applicant and assign an alarm index number unless the applicant has failed to pay a fi. fa. assessment or, had an alarm registration to the alarm site suspended or revoked, and the violation causing the suspension or revocation has not been corrected. 
(c)  Alarm registration application. Each alarm registration must include the following information. 
(1)  The name, complete address, and telephone numbers of the person who will be the registration holder and be responsible for the proper maintenance and operation of the alarm system and payment of fees assessed under this article; 
(2)  The classification of the alarm site as either residential, commercial, government entity or apartment; 
(3)  For each alarm system located at the alarm site, the classification of the alarm system, i.e., fire, burglary, holdup, panic or other, for each purpose whether audible or silent; 
(4)  Mailing address if different from the alarm site; 
(5)  Any dangerous or special conditions present, i.e. attack dog, at the alarm site; 
(6)  Name and telephone numbers of at least two (2) individuals who are able and have agreed to receive notification of an alarm activation at any time; respond to the alarm site within thirty (30) minutes; and will deactivate the alarm system if such becomes necessary; 
(7)  Type of business conducted at the alarm site; and, 
(8)  That law enforcement, fire, or EMS response may be based on factors such as: availability of police units, fire or EMT, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency conditions, staffing levels, etc. 
(d)  False application. Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for refusal to issue a registration. 
(e)  Transferability. An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator of any change that alters any information listed on the registration application within five (5) business days. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § 2, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 15-33. - Responsibility of the alarm user. 
(a)  Any commercial premises employing an alarm or system shall post in a prominent or conspicuous place notice of an alarm control company and alarm index number sticker. This index number, which is assigned by the alarm administrator, will correspond with a named representative who can be notified at all times and who is authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system or who can contact a person who can deactivate the system if there are no means of access to the premises. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to activate any alarm or system for the purpose of summoning the police, except in the event of an actual or attempted robbery or burglary. It shall also be unlawful for anyone to notify the police of an activated alarm and fail to disclose to the police their knowledge or apparent knowledge that the alarm system has been activated due to some electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system. 
(c)  All alarm users shall be required to respond to the location where the alarm is activated or when requested by the city police department, fire department or public safety department. The key holder will be given thirty (30) minutes from the time the officer or firemen arrive at the premises to respond to the alarm, unless other arrangements are made through public safety department. Upon activation, the alarm shall not sound any longer than fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § 3, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 15-34. - Responsibility of the alarm administrator. 
(a)  Public safety department, the monitoring agency for the false alarm ordinance will make notification to any owner or occupier of the premises who have violated the ordinance. 
(b)  The alarm administrator will issue a written notice of all false alarms to alarm users. This notice is in addition to the notice issued to the key holder answering the false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § 4, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 15-35. - Exemptions. 
(a)  There shall be a thirty-day grace period following the installation of any new alarm system during which period false alarms shall not be counted. This grace period is provided to allow the installing company or other installer and the user to take necessary corrective action with regard to the operation of the alarm system. A responsible person at a premise must maintain written proof, in the form of an invoice, of the date of installation of an alarm system for exemption under this section. 
(b)  An alarm activated during an alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company, or designee, or public safety communications to test the system. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § 5, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 15-36. - Offenses. 
(a)  Upon the police, fire, or EMS responding to the fifth false alarm within a twelve-month period, the owner or occupier of the premises where said alarm or burglary system is maintained shall be given a written notice that five (5) responses to false alarms have occurred within a twelve-month period. Any additional false alarms would result in the alarms administrator assessing a service fee due and payable within thirty (30) days following notice thereof, and treated as any other municipal liability, such as taxes, and issued a fi. fa. and an execution for the owner of the premises for violation of the false alarm ordinance. The violation would result in fees as shown: 
Number of false alarms fee 
1 st year 2 nd year 6 through 10 $25.00 $50.00 11 or more $50.00 $100.00  
(b)  Upon the police or fire department responding to each false alarm, the responding key holder will be advised of the false alarm. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm, the responding officer or firemen will notify public safety department and the alarm administrator will assess a fee to the owner or occupier for violation of the false alarm ordinance. If the key holder fails to respond to any false alarm after the fifth false alarm, the alarm administrator will issue a double assessment. One (1) assessment will be for the owner or occupier for violation of [subsection] (a). The violation of this section would result in an assessment the same as for the number of false alarms 6 through 10. 
(c)  In the event that an owner or occupier fails to register their alarm system, the alarm administer will assess a fee to the owner or occupier for violation of the false alarm ordinance. The violation of this section would result in an assessment the same as for the number of false alarms 11 or more, 2 nd year. 
(d)  In the event that an owner or occupier is a corporation or government entity, the summons will be addressed to the corporation or government entity and made attention to a designated individual. It will be the corporation's or government entity's responsibility to inform the public safety department who the designated individual will be. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § 6, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 15-37. - Appeals. 
(a)  In the event that a location is assessed a false alarm fee, and the owner, business or legal entity does not agree that the alarm activation should be classified as a false alarm, the owner, business or legal entity to appeal the ruling through the proper process as follows: 
(1)  The proper representative of the owner, business, or legal entity, having or maintaining the alarm system may contact the chief of the agency that responded to the alarm (fire, police or EMS) and appeal the ruling. The alarm administrator will present any documentation on behalf of the city or county. 
(2)  In the event that the owner, business or legal entity (proper representative) and the director of public safety are not able to resolve and agree on the alarm classification, the proper representative may request a meeting with the city manager to appeal the ruling. The alarm administrator will present any documentation on behalf of the city. 
(3)  The ruling of the city manager will be final. 
(Ord. No. 01-3, § 7, 1-8-2001) 
Chapter 16 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2; cemeteries, Ch. 7; planning, Ch. 17; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III, OCGA § 36-34-3; establishment, etc., of recreation systems, OCGA Title 36, Ch. 64. 

Sec. 16-1. - Golf course pond; no swimming or fishing allowed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fish or swim in the pond on the city golf course. 
(Code 1975, § 14-10) 
Sec. 16-2. - Horses or ponies prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow horses or ponies to enter upon any recreation areas owned by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 14-11) 
Cross reference- Animals, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 16-3. - Curfew. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or vehicle of any type whatsoever to go on, upon, or across any property used by the city as a part of any park or recreation area, including streets, lanes, alleys, and paths, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:30 a.m. 
(Code 1975, § 14-12) 
Cross reference- Curfew for minors, § 15-2. 
Sec. 16-4. - Two-wheel motor driven vehicles banned. 
    It shall be unlawful for any two-wheel motor driven vehicle of any type whatsoever to be operated in the areas described in section 16-3 at any time whatsoever. Provided, it shall be permissible for such two-wheel vehicles to be driven to, but not beyond, any authorized two-wheel motor driven vehicle parking area. 
(Code 1975, § 14-13) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 16-5. - Unauthorized vehicles in parks; towing away. 
    Any vehicles found on any city park or recreation area in violation of section 16-3 or section 16-4 may be towed away at the direction of appropriate city officers or employees with all expenses of towing and storage to be charged to the owner of such vehicle and collected prior to release of such vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 14-14) 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 16-6. - Queen City Lake regulations. 
(a)  The following regulations shall be observed at Queen City Lake: 
(1)  All provisions of the state department of natural resources, game and fish commission are to be observed, including limits and quantities of daily catch; 
(2)  Hours shall be sunrise to sunset; 
(3)  No alcoholic beverages; 
(4)  No fishing from the residential areas without permission of property owner; 
(5)  No littering, all trash to be removed; 
(6)  Keep off dam and spillways; 
(7)  No gasoline-powered motors allowed on lake. 
(b)  The provisions of this section will be enforced by the city police department and the state department of natural resources, game and fish commission. 
(Ord. of 3-9-81, § 1) 
Chapter 17 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 7; civil defense, Ch. 8; flood damage prevention, Ch. 11; parks and recreation, Ch. 16, streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Municipal powers of planning and zoning, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. 4; urban redevelopment, OCGA Title 36, Ch. 61. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 17-1-17-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAFAYETTE PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 17-16. - Established. 
    In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the LaFayette Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the planning commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 (Act No. 358 as amended) and the planning commission shall be organized and empowered as set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 25-10) 
Sec. 17-17. - Membership; terms; removal; compensation. 
    The planning commission shall consist of eleven (11) members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the mayor and city council. The terms of the members shall be for four (4) years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission under the terms of this article, the first member shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, the second member shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years, the third member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years, and the remaining members shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years each. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1975, § 25-11) 
Sec. 17-18. - Organizations, rules, staff, and finances. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(b)  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1975, § 25-12) 
Sec. 17-19. - Powers and duties. 
    From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then the planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 (Act No. 358 as amended). 
(Code 1975, § 25-13) 
Sec. 17-20. - Flood planning duties. 
    The planning commission shall have the responsibility, authority and means to: 
(1)  Delineate or assist the administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, at his request, in delineating the limits of the areas having special flood hazards on available local maps of sufficient scale to identify the location of building sites; 
(2)  Provide such information as the administrator may request concerning present uses and occupancy of the floodplain; 
(3)  Cooperate with federal, state, and local agencies and private firms which undertake to study, survey, map, and identify floodplain areas, and cooperate with neighboring communities with respect to management of adjoining floodplain areas in order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards; and 
(4)  Submit on the anniversary date of the city's initial eligibility an annual report to the administrator on the progress made during the past year within the community in the development and implementation of floodplain management measures. 
(Code 1975, § 25-20) 
Cross reference- Flood damage prevention, Ch. 11. 
Sec. 17-21. - New structures, record of elevations to be kept. 
    The planning commission and the city building inspector shall keep a record of elevations (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures located in the special flood hazard areas. If the lowest floor is below grade on one (1) or more sides, the elevation of the floor immediately above must also be recorded. 
(Code 1975, § 25-21) 
Secs. 17-22-17-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COOSA VALLEY AREA PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 17-36. - Established. 
    In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city and the Northwest Georgia Area which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, that the Coosa Valley Area Planning and Development Commission, hereinafter referred to as the area planning commission, is hereby created and established as authorized by state law, and the area planning commission shall be organized and empowered as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1975, § 26-10) 
Sec. 17-37. - Membership. 
    The Coosa Valley Area Planning and Development Commission shall consist of two (2) members from each of the counties participating in the area planning commission. Of the two (2) members from each county one (1) shall be appointed by the governing authority of the municipality wherein the county seat is located and the other member shall be appointed by the governing authority of the county. 
(Code 1975, § 26-11) 
Sec. 17-38. - Term of office. 
    The term of office for all members shall be five (5) years, except that the initial appointment by the mayor of the city shall be for a term of three (3) years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the governing authority making the appointment which has become vacant. The appointing authority shall also have the power to remove any member it may appoint for cause, on written charges, after public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1975, § 26-12) 
Sec. 17-39. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
    The commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from among its appointive members. The term of office of the chairman and vice chairman shall be for one (1) year or until reelected or their successors are elected. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an employee of the commission. The commission shall meet at least once each month at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the chairman or board may determine, shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations, which record shall be a public record. The commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work. In the performance of its duties, the commission may cooperate with, contract with, or accept funds from federal, state or local public or semipublic agencies or private individuals or corporations, may spend such funds, and may carry out such cooperative undertakings and contracts. It may make expenditures for the purchase of required equipment and supplies. The expenditures of the commission, exclusive of gifts to the commission and contract receipts, shall be within the amount appropriated for the purpose by the participating governing authorities. 
(Code 1975, § 26-13) 
Sec. 17-40. - Powers and duties. 
    It shall be the function and duty of the commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social, and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity, or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of the entire Northwest Georgia Area and each political subdivision therein. In general, the commission shall have such powers and duties and responsibilities as set forth in the General Planning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended (Act No. 358). 
(Code 1975, § 26-14) 
Secs. 17-41-17-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CHATTANOOGA AREA REGIONAL COUNCIL OF GOVERNMENTS 

Sec. 17-56. - Membership. 
    The mayor and council are hereby authorized to become members of the Chattanooga Area Regional Council of Governments, a general welfare corporation, and to subscribe in behalf of the city to its purposes and objectives, including the collection of data and preparation of plans and programs for land use, transportation, housing, economic development, natural resources development, community facilities, sewer systems, garbage disposal, public health, safety and morals, in cooperation with the membership of the Chattanooga Area Regional Council of Governments. 
(Code 1975, § 27-10) 
Sec. 17-57. - Principal representative for city. 
    The mayor shall be the principal representative of the city on the Chattanooga Area Regional Council of Governments. Should the mayor not be able to attend, he shall be represented by the city manager or the city attorney. 
(Code 1975, § 27-11) 
Secs. 17-58-17-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 17-71. - Activated. 
    There is hereby activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the "Development Authority of LaFayette" which was created upon the adoption and approval of the Development Authorities Law (Ga. Laws 1969, p. 137) and particularly section 2 thereof. 
(Code 1975, § 28-10) 
Sec. 17-72. - Terms of directors. 
    The persons named as the first board of directors of the development authority activated by section 17-71 shall serve in such capacity for the following terms: two (2) for two (2) years, two (2) for four (4) years, and three (3) for six (6) years. If at the end of any term of office of any director a successor thereto shall not have been elected then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Code 1975, § 28-11) 
Sec. 17-73. - Organization, powers and duties. 
    The board of directors of the development authority shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with terms and provisions of the development authorities law as it exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 1975, § 28-12) 
Chapter 18 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; court, Ch. 9; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide police protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(1); law enforcement officers and agencies, OCGA Title 35. 

Sec. 18-1. - Oath required of all policemen. 
    Every member of the city police force shall take and subscribe the following oath of service before a notary public: 
    "I do solemnly swear that I will uphold and enforce the Ordinances of the City of LaFayette, the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, and the Laws and Constitution of the United States of America, and that I will follow the directions and policies of the City of LaFayette as directed by the Mayor, the Chief of Police, Assistant Chief, and Police Committee of the City of LaFayette." 
(Code 1975, § 22-10) 
Sec. 18-2. - Uniform allowance. 
(a)  There shall be a yearly uniform allowance of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each policeman. No officer shall exceed such amount during any fiscal year, and no unused amount of this allowance shall be carried over to a new fiscal year. 
(b)  The city shall issue purchase orders and pay for all uniforms. Each such purchase order must be approved by the chief of police or the assistant chief. No cash shall be paid to any policeman to purchase uniforms. 
(Code 1975, § 22-11) 
Sec. 18-3. - Refusing to aid a police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any male person between the ages of eighteen (18) years and fifty (50) years, who, being called on by an officer of the city, for assistance to suppress an affray, breach of the peace, or other outrage, to refuse to give such assistance. 
(Code 1975, § 23-10) 
Chapter 18.2 - SIGNS 

Sec. 18.2-1. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city finds that signs are a proper use of private property, are a means of personal free expression and a necessary component of a commercial environment. As such, signs are entitled to the protection of the law. In the absence of regulation, however, the number of such signs tends to proliferate, with property owners desiring ever-increasing numbers and sizes of signs, leading to cluttered and aesthetically blighted thoroughfares. In addition, the competition among competing sign owners for visibility of their signs contributes to safety hazards for both vehicles and pedestrians and undermines the sign owner's original purpose of presenting a clear message of its idea or identification of its premises. 
(b)  Regulation of the size, height, number and spacing of signs is necessary to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the city, to protect the public investment in the streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, to eliminate visual clutter and blight, to provide an aesthetically appealing environment, and to provide for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all the city's citizens. 
(c)  The city further finds that there is a substantial difference between signs erected by public authority and signs erected by private citizens or businesses. Signs erected by public authority are virtually all erected for the purpose of maintaining the public safety either through direct control of traffic or through provision of such type signage as street signs which enable the traveling public to know where they are located and to find where they are going. As such, with the exception of signs identifying government buildings, virtually all government signs are erected purely for public safety purposes. Moreover, their use in the public right-of-way is necessary to ensure their visibility to the motoring public. The city council finds that public utility signs are frequently of the same nature as those signs erected by governmental entities in that they provide necessary information to safeguard the public from downed power lines and from street excavations. Even where signs serve a proprietary purpose, such as identifying markings on utility polls, those signs are marked primarily for the purpose of benefitting the public generally through identification of locations where there may be temporary losses of power. 
(d)  The city finds that some signage has a single targeted function and that identification of such signage by description is impossible without referring to its function. For instance, address numerals are used for the sole purpose of locating addresses, which is of benefit to persons looking for those addresses and is essential to public safety personnel responding to emergencies. Subdivision signs at the entrances to subdivisions favor a similar purpose in enabling both the traveling public and emergency personnel to quickly locate subdivision entrances for the purpose of either visitation or responding to emergency calls. While such signage is referenced based upon the function it serves within the context of this chapter, the bulk of the provisions of this chapter are unrelated to the content of the speech provided and allow maximum expressive potential to sign owners. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(1), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-2. - Authority. 
    This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article IX, Section II, paragraph IV of the Georgia Constitution of 1983, the Charter of the City of LaFayette, the general police powers of the City of LaFayette and other authority provided by federal, state or local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(2), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them. 
    A-frame sign or easel sign. A portable sign consisting of two (2) sign faces placed back to back and hinged together at the top in such a manner that each sign face leans toward the other, connecting at the top and forming a self-supporting structure. 
    Awning. A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway, walkway, or window from the elements. Awnings are often made of fabric or flexible plastic supported by a rigid frame, and may be retracted into the face of the building. 
    Awning sign. See "Building sign." 
    Banner. A sign other than a flag, made of paper, cloth, thin plastic, or similar lightweight material and usually containing a message or logo. 
    Billboard. A sign, with an area greater than one hundred (100) square feet, but not exceeding one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet, which is supported by one (1) or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and is not attached to a building and is not mobile or temporary. 
    Building sign. A sign that in any manner is fastened to, projects from, or is placed or painted upon the exterior wall, window or door of a building. The term "building sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Awning sign. A sign imposed or painted upon an awning. 
(2)  Canopy sign. A display attached to the underside of a marquee or canopy and protruding over any public or private sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(3)  Marquee sign. Any sign attached flat against the marquee or permanent sidewalk canopy of a building and not extending above the roof line. 
(4)  Projecting sign. A sign affixed to a wall and extending more than eighteen (18) inches from the surface of such wall, usually perpendicular to the wall surface. 
(5)  Wall sign. A sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building and extends from the surface of the wall no more than four (4) inches. 
(6)  Window sign. A sign that is placed on or behind a windowpane and intended to be viewed from outside the building. 
    Business premises. A building, suite, office or other unit used for nonresidential purposes. In the case of businesses licensed by the city, the area occupied by a single business license holder shall be deemed as one (1) business premises. In the case of professionals paying individual taxes to the city, each professional corporation, partnership or other entity in which the professional participates shall be considered the occupant and all area occupied by that occupant shall be the business premises. For the purpose of this chapter, business premises shall include nonresidential space occupied by charitable organizations, political organizations, institutions or other noncommercial entities. 
    Canopy. A roof-like structure supported by columns or projecting from a building and open on at least three (3) sides. 
    Canopy sign. See "Building sign." 
    Changeable copy sign. A sign that is capable of changing the position or format or word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods; provided these changes are actuated by either by a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. 
    Directional sign. A sign used to give direction or specific instruction to the public, such as, but not limited to, "enter," "exit," "no parking," "drive through," "rest room," etc. Such signs shall contain only instructional information. 
    Easel sign. See "A-frame sign." 
    Election cycle or election season. That period of time commencing with the closing date for filing notices of candidacy and ending with the final determination of each ballot issue or successful candidate for office. 
    Flag. A sign consisting of any fabric containing distinctive colors, patterns, logos, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government or any other entity or organization. 
    Freestanding sign. A sign, with an area of no more than one hundred (100) square feet and no less than four (4) square feet, which is supported by one (1) or more columns, uprights, or braces in or upon the ground and is not attached to a building and is not mobile or temporary. The term "freestanding sign" includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Pole sign. A sign that is mounted on a freestanding pole or similar support such that the bottom of the sign face is at least six (6) feet above the ground. 
(2)  Ground sign. A freestanding sign, other that a pole sign, in which the bottom of the sign face is less than six (6) feet above the ground but not directly in contact with the ground. 
    Frontage or street frontage. The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street from which access may be directly gained. 
    Fronts or fronting on a street. A business "fronts" on a street when the lot line on the property on which the business is located also forms the line marking the edge of a publicly dedicated right-of-way. 
    Illuminated signs: 
(1)  Internally-illuminated sign. Any sign that is illuminated by an artificial light source from within the sign structure over any or all of its sign face. 
(2)  Externally-illuminated sign. Any sign that is partially or completely illuminated at any time by an artificial light source that directly or indirectly illuminates the face of the sign from outside the sign structure. 
    Marquee sign. See "Building sign." 
    Monument sign. A freestanding sign in which the entire bottom of the sign face is in contact with the ground, providing a solid and continuous background for the sign face from the ground to the top of the sign. 
    Parcel. The unit identified on county tax maps as a single lot for purposes of ad valorem taxation; provided, that two (2) or more adjoining lots owned by one (1) person or entity shall be deemed to be one (1) parcel for the purpose of these provisions. 
    Portable sign: 
(1)  Any sign: 
a.  That is capable of being moved or intended to be moved from one (1) location to another; 
b.  That is considered a portable sign in the normal course of commerce, even though the sign may be temporarily or permanently affixed to the ground; 
c.  The design of which indicates it is capable of being moved or intended to be moved from one (1) location to another; 
d.  That is not permanently affixed to a building or the ground; or 
e.  That is used in such a manner as to be portable. 
(2)  Signs meeting the standards of the following categories shall not be considered portable signs: 
a.  Freestanding signs; 
b.  Building signs; 
c.  Monument signs; 
d.  Billboards. 
(3)  Removal of wheels, chassis or frame from a portable sign shall not result in a change of its classification. 
(4)  Vehicles regularly used in the course of business or that are driven to and from a place of business may contain information identifying the business on the vehicle and may be parked in lots serving the identified business, provided that such vehicle is regularly used for transportation. Vehicles parked in commercial lots or on property located in the city for indefinite periods of time and not regularly used in the course of business that contain identifying information about a business shall be considered portable signs. 
    Projecting sign. See "Building signs." 
    Roof sign. A sign erected upon and above a roof structure and wholly supported by the roof structure or a structure placed upon the roof. Roof signs shall also constitute any signage placed upon sloped building fascia intended to appear as or actually be roof elements of the building. 
    Shared sign. A sign that serves as common or collective use for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same parcel, such as, but not limited to, a shopping center or business park. Ownership of and responsibility for a shared sign shall remain with the owner of the building or buildings served by the sign. 
    Sign. Any structure, display, or device that is used to advertise, identify, direct, or attract attention to a business, institution, organization, person, idea, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, design characteristics, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, movement or illumination. 
    Sign area (for freestanding signs): 
(1)  The area of a sign structure shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of the surface of a sign whereon the sign face or sign face modules may be placed, including all portions of a sign structure that provide a background for the sign face and forming an integral part of the sign face. 
(2)  Any open space contained within the limits of the rectangle delimiting the sign face or sign face modules shall be included in the computation of the area of such sign face or sign face module. 
(3)  For multifaced signs, when the sign face surfaces are parallel (back-to-back), or where the interior angle formed by the faces is forty-five (45) degrees or less, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area on the largest side. For all other multi-faced signs, the area of the sign shall be the total area on all sides that can be viewed at one (1) time from any angle. 
    Sign area (for building signs): 
(1)  The area of a sign shall be computed as the area within the smallest rectangle enclosing the limits of a sign face, or the combination of the areas of all such rectangles delimiting each sign face module, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
(2)  The computation of the area of a sign face shall not include the structure, supports or uprights on which the sign face is placed or any portions of a sign structure that are not intended to contain any message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature, other than those ports contained within the rectangle that delimits the sign face or a sign face module. 
(3)  For any sign on which the words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements routinely change or are intended to be changed from time to time, the sign face area shall include the entire area within which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements may be placed, together with any frame or material, texture, or color forming an integral part of the sign face or used to differentiate the sign face from the structure upon which it is placed. 
    Sign area (for monument signs). The computation of the sign area of a monument sign shall include the entire monument surface, as measured from top to bottom and side to side, upon which any words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors or other design elements occur. 
    Sign face. That portion of the surface of a sign structure where words, letters, figures, symbols, logos, fixtures, colors, or other design elements are or may be located in order to convey the message, idea, or intent for which the sign has been erected or placed. The sign face may be composed of two (2) or more modules on the same surface that are separated or surrounded by portions of a sign structure not intended to contain any advertising message or idea and are purely structural or decorative in nature. 
    Sign height. The vertical distance to the highest point of a sign structure. The height is measured from the surface of the nearest adjacent street at a point on the roadway centerline nearest the sign. 
    Special event sign. A temporary sign utilized in conjunction with and for the same time period as a valid special event permit by the city. 
    Spectacular sign or device. Spectacular sign or device includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Any piece or strip of cloth, paper, canvas, plastic or similar material, including banners, but excluding flags, on which a message, slogan or emblem is painted, drawn or otherwise projected, colored or shaped for the purpose of advertising or drawing public attention; 
(2)  Any advertising display, sign or copy that is animated; 
(3)  Balloons, air- and gas-filled devices; or 
(4)  Streamers. 
    Standard informational sign. A sign with an area not greater than four hundred eighty (480) square inches, with a placard made for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than thirty (30) inches, and is mounted on a stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half (11/2) inches. 
    Wall sign. See "Building sign." 
    Window sign. See "Building sign." 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(3), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-4. - Applicability. 
(a)  The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all properties in the city, regardless of zoning district. 
(b)  The requirements of this chapter shall apply to all signs that are visible from a street, public right-of-way, or property in public ownership. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(4), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-5. - Prohibited signs. 
(a)  The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)  Signs imitating warning signals; signs displaying lights resembling the flashing lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance or rescue vehicles; signs using words, slogans, dimensional shape or size, or colors of governmental traffic signs in such a manner as to be confused with official traffic signs; 
(2)  Signs with lights flashing in series, lines, or rows; 
(3)  Flashing, blinking, fluctuating, or otherwise animated signs; except LED displays on changeable copy signs, as permitted in section 18.2-11; 
(4)  Signs attached to trees or utility poles or boxes; signs painted on or otherwise attached to rocks or other natural objects; signs, other than those placed by a local, state or federal government or utility company located within the public street right-of-way or within five (5) feet of the curb or closest edge of the pavement of any public street; 
(5)  Signs emitting or utilizing in any manner any sound capable of being detected on a public road by a person of normal hearing; 
(6)  Signs which obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof; signs attached in any manner to any fire escape; 
(7)  Banners, fringe, twirling, A-frame, sandwich-type, sidewalk or curb-type signs, balloons, streamers, portable display signs, air or gas filled figures and other similar temporary signs, except as permitted by sections 18.2-10 and 18.2-12 hereof; 
(8)  Roof signs; 
(9)  Signs displaying any statement, word, character or illustration of an obscene nature; 
(10)  Illuminated signs from or to which direct rays of light are projected onto a lot other than on the lot where the illumination occurs. 
(b)  No sign otherwise prohibited by this chapter shall be installed within a building in such a manner that is visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(5), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-6. - Permits; procedures. 
(a)  Unless specifically exempted from obtaining a permit under provisions of this chapter, no person shall erect, construct, replace, relocate or structurally alter any sign within the city without first obtaining a sign permit from the building official. No permit shall be required to repaint or change the lettering of an existing conforming sign, provided that no change of ownership of the entity displaying the message thereon has been made. 
(b)  Applications for permits shall be made upon forms provided by the city and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(2)  Address of building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  One (1) accurate drawing showing the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures, including other signs, driveways, parking areas, and any other limiting site features (survey not required); 
(4)  One accurate drawing of the plans, specifications and method of construction and attachment of the sign to the building or ground. Such drawings shall include the size of the sign area, overall height of the sign, location of the sign installation and its relation to existing rights-of-way and all driveways, and, if a freestanding or monument sign, any protective devices or landscaping around the base of the sign. No sign shall be within ten (10) feet of the closest power line and no part of any sign shall hang over any power line; 
(5)  Name, address and telephone numbers of person erecting the sign; 
(6)  Written consent of the owner, manager, leasing agent or lessee of the building or land to which or upon which the sign is to be erected. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a person placing a political sign upon private property during the election season shall only be required to obtain the verbal consent, not the written consent, of the owner of the private property; 
(7)  The location and size of all other signs on the parcel upon which the sign is to be erected; 
(8)  The size of the parcel on which the sign is to be erected and the length of the street frontage for the street to which the sign is oriented; 
(9)  If the sign is to be lighted, an application for electrical permit meeting all standards of the city's electrical code. The electrical permit shall be included in the sign permit; 
(10)  Such other information as the city shall require to show full compliance with this and other ordinances of the city. 
(c)  For signs shared by more than one (1) person or entity, the property owner or sign contractor shall secure a permit for the sign structure and the property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of the structure as well as for removal of individual sign panels identifying uses which no longer exist within the building or buildings covered by the shared sign. In addition to the permit required for a shared sign structure, a separate permit shall be required for each panel, which shall be obtained by the owner, his tenant, an authorized agent, or the sign contractor. 
(d)  Fees for permits shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the council. 
(e)  Upon the filing of an application for a permit and the payment of all necessary fees, the building official shall examine all plans and specifications submitted, including electrical wiring and connections, and the premises upon which the sign is proposed to be erected. Such review shall be completed within thirty (30) days of submission of a completed sign application. If it appears from review of the permit application and the site that the proposed sign is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and all other ordinances and laws of the city, the building official shall issue a permit no later than thirty (30) days from receipt of the completed application. 
(f)  The city shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, are incomplete, or contain any material false statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the building official shall revoke the permit. Should the building official deny a permit, the reasons for denial shall be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address on the permit application on or before thirty (30) business days after the city received the application. Alternatively, the city may personally serve the sign applicant with a copy of the written notice of denial within thirty (30) business days after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. 
(g)  No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after the applicant is given ten (10) days' written notice containing a statement of the reasons for the denial of the permit application or the revocation of a permit. "Due cause" is the violation of any provision of this chapter, or other applicable ordinances, state or federal law, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(h)  An individual whose permit application has been denied or a permittee whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision to the mayor and council, provided such appellant files a written notice of appeal with the city manager within ten (10) business days of the building official's notice. Such appeal shall be considered by the mayor and council at the next council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that such notice of appeal is received a minimum of five (5) business days before the next meeting. Appeal notices received within five (5) days of a scheduled council meeting shall be heard at the next available meeting more than five (5) days following receipt of appeal. The mayor and council shall issue a written decision to the applicant no later than thirty (30) days following the close of the appeal hearing. Decisions of the mayor and council to affirm the decision of the building official or to overrule the decision of the building official and grant or continue the permit for which appeal is taken shall be reduced to writing and served upon the applicant in the same manner as the original notice to deny or notice of revocation. Such decision shall constitute a final determination by the city. 
(i)  In the event an applicant whose permit has been denied or a permit holder whose permit has been revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the mayor and council, such applicant or permit holder may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law and the charter of the City of LaFayette. 
(j)  Any person commencing work on a sign before securing the necessary permit from the building official shall be subject to double permit fees under the permit fee schedule. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(6), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-7. - Permit expiration. 
    A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within three (3) months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made of permit fees for permits that expire due to failure to erect a permitted sign; provided that where an applicant can demonstrate that a commercial entity was timely engaged to construct the permitted sign but the fabrication has not yet been completed, one (1) ninety-day extension may be granted by the building official on the duration of the permit. Where a permit has expired for failure to erect the sign, if an individual later desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule in effect at the time of resubmission. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(7), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-8. - Display of permit. 
    The owner of the sign shall be responsible for maintaining the permit for every sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this chapter. Such permit shall be kept on the premises served by the sign and shall be exhibited promptly upon request of city officers and employees. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(8), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-9. - Compliance with technical codes; zoning. 
(a)  All signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, altered, relocated or modified within the city shall conform with the requirements of the current Georgia Building Codes with amendments and any optional codes adopted by the city and the requirements of the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the city, and as may be amended in the future. Where the provisions of the building or electrical code and this chapter conflict or overlap, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(b)  All signs hereafter erected, replaced, reconstructed, repaired, altered or relocated within the city shall conform to the zoning ordinance of the city. In the event of conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance, the most stringent requirement shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(9), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-10. - Regulation of signs by land use-Developed residential property. 
(a)  Any developed property which is zoned multifamily residential shall comply with the requirements of section 18.2-11 hereof. 
(b)  Any developed residential property which is zoned other than multifamily residential may post only such signs as are authorized by this section and shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Freestanding signs, wall signs. Such property may contain not more than one (1) freestanding sign or wall sign, with permit, the sign area of which may be not greater than six (6) square feet. Any freestanding sign shall be six (6) feet in height or shorter and shall be set back so that it is located entirely on private property and no closer than ten (10) feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Signs shall not project over property lines. Provided, however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs not exceeding the size and height limits provided above are allowed during a political election, between the date of close of filing for qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. No fee and no permit are required for such additional freestanding signs allowed during election cycles. 
(2)  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, such property may contain standard informational signs, without a permit or fee, located so that they are located entirely on private property and no closer than ten (10) feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, as follows: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. below, not more than one (1) standard informational sign; 
b.  An unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of qualification of candidates and final determination on all ballot issues or candidates; 
c.  Where no standard informational sign may be posted in the yard due to lack of a front yard deep enough to meet this standard, such standard informational sign may be posted in a window of the premises. 
(3)  Permanent subdivision signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, if such property is located at the entrance to any residential subdivision, then such property may contain no more than one (1) permanent subdivision sign per entrance. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(10), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-11. - Same-Other developed property. 
    For properties which are zoned multifamily residential and any developed property which is zoned for any commercial, office or industrial use, such properties may post only such signs as are authorized by this section. All signs not expressly authorized by this section are prohibited on such properties. Authorized signs shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. Such property may contain one (1) or more freestanding signs in accordance with the following: 
a.  Except for regulatory signs approved and erected by appropriate federal, state or local authorities, or public utilities, no signs shall be constructed, erected or maintained closer than ten (10) feet from the curb or pavement edge on streets with no curb and shall be installed completely on private property. No freestanding or projecting sign shall be erected within ten (10) feet of the nearest point of the public right-of-way at the intersection of two (2) or more streets. 
b.  Where signs are erected at the same elevation as electrical power lines, the minimal horizontal distance from such power lines to the sign shall be no less than ten (10) feet and no part shall hang over any power line. 
c.  Only one (1) freestanding sign per platted lot shall be allowed along the right-of-way, provided that for business premises fronting on more than one (1) street, one (1) freestanding sign shall be allowed along no more than two (2) right-of-way frontages. 
d.  All freestanding signs shall be surrounded by protective concrete curbing if in a paved area or shall be placed in a landscaped area. No freestanding sign shall be permitted to encroach in a parking area to such extent that the remaining parking spaces fail to meet the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance for offstreet parking. 
e.  Freestanding signs shall be erected to a height of no more than twenty-four (24) feet, provided that planned centers (including both shopping centers and business parks) covering ten (10) acres or more may erect one (1) freestanding sign to a height of thirty (30) feet. All sign heights shall be measured from the grade level of the nearest adjacent street from which the sign is visible. The level of the ground shall not be altered in any way so as to provide additional sign height. All freestanding signs shall have an unobstructed visual clearance exclusive of supports of not less than eight (8) feet. 
f.  The maximum sign area of any sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members shall be: 
1.  Freestanding signs, including shared signs, on parcels of ten (10) acres or more in size, eighty (80) square feet in sign area. For a shopping center, the main sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet and each tenant thereof may have a sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. 
2.  Freestanding signs including shared signs on parcels of three (3) acres or more but less than ten (10) acres, eighty (80) square feet in sign area. For a shopping center, the main sign shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet and each tenant thereof may have a sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. 
3.  Freestanding signs including shared signs on parcels less than three (3) acres, eighty (80) square feet in sign area, and each tenant thereof may have a sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet. 
4.  Freestanding and shared signs may be increased by twenty-five (25) percent on divided highways. 
g.  Exceptions. Exceptions to the size restrictions for shared signs may be made by the city building official upon petition by the property owner where it is determined that the number of tenants to be served by the sign are such that individual sign panels would measure less than four and one-half (41/2) square feet each. Exception to the size limits shall be limited to the maximum relief necessary to allow such individual sign panels at a size of four and one-half (41/2) square feet. 
h.  Drive-through menu boards. In addition to any other freestanding signs authorized by this section, if such property contains a business premises where materials are delivered at a drive-through delivery point other than on the front side of the building, then one (1) additional freestanding sign per delivery point shall be allowed to be located on the property in the side or rear yard. 
(2)  Building signs. Fifteen (15) percent of the square footage of the business premises facade (including signage on glass windows and doors); provided that any business premises may erect a building sign of at least six (6) square feet. Business premises may use a combination of wall signs, canopy signs, marquee signs, projecting signs, window signs and awning signs as building signs. No individual building sign shall exceed ten (10) percent of the total area of the facade of the building or combination of building signs shall exceed thirteen (13) percent of the total area of the facade of the building per business premises. Projecting signs attached to a building may extend over pedestrian portions of a public right-of-way not more than eighteen (18) inches from the surface of the building; provided that such signs shall not extend over paved portions of the roadway. 
(3)  Changeable copy signs are permitted as an integral part of freestanding and wall signs in business, office and industrial zoning districts, subjects, to the following: 
a.  The changeable copy portion of the sign shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the overall sign area of the sign to which it is attached; 
b.  Changeable copy signs erected in combination with freestanding or wall signs must be on the same pole, post or standard or within the same frame as the principal sign. 
(4)  Monument signs may be erected in lieu of freestanding signs at the option of the sign owner. Such monument signs shall conform to all setback requirements for freestanding signs. Monument signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height or forty (40) square feet in sign area. 
(5)  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain standard informational signs, without a permit or fee, located so that the sign is located completely on private property and the support is no closer than ten (10) feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, and no part of the placard is closer than ten (10) feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, as follows: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b. below, not more than one (1) standard information sign; 
b.  An unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
(6)  Permanent subdivision signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, if any parcel is located at the entrance to any subdivision, then that parcel may contain not more than one (1) permanent subdivision sign. 
(7)  Directional signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, any such property may contain not more than two (2) directional signs per driveway entrance. Such signs are limited to no more than two (2) square feet in sign area. 
(8)  Temporary signs. In addition to any other signs authorized by this section, any such property may contain temporary signs in accordance with section 18.2-15. 
(9)  Billboards. In lieu of other freestanding signs authorized by subsection (1), any such property may contain one (1) billboard which complies with the following: 
a.  Billboards are allowed on parcels fronting state or federal highways in business and industrial districts only. Such billboards are limited to one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet in sign area with dimensions not exceeding eight (8) feet in height or sixteen (16) feet in width; 
b.  Billboards shall be erected to a height of no more than fifty (50) feet where located adjacent to state and federal highways; 
c.  All portions of a sign face and support members of any billboard shall be setback from all buildings, structures and property lines at least seventy-five (75) feet; 
d.  Illumination. All illuminated billboards shall use base mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited; 
e.  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of any billboard, excluding aprons, are prohibited; 
f.  Location and number of signs. Only one (1) billboard shall be allowed per platted lot. No billboard shall be placed on any lot which contains any freestanding sign. Billboards shall be no less than two thousand (2,000) feet apart, measuring from the two (2) closest points and only one (1) sign face shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back to back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two (2) signs side by side or over and under, facing the same direction. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(11), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-12. - Same-Vacant and undeveloped property. 
    Any property wherever located which is not developed property, may contain only those signs authorized by this section, except during an election period as provided herein. Vacant and undeveloped property shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Freestanding signs. Such property may contain one (1) or more freestanding signs in accordance with the following: 
a.  Number of signs, sign area. One (1) freestanding sign limited to seventy-five (75) square feet of sign area is allowed with a permit. Provided, however, that an unlimited number of freestanding signs with faces of sixteen (16) square feet or less and twelve (12) feet in height or shorter are allowed during a political election between the date of qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate, and permits shall not be required for these additional signs during election seasons. 
b.  Encroachment, required setbacks. Freestanding signs may be erected only on private property and shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing. Signs shall not project over property lines. 
c.  Height restrictions. The height of any freestanding sign at its highest point above the grade of the adjacent street shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  Standard informational signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, such property may contain standard informational signs, without a permit or fee, located so that the signs are erected entirely on private property and are not closer than ten (10) feet to the back of the curb or from the edge of the pavement on streets with no curbing, as follows: 
a.  Except as provided in subsection b below, no more than one (1) standard information sign. 
b.  An unlimited number of standard informational signs are allowed during a political election, between the date of qualification of candidates and final determination on each ballot issue or candidate. 
(3)  Permanent subdivision signs. In addition to any other sign authorized by this section, if such property is located at the entrance to any subdivision, then such property may contain no more than one (1) permanent subdivision sign. 
(4)  Billboards. In lieu of other freestanding signs authorized by subsection (1), any such property located in a business or industrial district may contain one (1) billboard which complies with the following: 
a.  Billboards are allowed on parcels fronting state or federal highways in business and industrial districts only. Such billboards are limited to one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet in sign area with dimensions not exceeding eight (8) feet in height or sixteen (16) feet in width. 
b.  Billboards shall be erected to a height of no more than fifty (50) feet where located adjacent to state and federal highways and no more than thirty (30) feet when located adjacent to other streets. 
c.  All portions of a sign face and support members of any billboard shall be set back from all buildings, structures and property lines at least seventy-five (75) feet. 
d.  Illumination. All illuminated billboards shall use base-mounted fluorescent or mercury vapor lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to, neon, animation and running lights, is prohibited. 
e.  Extrusions prohibited. Extrusions beyond the face of any billboard, excluding aprons, are prohibited. 
f.  Location and number of signs. Only one (1) billboard shall be allowed per platted lot. No billboard shall be placed on any lot which contains any freestanding sign. Billboards shall be no less than two thousand (2,000) feet apart, measuring from the two (2) closest points and only one (1) sign face shall be allowed to face the same direction per location. This allows back to back or "V" formation signs but prohibits two (2) signs side by side or over and under, facing the same direction. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(12), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-13. - Special event permits. 
    Properties in business, office and industrial districts may erect window signs and spectacular signs and devices inside the building housing the premises without first obtaining a permit; provided that when such sign or device is erected inside a window visible from outside the building, the display area of the sign shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the total window surface, and the sign shall not remain in place longer than thirty (30) days. All other special event signage, including portable signs and spectacular signs and devices shall be displayed only by permit under the following conditions and requirements: 
(1)  Prior to display of a special event sign, an application for a permit shall be filed with the building official. One (1) permit shall be issued to cover all signs and devices during the period of permit coverage. Handling of permit requests shall conform to section 18.2-6. All signs and devices to be covered by the permit shall be specifically described as to their construction and/or composition and location on the business premises. 
(2)  The maximum size allowed for one (1) window sign is ten (10) square feet, and the total of all window signs to be displayed under the permit shall be one hundred (100) square feet. The maximum size allowed for one (1) spectacular sign is twenty-four (24) square feet, and the total of all spectacular signs shall be two hundred (200) square feet. 
(3)  Spectacular signs may be attached to the exterior wall or walls of the building or securely attached to the roof, but shall not be placed on or located so as to obstruct the public right-of-way. Portable signs may be located within parking areas of the business premises (but not upon the right-of-way), provided minimum standards for all off-street parking are maintained. 
(4)  The maximum number of special event permits to be issued to a single premises in a business, office or industrial district shall be four (4) per year for a period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days for each permit issued. No more than one (1) special event permit shall be issued per calendar quarter per business premises. 
(5)  Except as modified by this section all special event signs or devices must comply with all other applicable regulations and conditions set forth in this chapter governing their usage. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(13), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-14. - Erecting signs on private property. 
(a)  No person in the city shall place, print, nail, tack or otherwise fasten any card, banner, hand built sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind, or cause the same to be done, on any private property without the written consent of the owner of such property. 
(b)  No person shall construct, erect, operate, use or maintain any sign without the written permission of the owner or the person in lawful possession or control of the property on which such structure or sign is located. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a person placing a political sign upon private property during the election season shall only be required to obtain the verbal consent, not the written consent, of the owner of the private property. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(14), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-15. - Exception to permit provisions. 
    The permit requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the following, provided that the signs or devices erected or placed are located on property of the person who erects such signs or on property whose owner has given written permission for such placement. 
(1)  Flags of a size not exceeding four (4) feet by six (6) feet attached to a pole mounted directly onto a residence, business or commercial structure, not to exceed two (2) per premises, or one (1) flag not exceeding forty-eight (48) square feet mounted on an independent flagpole installed directly into the ground. 
(2)  Any sign erected by or at the direction of any government. 
(3)  Seasonal or holiday decorations erected on either public or private property. 
(4)  Identification plates for doors not exceeding four (4)inches by eighteen (18) inches in size. 
(5)  Building numerals designating property numbering of a building or premises, such numerals not to exceed a height of six (6) inches on residential property or a height not exceeding twelve (12) inches on business, office or industrial property. 
(6)  Additional freestanding signs permitted during election seasons as described in sections 18.2-10 through 18.2-14. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a person placing a political sign upon private property during the election season shall only be required to obtain the verbal consent, not the written consent, of the owner of the private property. 
(7)  Standard informational signs meeting the standards of this chapter. 
(8)  Alarm system signs not exceeding six (6) inches by six (6) inches. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(15), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-16. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Signs that, on the effective date of this chapter, were approved and legally erected under previous sign restrictions, and that became or have become nonconforming with respect to the requirements of this chapter, may continue in existence subject to the remaining provisions of this section. 
(1)  No increase in size of the nonconforming sign shall be permitted. 
(2)  Existing signs which were legally erected and which have become nonconforming and do not meet the setback requirements of this chapter due to road widening may be moved to meet the setback requirement of this chapter but shall not be increased in size, shape or changed in any manner except as to become conforming. 
(3)  In all zoning districts, signs which were: 
a.  Illegally erected or maintained with respect to prior ordinances; or 
b.  Made of paper, cloth or nondurable materials (except standard informational signs); or 
c.  Located in the public right-of-way (except as permitted by this chapter) shall be prohibited and shall be removed by the owner. 
d.  Upon failure to comply with any requirement of this section, the building official or his authorized agent may cause the removal of such sign at the expense of the owner. 
(4)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or other removable material, which does not destroy the sign, on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. 
(5)  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as electrical repairs or lettering repair shall be allowed. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter; provided that signs damaged by fire or act of God may be restored to their original condition. 
(6)  Upon the effective date of this chapter, each nonconforming sign shall be registered by the sign owner within ninety (90) days of notification by the city using registered mail, certified mail, or overnight delivery service If it is determined that such nonconforming sign was legally erected under the prior ordinance, then a sign permit shall be issued to the sign owner without charge and the sign shall be marked with a permit decal. Should the owner of a nonconforming sign fail to register such sign with[in] ninety (90) days from the enactment of this chapter, such failure to register shall be deemed a violation of this chapter, and such person shall be subject to citation in municipal court. 
(7)  Existing signs on the property of newly annexed territory that were legally erected under the county ordinance which would become nonconforming under this chapter upon annexation by the city shall be allowed to remain, provided such sign shall be registered with the city within ninety (90) days of notification of the sign owner, as set forth above in subsection (6). The city will endeavor to give the sign owner written notification, as provided herein, during the annexation process. 
(b)  The building official shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this section. Notices of violation shall be provided to the sign owner in accordance with the requirements of section 18.2-19. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(16), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-17. - Inspections. 
    The building official shall periodically inspect each permanent and temporary conforming and nonconforming sign in an attempt to ascertain whether the same is secure or insecure, and whether it is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter or in need of repair. Responsibility for the safety of signs and security of their attachment or erection remains at all times with the sign owner. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(17), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-18. - Signs requiring removal. 
(a)  Traffic hazards. Any sign constituting a traffic hazard or a menace to the motoring public or pedestrians, as determined by the building official in consultation with the chief of police, shall be removed as provided in section 18.2-19. 
(b)  General maintenance. Every sign, including those signs for which permits are required and those for which no permits or permit fees are required shall be maintained in a safe, presentable and good structural condition at all times. The sign owner shall be responsible for repair or replacement of defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning and other acts required for the maintenance of the sign. If the sign is not made to comply with adequate safety and maintenance standards, the building official shall require its removal in accordance with section 18.2-19. 
(c)  Abandoned signs. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and unoccupied for a period of three (3) months or longer, or any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose which no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of six (6) months or more. Sign panels from abandoned signs shall be removed by the owner of the premises on which the sign is located within the time frame specified in the this subsection. The supporting structure of an abandoned sign shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of section 18.2-16. 
(d)  Dangerous or defective signs. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained on any premises owned or controlled by that person any sign that is in a dangerous or defective condition. Any such sign shall be removed or repaired by the owner of the premises or owner of the sign. Upon failure of the owner to remove or repair a dangerous or defective sign, the building official shall proceed as described in section 18.2-19. 
(e)  Unlawful signs. No person shall erect or permit to be erected any sign that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(18), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-19. - Removal procedure. 
(a)  The building official shall cause to be removed any sign that he determines endangers the public safety, such as an abandoned, dangerous, or electrically or structurally defective sign or a sign for which no permit has been issued or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter. The building official shall prepare a written notice that shall describe the sign and specify the violation involved. The notice shall state that if the sign is not removed or the violation is not corrected within twenty (20) business days, the sign shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  All notices by the building official shall be personally served or sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any time periods provided in this section shall be deemed to commence on the date received if hand delivered or otherwise on the date delivered as shown upon the return receipt of the U.S. Postal Service. 
(c)  The notice shall be mailed to the owner of the property on which the sign is located, the owner of the sign, and the occupant of the property. If any such person is unknown or cannot be found, notice shall be mailed to such person's last known address, if any, and posted on the sign or on the premises. 
(d)  Any person having an interest in the sign or the property may appeal the determination of the building official ordering removal or compliance by filing a written notice of appeal with the city manager within twenty (20) business days after receipt of the notice. Appeals will be handled as provided in section 18.2-6(h). 
(e)  If the person to whom notice is directed fails to take corrective action within the time period prescribed, or if on appeal the mayor and council affirm the decision of the building official and the person fails to take corrective action or remove the offending sign within the time period prescribed, then; the building official shall proceed to have the sign removed or corrected to bring such sign into compliance with this chapter or to remove any unsafe condition. 
(f)  When it is determined by the building official that the sign would cause imminent danger to the public safety and contact cannot be made with the sign owner or building owner, no written notice shall have to be served prior to removal. In such emergency situation, the building official shall document the unsafe condition and may correct the danger, with all costs being charged to the sign owner or the property owner. 
(g)  If it shall be necessary for the building official to remove the sign pursuant to the provisions of this section, and it should be practicable to sell or salvage any material derived in the removal, the building official may sell or salvage any material derived in the removal. He may sell the same at public or private sale at the best price obtainable and keep an account of the proceeds thereof. Such proceeds, if any, shall be use to offset the cost of removal to be charged to the sign owner or property owner. Any proceeds in excess of the cost of removal shall be returned to the sign owner, if known, or if unknown, shall be deposited in the city treasury and maintained for benefit of the owner for a period of three (3) years. At the end of three (3) years, all unclaimed proceeds shall become the property the city. Where the proceeds derived from such sale are less than the costs of removal, such deficiency shall constitute a lien against the property on which the sign is located. Such lien shall be collectable in the same manner as city property taxes. 
(h)  Any sign removed by the building official pursuant to the provisions of this section shall become the property of the city and may be disposed of in any manner deemed appropriate by the city. The cost of removal of the sign by the city shall constitute a lien against the property and shall be recoverable in the same manner as city property taxes. The cost of removal shall include any and all incidental expenses incurred by the city in connection with the sign removal. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(19), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-20. - Variances. 
(a)  Variances from the regulations of this chapter shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Where the proximity of existing signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible, due to spacing requirements, for a sign of the type sought; or 
(2)  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the proposed street and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
a.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; 
b.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
c.  The variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
(b)  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. 
(c)  Relief from the application of the provisions of this chapter by use of variances granted by the mayor and council shall be granted only upon a finding of hardship as previously defined. Hearing on such variances shall be noticed using this same time frames and notice requirements as for variances from zoning decisions. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 1(20), 5-12-2008) 
Sec. 18.2-21. - Conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 08-08, § 2, 5-12-2008) 
Chapter 18.5 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of June 12, 1995, §§ I-VIII, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as a new Ch. 18.5, §§ 18.5-1-18.5-8, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 18.5-1. - Title. 
    This chapter will be known as City of LaFayette, Georgia, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § I; Ord. No. 2001-08, § I, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 18.5-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Best management practices (BMP's): A collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
    Board: The board of natural resources. 
    Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Commission: The state soil and water conservation commission. 
    Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Department: The department of natural resources. 
    Director: The director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    District: The Coosa River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Division: The environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one (1) place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan: A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
    Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
    Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 18.5-3(a)(5). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. 12-5-440 et. seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one (1) or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River water conservation district. 
    Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. O.C.G.A. section A. 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § II; Ord. No. 2001-08, § II, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 18.5-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This chapter shall not apply to the following activities: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. section 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a platted subdivision, a planned community, or an association of other residential lots consisting of more than two (2) lots and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of this title. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. section 1-3-3 to include those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; and the construction of farm buildings; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in paragraphs (15) and (16) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after the completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil and Water Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving one and one-tenth (1 1/10 ) acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do have water in them year round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one and one-tenth (1 1/10 ) acres or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent a city or county which is an issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), or (10) of this subsection; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6; provided, further, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb five (5) or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. section 12-7-7.1; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6; and 
(11)  Public water system reservoirs. 
(b)  Where subsection (a) of this Code section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. section 12-7-6, issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § III; Ord. No. 2001-08, § III, 6-11-2001; Ord. No. 02-06, § 1(a)-(d), 7-8-2002) 
Sec. 18.5-4. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b)(c) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMP's. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b)(c) of this chapter shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the Division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this chapter; 
(15)  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(16)  There is established a fifty (50) foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five (25) foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
(d)  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b)(c) of this chapter. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § IV; Ord. No. 2001-08, § IV, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 18.5-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the codes enforcement department to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the codes enforcement department and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this chapter. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsection 18.5-4(b)(c) of this chapter. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four (4) copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsection 18.5-4(c)(15)(16) and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(5)b, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)  a.  If a permit applicant has had two (2) or more violations of previous permits, this chapter section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three (3) years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.  The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 18.5-4(b)(c) of this chapter. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use all project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of twenty-four (24) hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "the installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement - "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection." 
(3)  Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 
Map Scale Ground Slope Contour 
Interval, (feet) 1 inch = 100 feet 
or larger scale Flat 0-2% 
Rolling 2-8% 
Steep 8% + 0.5 or 1 
1 or 2 
2, 5 or 10  
f.  Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the twenty-five-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsection 18.5-4(c)(15)(16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(5)b are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the Walker County Tax Assessor's Office certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § V; Ord. of 9-11-95, § 1; Ord. No. 2001-08, § V, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 18.5-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The codes enforcement department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The codes enforcement department shall have power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. [section] 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as issuing authorities pursuant to Code Section 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. [section] 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. [section] 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have thirty (30) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within thirty (30) days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as an issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § VI; Ord. No. 2001-08, § VI, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 18.5-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five (5) days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five (5) days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop work order; and; 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 18.5-5(b)(5)b. The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. The following penalties shall apply to land-disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this chapter, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter; 
a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; and; 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation involving land-disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection a. of this paragraph. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § VII; Ord. No. 2001-08, § VII, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 18.5-8. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the construction board of appeals within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-12-95, § VIII; Ord. No. 2001-08, § VIII, 6-11-2001) 
Sec. 18.5-9. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the 14 th day of May, 2001. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 2001-08, § IX, 6-11-2001) 
Chapter 19 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 7; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; planning, Ch. 17; utilities, Ch. 21; zoning, App. A. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority over streets and sidewalks, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(4), O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Definition. 
    The phrase "public place," as employed in this chapter, shall be construed to mean a street, alley, sidewalk or other public property owned by the city or under its supervision. 
(Code 1975, § 38-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-2. - House numbering-Assigning by city manager; duty of property owner or tenant. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to provide a uniform numbering system for all houses and structures, including business establishments, in the city. It shall be the duty of all owners and tenants of all houses and structures in the city to obtain from the city manager the correct number assigned to his house or structure, and thereafter to post the assigned number in a conspicuous place on the house or structure, or on the property, so that the same may be seen from the street. 
(Code 1975, § 38-11) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 19-3. - Same-Prerequisite to issuance of building permit. 
    The building inspector is hereby prohibited from issuing any permit for the construction of any house of any kind to any person until a number shall have been assigned to such structure by the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 38-12) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 19-4. - Downspouts and drains of water on sidewalks. 
    No person shall erect any drain, gutter, downspout, valley or any flat or sloping roof of any character that will in any manner drain or shed water on any sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 38-13) 
Sec. 19-5. - Obstructing drainage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in any street or alley, any dirt, trash or other material so as to interfere with the drainage or use of the street or alley, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city manager. 
(Code 1975, § 38-14) 
Sec. 19-6. - Disposing of liquids on streets and sidewalks. 
(a)  No person shall cause any water or other liquids to be disposed of on the streets or sidewalks of the city without the written permission of the city council. 
(b)  The terms of this section shall not be applicable to the members of the fire department or any officer, agent, or employee of the city in the performance of a designated municipal duty. 
(Code 1975, § 38-15) 
Sec. 19-7. - Sidewalks; cleanliness responsibility of abutting property owners, enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of all occupants of improved property and owners of vacant property, in front of which the sidewalks have been paved, to keep such sidewalks clean, and to do such sweeping and scraping as may be necessary to remove clay, dirt and trash therefrom, and to render the same passable, comfortable and sightly. In addition, it shall be the duty of the city manager, after five days' written notice to any such person of the necessity for cleaning such sidewalk, to have done such work as may be necessary to render such walk clean and to render a bill covering the cost of such cleaning to the owner or agent of such property in person, or if such person or agent be a nonresident, then by mail. Upon the nonpayment of such bill within ten (10) days after service of same as aforesaid, the city clerk shall issue an execution therefor against the owner of the abutting property and such execution shall be a lien upon such property and shall be collected as other executions issued by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 38-16) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 12. 
Secs. 19-8-19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS 

Sec. 19-21. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or excavate in any public place within the city or install, repair or replace any of his property or equipment in such public place, or do any other work in or on any public place, which requires the removal or breaking of the surface or underpart of any such public place, unless and until such person shall have first secured, in the manner provided in this article, permission to do so. 
(Code 1975, § 38-20) 
Sec. 19-22. - Application. 
    Each person desiring permission to dig or excavate in any public place shall file with the city manager a written or printed application, setting forth the character and location of such work to be done in any such public place, the probable number of square yards of surface to be removed and the probable date of beginning and the completion of the work. 
(Code 1975, § 38-21) 
Sec. 19-23. - Fees and deposits. 
    If the applicant for the permit to excavate is authorized to perform the work himself, including replacing the street to its condition prior to the excavation, there shall be no charge for the issuance of the permit. If the city must fill and resurface the street or public way, the applicant shall deposit with the city at the time of application, a sum of money which shall be fixed by the city manager and shall be based on the cost per square yard of replacement plus ten (10) percent. 
(Code 1975, § 38-22) 
Sec. 19-24. - Grant or refusal. 
    Each application, as referred to in section 19-22 shall be considered by the city manager, who shall then, without unreasonable delay, either grant or reject such application. Upon rejection of the application, the applicant shall have the right to present the matter to the city council, the order of which shall be final in such matter, and upon final rejection, the deposit of money referred to in section 19-23 shall be returned to the person who deposited the same. 
(Code 1975, § 38-23) 
Sec. 19-25. - Failure to complete or restore. 
    Upon the failure of any person, whose application to dig or excavate shall have been granted and who shall have begun the work, to complete the same without delay, or upon the completion of such work, to restore the public place to the same or as good a condition as the same was before such work was done, or to comply with any reasonable rules or regulations of the superintendent of streets from time to time given to such person for the completion and restoration of such public place, such person shall upon conviction, in addition to other penalties, forfeit to the city any deposit of money so made with the city. 
(Code 1975, § 38-24) 
Sec. 19-26. - Restoration by city. 
    Upon the failure of any person to make such repairs as herein required in the manner or in the time required, the city manager is empowered and authorized to cause such repairs to be made and such public place to be restored to its original condition, and the cost thereof, plus ten (10) percent thereof, shall be charged to and paid by such person who so failed to make such repairs, and such sum of money shall constitute and be a debt due from such person to the city. 
(Code 1975, § 38-25) 
Sec. 19-27. - Use or refund of deposit. 
    The deposit of money made under section 19-23 shall stand as a guarantee and may be employed by the city for the replacement of such public place in as good condition as the same was immediately before the excavation or digging, and upon default of the person so making such deposit to restore immediately the public place to as good condition as the same was immediately before such excavation or digging was done by him, the city manager may employ the whole or any part of such deposit of money necessary for such restoration. Upon the restoration of the public place to such condition as the same was immediately before such digging or excavating, the city clerk shall, upon the certificate of the city manager, restore to the person so making such deposit such sum of money so deposited, or in case any part thereof is employed by the city for such restoration of such public place, upon such certificate, the city clerk shall refund such part of such sum of money so remaining. 
(Code 1975, § 38-26) 
Sec. 19-28. - Prompt work. 
    All digging or excavating to be done, as provided in this article, shall be promptly started and completed without delay after permission shall have been granted, and such public place shall be, immediately upon the completion of such work, restored to the same or as good condition as the same was before such work was done thereon. Such work or restoration shall be at all times and in all respects in compliance with the orders and supervision of the superintendent of streets from time to time given to such person for such purpose. 
(Code 1975, § 38-27) 
Sec. 19-29. - Warning devices; posting permit. 
    Upon the granting of an application for permission to dig or excavate in any public place, and in all other cases provided for in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the applicant, before beginning any such work, to enclose the place where such work is being done or otherwise afford adequate protection to street traffic. He shall post and keep posted at such place a placard showing that the work is being done under a permit granted by the city, with sufficient other information thereon to give ample warning to those using such public place that the same is out of repair or being repaired, and in addition thereto, he shall place sufficient markings at night by a red or amber light, to notify those having the right to use the same that such public place, or part thereof, is closed. 
(Code 1975, § 38-28) 
Sec. 19-30. - Decision of city council final. 
    Any controversy between the person making a deposit in order to dig or excavate in any public place and the superintendent of streets or the city manager, respecting any of the duties to be performed by any of them, may be submitted to the city council by any of the parties, and when so submitted, the action of the city council thereon shall be binding on all the parties. 
(Code 1975, § 38-29) 
Secs. 19-31-19-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OPENING AND CLOSING STREETS 

Sec. 19-46. - Initiation of action to open or close street, by council motion, by petition; to be tabled until next meeting. 
(a)  Any action to either open or close a street or alley or any portion thereof within the city limits shall be initiated either by the city council, upon its own motion, or by petition of all abutting property owners of the portion of the street or alley to be opened or closed, the petition to be filed with the city clerk and brought before the mayor and council at its next meeting, either regular or called. 
(b)  At the meeting of the mayor and council, if such action is recommended by motion of any member of the city council, the same shall be read and tabled for action at the next regular meeting, or if such action is initiated by petition, the petition shall be read and tabled for action at the next regular meeting, and at the next regular meeting evidence shall be heard, if presented, and the determination of the city council made at such time and spread upon the minutes. The city council may table final determination until the next regular meeting, if it so desires, and if the same is so tabled, it shall not be necessary to republish the public notice provided in section 18-47. 
(Code 1975, § 38-30) 
Sec. 19-47. - Publication of notice in newspaper required. 
    Between the time of the first reading of the motion or petition to open or close a street or alley or any portion thereof, and the next regular meeting of the city council, the clerk of the city shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city a notice to the public of the proposed opening or closing of a street or alley or any portion thereof, and the time and place of the meeting at which a determination of such matter shall be made by the city council. Such public notice shall be published in such newspaper once a week for four (4) weeks immediately preceding the meeting at which said determination is to be made. 
(Code 1975, § 38-31) 
Sec. 19-48. - Assessment of cost of proceeding. 
    The cost of any such proceeding, including all advertising costs, shall be borne by the city if the same is initiated upon motion of the city council, and the cost thereof shall be borne by the petitioner if the same is initiated by petition of abutting property owners, the cost to be paid to the city at the time of the filing of the petition. 
(Code 1975, § 38-32) 
Sec. 19-49. - Closing of street, not to be construed as abandonment. 
    If any street or alley or portion thereof is closed under this procedure, the same shall not be considered abandoned, and any such action shall not be construed as an abandonment by the city. There shall be no abandonment of any street or portion thereof unless the city council shall specifically declare a street or any portion thereof "abandoned" in a properly passed resolution. 
(Code 1975, § 38-33) 
Sec. 19-50. - Closed street, city may sell or use for other purposes. 
    The title to streets or alleys closed by such action shall remain in the city unless sold as herein provided for. The city may either use the property for public purposes; hold title thereto and reopen the same as a public street or alley, if the city council shall in the future determine to do the same; or may sell the property to the abutting property owners, the centerline of said street or alley to be the dividing line, at the fair and reasonable market value of the property at the time of such sale. 
(Code 1975, § 38-34) 
Secs. 19-51-19-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CUTTING AND CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 19-66. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for anyone to cut or construct a street or lane belonging to the city, or to cause the same to be cut or constructed without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 38-40) 
Sec. 19-67. - Application, required information. 
    Before any street or lane is cut or constructed in the city an application for a street permit must be made to the building inspector. The application must be in writing and must contain the following information: 
(1)  The location of the street or lane including a legal description of the land where the street or lane is proposed; 
(2)  The width of the street or lane and the length of the same; 
(3)  The purpose of the street or lane; 
(4)  The type of construction of the proposed street or lane including the type of pavement, width of pavement and type of base; 
(5)  The name of the proposed street contractor or paving company; 
(6)  The plans for the street or lane must show that proper drainage is provided; 
(7)  If the street is to be a public street or a street to be accepted as a part of the system of city streets, the application must indicate when the proposed layout, cutting and construction of the street or lane is to commence, when the same should be completed and must give full assurance that the applicant is financially capable of paying for improvements and completing the same in accordance with the plans as contained in the application; 
(8)  Whether or not the street or lane will be dedicated to the public; and 
(9)  Whether or not the city will be requested to accept the street or lane into the system of city streets. 
(Code 1975, § 38-41) 
Sec. 19-68. - Public streets, no permit unless city requirement met. 
    No permit for cutting or constructing any street or lane shall be issued for any street or lane which is to be dedicated to the public or is to become a part of the system of city streets unless the same meets all of the right-of-way requirements and paving and base requirements of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 38-42) 
Sec. 19-69. - Public street defined. 
    For the purposes of this article any street or lane on which more than two (2) dwelling units or more than two (2) business establishments or more than two (2) manufacturing establishments or any combination of the aforesaid totaling more than two (2) shall be located shall be presumed to be a public street or lane. 
(Code 1975, § 38-43) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 19-70. - Building permits not to be issued on streets in violation of article. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any construction for new dwellings or buildings or expansion of existing dwellings or buildings on any street or lane which exists in violation of this article or any portion hereof. 
(Code 1975, § 38-44) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 19-71. - Appeal from denial of building permit or street permit, procedure. 
    The denial of a street permit by the building inspector or the denial of a building permit by the building inspector due to violations of this article may be appealed directly to the mayor and council. Any such appeal must be in writing, must have attached thereto a copy of the application which has been previously filed with the building inspector, and must be delivered to the city clerk at the city hall not later than ten (10) days after the denial of the street permit or building permit. The appeal must state clearly the name and address of the appellant, and the telephone, if any, of the appellant. The mayor and council must conduct a public hearing on the appeal within forty-five (45) days from the date the appeal is filed with the city clerk, and the appellant must be notified in writing by the city clerk of the date, time and place of the hearing, it being sufficient for the purposes of this article that the notice be mailed to the appellant at the address given in the appeal by regular United States mail at least seven (7) days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(Code 1975, § 38-45) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6. 
Sec. 19-72. - Violations. 
    The cutting or construction of any street or lane in violation of this article or any part hereof shall constitute an offense punishable by the recorder's court. 
(Code 1975, § 38-46) 
Sec. 19-73. - Injunctions against violations. 
    In addition to any criminal penalty imposed under section 19-71, the cutting or constructing of any street or lane in violation of this article or any part hereof may be enjoined in the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
(Code 1975, § 38-47) 
Secs. 19-74-19-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - REGULATION OF TIMBER HARVESTING ACTIVITY 

Sec. 19-80. - Title. 
    This article is known as the "Regulation of Timber Harvesting Activity." 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 19-81. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, timber harvesting shall means the harvesting of standing timber for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, posts, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state. Such term shall not apply to landscaping or removal of dead or diseased trees from public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 19-82. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose and intent of this article to protect the public streets and roads of the city from damage, including erosion and deposits of sedimentation, that often occur from timber harvesting activities. This article is enacted pursuant to the authority of a municipal corporation to regulate streets or roads within its jurisdiction in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 32. Nothing in this article is intended to preclude the city from imposing regulations on private land use activities relating to development, such as zoning, tree protection, landscaping, or streamside buffer regulations. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 19-83. - Timber harvesting requirements and application process. 
(a)  All timber harvesters harvesting timber in the City of LaFayette must comply with all relevant provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24 in order to use any public street or road(s) in the city for transporting harvested timber, other than a federal or state highway. 
(b)  An appointment for ingress/egress inspection shall be scheduled forty-eight (48) hours in advance of the commencement of activity with the public works director to allow the public works director and the codes enforcement director or their designated agents to inspect the site prior to any activity at the proposed ingress/egress location. 
(c)  The following minimum standards shall be met unless directed otherwise by the public works director or codes enforcement director or their respective designated agent: 
(1)  Use geotextile underliner minimum twenty (20) feet wide under gravel pad. 
(2)  Minimum drive width shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Minimum thickness of six (6) inches constructed of one and one-half (11/2) inches to three and one-half (31/2) inches of coarse aggregate for a minimum drive length of fifty (50) feet. 
(4)  The street or road, at each ingress/egress point, shall be posted with four (4) forty-eight-inch orange "Trucks Entering Highway" advance warning signs placed on the shoulder of the road at five hundred (500) feet and one thousand (1,000) feet intervals from both directions. Signs and posts shall conform to the current edition of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(5)  All tree harvesting activities shall be performed in accordance with generally accepted forestry land management practices and/or agricultural operations, not incidental to development, on tracts zoned for or used for forestry, silvicultural, or agricultural purpose. 
(d)  No harvester equipment or vehicle(s) may be parked on a public right-of-way or use the public right-of-way as a loading facility. 
(e)  Once items (a) through (c)(4) have been accomplished and notification given to the public works director or his designated agent, the timber harvester must provide the following to the public works director: 
(1)  Persons or firms conducting timber harvesting activities in the City of LaFayette shall furnish to the city, a surety bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) in a form required by law and approved by the city attorney prior to beginning any timber harvesting activities or, at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. A separate surety bond or letter of credit shall be required for each tract for which timber harvesting is to occur. In addition, a map of the area identifying the location of the tract to be harvested and the main point and any alternate points of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, any point of egress from such a tract to a public road. Said bond or letter of credit shall indemnify and protect the city from any damage to public street or road(s) or clean-up cost associated with any timber harvesting activity conducted. 
(2)  Said bond(s) or letter(s) of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which it is issued. 
(3)  Timber harvester shall submit a fully completed notice of timber harvesting activity, in the form approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission, as found on its website, along with all requested additional information and surety bond(s) or bank letter(s) of credit to the public works director, who along with the codes enforcement director, then shall review the documentation submitted and then the public works director shall notify the timber harvester of approval or denial to proceed with the timber harvesting process. It shall be the duty of the public works director to promptly provide a copy of every approved notice of timber harvesting activity to the Office of the Walker County Commissioner. 
    Pursuant to the soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control ordinance, section 18.5-7(d), a citation will be issued immediately by the public works director or codes enforcement director upon proof of any sediment entering onto a public street or road or sedimentation entering any waters of the state or United States. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Sec. 19-84. - Liability for violation of this article. 
(a)  Liability . 
(1)  Violation of the notice requirements of this article shall result in the immediate issuance of a stop-work order by the public works director or codes enforcement director against the timber harvester, and issuance of a citation, returnable to the Municipal Court of LaFayette, Georgia. Upon conviction, a violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(2)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by the law nor impose any liability upon the city for damages to any person or property. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, any rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder, any local ordinance(s) enacted pursuant thereto, or to pollute any waters of the state or United States, as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 18-04, § 1, 2-12-2018) 
Secs. 19-85-19-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - UTILITY ACCOMMODATION POLICY AND ISSUANCE OF RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS 

Sec. 19-90. - Declaration of findings, purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of LaFayette (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, and economic development of the city and to protect public works infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the Laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia including, but not limited to O.C.G.A. 32-4-92, has adopted this article for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided in this article. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations, whether capitalized or lowercase, have the following meanings: 
    Business day is defined as defined in O.C.G.A. 25-9-3(3). 
    City means the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    Codified ordinances means the LaFayette City Code. 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, along or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Department means the City of LaFayette Public Works Department. 
    Director means the Public Works Director of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property caused by such things as natural disasters, fire, subversive activities, and like events. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including, but not limited to, pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, signs, towers, traffic control devices and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, above, within, over, below, under, along or through any part of the rights-of-way in the city. 
    Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities-related information. Utility must ensure at least one (1) of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities-related emergencies or situations; 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor agency. 
    Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, along or through any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
    Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city that, now or hereafter, is consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
    Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two (2) or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than fifty (50) percent at one (1) time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facility, or of more than fifty (50) percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
    Unused facility or facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for twelve (12) months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next twelve (12) months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-91. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Registration required. Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of this article, including by lease, sublease or assignment to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, must file a registration statement with the department within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. 
(b)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city must be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration must include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
The name, street address, email address and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency must be provided at the time of filing a registration and must be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times. 
(2)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(c)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the director must promptly notify the registrant and must provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. When a registration is complete, the director will accept it and so notify the utility in writing. 
(d)  Acceptance of the registration does not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city codes nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required in this article. 
(e)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one (1) year after the effective date of this article, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained, unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; or any other remedy provided by City codes or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-92. - Construction permits. 
(a)  Permit required. It is unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, along or through the public roads of the city without a utility permit from the department of public works in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  Permit procedure. Utility permits must be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the department of public works. The written application must include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans must show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address and telephone and facsimile numbers of one (1) or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and completed; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(c)  Permit fees. Fees will be determined by resolution of the mayor and council, as from time to time amended. A fee schedule will be available at the offices of the director and the city manager and open for public inspection and copying, without charge. 
(d)  Issuance of permit. If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. 
(1)  Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this article; 
(2)  Whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and 
(3)  The impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(e)  Emergency situations. 
(1)  Each utility must, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which it considers to be an emergency. The utility may proceed to take whatever actions are necessary in order to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation must take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. 
(2)  In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city does not incur any liability to the utility for such emergency actions, and the cost of such must be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(f)  Effective period of permit. 
(1)  Each permit must have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. 
(2)  The permit must remain in place until construction is completed or until its stated expiration date, unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
a.  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
b.  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
c.  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
d.  Made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(g)  Cancellation for cause. If a utility fails to cure a default within twenty (20) business days after notice is provided to the utility by the city, then the default is a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director determines there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  City will serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of fifteen (15) calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within fifteen (15) calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(h)  Expiration of permit. If work is not begun within six (6) months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-93. - Required minimum standards. 
(a)  Utility accommodation manual adopted. The 2016 GDOT Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the State of Georgia Department of Transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in this article as if fully set forth in this article, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this article. A copy of the manual will be maintained in the offices of the director or his or her designee and open for public inspection and copying. Copies of the manual are also available on the Georgia Department of Transportation's website. Any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the manual will be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees will be interpreted, where required, as meaning the City of LaFayette municipal equivalents. 
(b)  Protection of traffic and roadway. Unless specifically stated in the permit, no utility may occupy city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(c)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city or by federal or state highway authorities during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility must, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city will have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility, and the utility must pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(d)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities must be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(e)  Utilities protection. As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility may commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given forty-eight (48) hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next business day, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-3(3), after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-94. - Restoration of property. 
(a)  Each utility is responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. 
(b)  A utility is liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure on, under, over or adjacent to the right-of-way that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair within twenty (20) business days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility must pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-95. - Inspection. 
(a)  The utility must make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. 
(b)  At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work, which poses a serious threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit or this article, or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit or applicable standards, conditions, or codes. 
(c)  When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility must notify the department. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-96. - Other approvals, permits and agreements. 
(a)  Additional permits required. The utility must obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city codes, state or federal law. In addition, a permittee must comply with all requirements of laws, must complete work in a way as not to cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way regardless of who performs the work. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an emergency as defined in subsection 19-90(c)(6) and as outlined in subsection 19-92(e). 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-97. - Penalties. 
(a)  A utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this article may be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. Each act of violation and each day on which any violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. In addition to a fine, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisance, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(b)  Citations returnable to the Municipal Court of LaFayette, Georgia are valid when served personally upon the utility's designated facilities representative, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery at the address provided. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-98. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be later vested in the city under the constitution and laws of the United States, State of Georgia and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. By applying for and being issued a written permit, the utility acknowledges that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or may be, from time to time, vested in or reserved to the city, are in full force and effect and subject to exercise by the city at any time. A utility acknowledges that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and agrees to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city under its powers. In particular, all utilities must comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(b)  Compliance. No person is relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(c)  Appeal of administrative decisions. Any appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this article must be in writing and sent via certified mail to the city manager as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY SITING 

Sec. 19-100. - Declaration of findings, purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide policies and procedures for regulating the placement of small wireless facilities in certain rights-of-way within the jurisdiction of the city, which will provide a public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city rights-of-way and the city as a whole. The article is intended to facilitate and promote the expeditious deployment of the small wireless facilities necessary to provide citizens with the benefits of advanced wireless services through establishing uniform standards associated with the siting of such antennas. This article is intended to: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways, poles, and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(3)  Prevent interference with other facilities and operations of facilities lawfully located in city rights-of-way or public property; 
(4)  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees or shrubbery including, but not limited, those items planted pursuant to city landscaping, zoning, tree preservation, or other city policies; 
(5)  Preserve the property values of neighborhoods in which small wireless facilities are installed or proposed; 
(6)  Preserve the character of historic structures including, but not limited to, such structures or neighborhoods listed on the National Register of Historic Places and local historic preservation districts or historic districts; 
(7)  Preserve public rights-of-way and areas with underground utility facilities where small wireless facilities would be cost prohibitive and aesthetically incompatible; and 
(8)  Preserve the public rights-of-way with insufficient space to accommodate small wireless facilities. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this article apply to the siting of all small wireless facilities employed by any provider of wireless services within the city's rights-of-way. If this article conflicts with any other ordinance of the city, this article will supersede all other ordinances, except that any facilities permitted under this section must also comply with article VI of this chapter. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations, regardless of whether capitalized or lowercase, have the following meanings: 
    Ancillary equipment means equipment not included in the calculation of SWF equipment volume including the electric meter, ground-based enclosures, grounding materials, power transfer switch and cut-off switch. 
    Antenna means communication equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those codes enacted solely to address imminent threats of destruction of property or injury to persons to the extent not inconsistent with the term of this section. 
    Applicant means any person who submits an application for a SWF located on city rights-of-way or city-owned property. 
    Application means a request submitted by an applicant for a permit to install, collocate, modify, or replace a SWF within the city rights-of-way; or to install, modify, or replace a wireless support structure or pole within the right-of-way. 
    Attachment agreement means an agreement between the WIP and the owner of a pole owned by an entity other than the WIP, including the city, utility or other entity, authorizing the attachment of small wireless facilities to the pole. 
    City means the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    City-approved pole means a pole which has been evaluated and approved by city staff for use within the right-of-way. A list of pre-approved poles and a set of specifications for newly proposed poles will be maintained by the department for both rights-of-way in protected areas and general use areas. 
    Collocate means to install, attach, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless attachments and associated ancillary equipment on or adjacent to a pole or pre-existing wireless support structure which already contains a SWF located thereupon. "Collocation," has a corresponding meaning. 
    Department means the city's public works department. 
    Director means the director of the city's public works department. 
    Fee means a one-time, non-recurring charge. 
    Permit means a permit issued by the city upon review-and approval, of an application for the installation, collocation, modification or replacement of a SWF, wireless support structure, pole, or associated fiber lines within the right-of-way. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization with experience deploying wireless support structures. 
    Pole means: 
a.  A utility pole owned or operated by the city in the rights-of-way, including a utility pole that provides street and security lighting, traffic control functions and other law enforcement functions, including, but not limited to, other light poles and structures for signage; 
b.  A pole owned, operated or maintained by the city in the rights-of-way that supports wireless facilities; or 
c.  A pole owned, operated or maintained by any person that supports small cell wireless facilities or other utility infrastructure located within the city's rights-of-way by permit or under an agreement with the city. 
    Protected area means areas of the city designated by the city council in which all or a portion of the utilities have been placed underground, or in which new utilities are required to be underground, or in which a future underground project is expected, or for which a corridor in which a design project is being proposed, or for which streetscaping, historic preservation, or other considerations require either the design and construction of small wireless facilities in a manner that conforms to the existing aesthetic and structural schemes. The department will maintain a map designating each protected area and a corresponding list of city-approved poles for each area. 
    Rate means a recurring charge. 
    Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to, any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city. 
    Sign pole means any sign supported by a sign structure secured in the ground and which is wholly independent of any other support. The structure may include guyed wires between two (2) poles on which the sign may be affixed. 
    Small wireless facility ("SWF") means a small cell antenna or distributed antenna system with wireless attachments that meet the following qualifications: 
a.  Antenna(s) that fit(s) within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume, and 
b.  All other wireless attachments and ancillary equipment associated with the facility whether pole-mounted or located on the ground (where allowed) which may total no more than twenty-four (24) cubic feet in volume. 
    Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is or may use in whole or in part for electric distribution, telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, traffic control signage, or a similar function regardless of ownership, including city-owned poles. 
    Wireless attachments means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communication network, including: 
a.  Equipment associated with wireless communications; 
b.  Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and back-up power supplies, antenna cable combiners, network interface device, surge suppressors, and comparable equipment regardless of technological configuration; and 
c.  Pole-mounted shroud or enclosure, pole-top antenna and mounting hardware. 
    The term does not include: 
a.  The structure or improvements on, under or within which the SWF is located; 
b.  Coaxial or fiber optic cable that is between wireless support structures or poles or that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or directly associated with a particular antenna; 
c.  Other wireless attachments permitted, but not included in the calculation of the SWF equipment volume include wi-fi radios, surveillance cameras, modems, routers, switches, sensors, beacons and other internet-based devices. 
    Wireless infrastructure provider ("WIP") means any person, including a person authorized to provide wireless communication services within the state, that builds or installs or proposes to build or install wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or communications transmissions facilities in support of wireless facilities. 
    Wireless services means any services provided through the use of small wireless facilities or other wireless technologies, whether on a licensed or an unlicensed spectrum or whether at a fixed or mobile location. 
    Wireless support structure means an existing or proposed free-standing structure, other than a pole, capable of supporting wireless attachments. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-101. - Permit required; application process. 
(a)  The placement of a SWF in the right-of-way without first filing an application and obtaining a permit, as provided in this article, is prohibited. 
(b)  The application must be made by the WIP or its duly-authorized agent as demonstrated in a notarized statement from a representative of the WIP with the authority to make such an authorization. 
(c)  An applicant seeking to construct, modify or replace a network of small wireless facilities may, at the applicant's discretion, file a consolidated application for up to five (5) small wireless facilities and receive a single permit for such multiple small wireless facilities, unless permission is obtained in advance from the department to include more than five (5) small wireless facilities in an application. But, the denial of a permit for one (1) or more small wireless facilities in a consolidated application must not delay processing of any other small wireless facilities in the same consolidated application. 
(d)  The applicant must submit its permit application to the department located at 2776 Highway 27 - Bypass, LaFayette, Georgia 30728. 
(e)  The application must the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number and email address; 
(2)  The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to filing the application; 
(3)  A general description of the work to be performed and the purposes and intent of the SWF, wireless attachments, ancillary equipment, pole, wireless support structure, or any other structures or equipment to be installed. The scope and detail of such description must be appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters including, but not limited to, sub-service utilities, likely to be affected or impacted by the proposed work; 
(4)  Authorization for any consultant acting on behalf of the applicant to speak with the city, or a designee of the city; 
(5)  A specific description of the proposed installation, including the wireless attachments pole, wireless facilities, and any other structures or equipment to be installed. Applicant must provide construction plans certified by an appropriate professional, which must state that the installation is safe and consistent with sound engineering practices. The city reserves the right to determine whether the certification submitted is appropriate, and may require a certification by a professional engineer or architect licensed by the State of Georgia. 
(6)  In the case of any installation involving attachment of small wireless facilities to a structure owned by a third party, the applicant must submit a statement that the applicant has an attachment agreement or other authorization allowing the placement of the SWF on the structure. The city may require the applicant to provide additional information, including an attachment agreement or other document demonstrating the applicant's legal right to place the facility on the structure. Any permit issued under this article is effective and conditioned upon the applicant's demonstration of compliance with this subsection. 
(f)  In addition to the information required in subsection (e), the following must also be included with all permit applications: 
(1)  A check made payable to the city for the fee for all actual, direct, and reasonable costs incurred by the city related to processing the application in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) each application for up to five (5) identical or similar small wireless facilities addressed in the application and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional application for similar small wireless facilities. 
(2)  Photo simulations, which illustrate "before" and "after" conditions as they relate to installation of the SWF. Photos should be taken from all adjoining public streets and, when adjacent to residential properties, from the vantage point where the SWF and wireless attachments will be visible. 
(3)  Elevation drawings of the SWF, including wireless attachments, ancillary equipment, pole or wireless support structure or both, if applicable. The drawings must indicate the height, appearance, color, and material proposed for the SWF and related collocated equipment and ancillary equipment including underground or overhead infrastructure. 
(4)  A site plan, which indicates the location and height of all existing and proposed small wireless facilities, including wireless attachments, collocated equipment and ancillary equipment. Proposals that include collocated equipment, Ancillary equipment or ground based facilities must show all existing and proposed structures, parking, landscaping, and fencing on the site. 
(5)  Verification from an appropriate professional that the SWF complies with all applicable codes of the city including the most current National Electric Safety Code and American National Safety Institute for structural integrity. 
(6)  Any small wireless facilities that require installing, collocating, modifying, or replacing wireless attachments and ancillary equipment to a pole or wireless support structure, or otherwise attaching or using a third party's pole requires, in addition to obtaining a permit, the applicant to submit a statement that the applicant has an attachment agreement or other authorization allowing the placement of the SWF on the pole or other wireless support structure. 
(g)  Following the submission of a permit application, applicants have a continuing obligation to: 
(1)  Provide information updates, including any change in the information contained in a permit application, which must be submitted in writing to the city as an amendment to the permit application within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(2)  Applicants are required to coordinate with city officials to protect existing utilities in the public right-of-way and public utility easements, including all public safety considerations prior to and during installation to ensure public safety response in the case of gas line, water line or electricity disturbance. 
(3)  Though a new application is not be required for routine maintenance or repair; where the maintenance or repair would require the removal or replacement of any other wireless or utility providers equipment no work may be performed until authorization is obtained from the entity in compliance with the applicable attachment agreement. 
(h)  Additional considerations. 
(1)  Nothing in this article is intended to supersede or conflict with applications for eligible facilities requests according to the procedures established under article VI of this chapter. 
(2)  Compliance with the State of Georgia's Open Records Act. 
a.  All records received in connection with the application process provided by this section will be handled by the city in accordance with the State of Georgia's Open Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. 
b.  The applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain trade secrets or other proprietary or confidential information "confidential under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72" by submitting with it an affidavit affirmatively declaring that specific information in the records constitute trade secrets as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72. The applicant is solely responsible for clearly identifying and labeling any applicable material as "confidential" or "proprietary" which it asserts is exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72 of the Open Records Act or any other applicable law. But applicants are advised that such designations on any such confidential or propriety material is not binding on the city or determinative of any issue relating to confidentiality or propriety and neither the city nor any of its agents or employees are liable for the disclosure of any information in response to a request for information under the Open Records Act. 
c.  If the city receives a request for public disclosure of all or any portion of any material identified as "confidential" or "proprietary" by an applicant, the city will endeavor to notify applicant of the request in sufficient time to allow applicant to review such request and take whatever action it deems appropriate to protect the material. But, the city must comply with the deadlines for responding in O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71, and the applicant will bear the sole responsibility for the costs and expenses of all such actions seeking to protect the confidential material. Among others, applicant may seek a protective order or other appropriate remedy. If the applicant or the city determines in good faith that the material identified as "confidential" or "proprietary" is not exempt from disclosure under the Open Records Act, then the city will release the requested information unless otherwise ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. In the absence of a protective or other similar order rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction, the city will make the final determination regarding whether the requested material is to be disclosed or withheld. Applicant is liable for any costs incurred by the city associated with an action seeking to protect any confidential or proprietary material. If costs are incurred the city, the city will notify applicant in writing of the amount due, and applicant will have thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to reimburse the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-102. - Application review and approval process. 
(a)  Application review process. 
(1)  Applications for permits under this article are subject to initial review by the city's department and final approval by the city manager or his or her designee. Upon final approval by the city manager or his or her designee, the department will issue a permit on the nondiscriminatory terms and conditions provided by this article. 
(2)  Upon receipt of an applicant's permit application, the department, will initially review the application to ensure conformity with this article and other applicable regulations, and subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Within fifteen (15) days of receiving an application, the city must determine and notify the applicant: 
i.  Whether the application is complete. 
ii.  If the application is incomplete, what specific information is missing. 
(3)  The city manager or his or her designee must make the final decision to approve or deny the application within forty-five (45) days of the submission of a completed application. 
(4)  The city must notify the applicant in writing of its final decision and, if the application is denied, the city must specify the basis for denial and, where applicable, cite to the specific provisions of this article or to the applicable federal, state, or local codes upon which the denial is based. 
(5)  If an application is denied, the applicant may cure any deficiencies identified by the city if curable within thirty (30) days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The city must approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt of the amended application. 
(b)  Appeals of denied applications. 
(1)  Any applicant who wishes to appeal the denial or revocation of a permit must submit a notice of appeal in writing by certified mail to the city manager within ten (10) days of the date the city issued the written notice of denial. 
(2)  The notice of appeal must be addressed to the city's council and must specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. 
(3)  The city manager must place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five (5) nor more than forty-five (45) days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(4)  At the time and date set by the city clerk for the appeal, the council will receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the applicant, interested parties, and city staff. The mayor will preside over the appeal hearing and may set appropriate time limits for the presentation of evidence. The mayor and council are not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter and, instead, rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing will apply. The council may vote to sustain, over-rule, or modify the action complained of by the appellant. The action of the council is final and any appeal of its decision must be to superior court by writ of certiorari as provided by the LaFayette City Code. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-103. - Scope of permit; construction and maintenance requirements. 
(a)  Scope of permit. 
(1)  A permit issued by the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant any authority whatsoever to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(2)  A permit for the placement of small wireless facilities within the city rights-of-way may include a provision reasonably addressing the obligations of the parties if there is a substantial change of law at the federal, state, or local level. 
(3)  The city may, in its sole discretion, review the terms and conditions of any permit issued under this article after five (5) years to determine if the terms and conditions for the use of city's rights-of-way are still in the best interests of the city in accordance with the laws and regulations in effect at the time. If city determines that the terms and conditions of the permit are no longer in the best interest of the city under the terms of this article, the city may revoke the permit or may make changes to the permit as necessary to meet the best interests of the city. 
(4)  Unless construction has actually begun and is diligently pursued to completion at that point, no permit for construction issued under this chapter is valid for a period longer than twelve (12) months unless both the city and the applicant agree to a reasonable extension and all required fees are paid for the term regardless of construction. 
(b)  Construction and maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Small wireless facilities and wireless attachments must be constructed and maintained in a manner that does not interfere with the operation of the department's equipment, the operation of other utility equipment, the general public safety, and traffic flow. If it becomes necessary for a permittee's construction or maintenance activities to disrupt traffic flow, appropriate safety and traffic flow measures must be employed to safeguard against accidents and keep traffic moving in an efficient manner. 
(2)  Upon completion of any construction or maintenance of its small wireless facilities, the WIP must return the surface of the city's right-of-way to its prior condition, including any sidewalks, curbing, paving, landscaping or other improvements in place prior to the construction. WIP must not leave sidewalks in an uneven condition and must use similar materials and construction in its repair of the right-of-way such that the appearance of the improvements is substantially identical to its prior condition. If the right-of-way is not returned to a substantially identical condition after construction or maintenance activities, the city may, in its sole discretion, request the WIP to make the appropriate repairs within five (5) days of receiving notice from the city. If the repairs are not made by the WIP within said time, the city may perform the repairs on its own and require reimbursement of any expenses associated therewith. When such repairs are made by the city, written notice will be sent requesting reimbursement upon completion of the repairs, and WIP will have thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to reimburse the city for the expenses. 
(3)  The city retains the authority to exclude certain days, holidays and special events periods during which the WIP may not perform construction or maintenance activities on its small wireless facilities and must be out of the rights-of-way. The department may also require that WIP and their agents not perform construction or maintenance work during certain times of the day in order to lessen the impact on traffic or otherwise address safety concerns. Such times will be as approved by the city council or the director. Prior to commencing construction or maintenance, permittee or its agent must verify that its planned work does not fall into an excluded time period. 
(4)  Any small wireless facilities or associated construction and maintenance activities must comply with Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (Section 504) (29 U.S.C. § 794) and Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 12131-12164). The city is not liable for any small wireless facilities or any actions of the WIP which violate the ADA. If at any time the city determines the right-of-way is not in compliance due to the actions or facilities of WIP, the city may, in its sole discretion, request the WIP to make the appropriate repairs within five (5) days of sending of the notice from the city. If the repairs are not made by the WIP, the city may perform the repairs on its own and require reimbursement of any expenses associated therewith. When repairs are made by the city under this subsection, written notice will be sent requesting reimbursement upon completion of the repairs, and WIP will have thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to reimburse the city for its expenses. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-104. - Requirements for the siting of distributed and small cell wireless antennas in the city's rights-of-way. 
(a)  An attachment agreement or other authorization for placement on the pole or wireless support structure is required for siting of all SWFs. Siting of SWFs is subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  For any SWF proposed to be located on any pole other than a city-approved pole, the WIP must replace the existing pole with a city-approved pole unless such replacement is shown to be impractical under the circumstances; the city has the authority to determine whether replacement is impractical, and if that determination is made, the city has the right to require placement of the proposed small wireless facilities in such a manner as to minimize its impacts to the right-of-way, including conditions intended to ensure the safety of its citizens and to protect the aesthetics of the surrounding area. 
(2)  Installations in/on utility poles not located within protected areas are limited to in-line tangent poles without transformers and those classified as secondary service poles. 
(3)  To the greatest extent practical, SWFs must not be perceptible by a person of average height from two hundred fifty (250) feet away; if a dispute arises as to this paragraph, the director will make the final determination as to compliance with this paragraph. 
(4)  SWF installations on all poles must utilize a concealed design, with all cabling being inside a hollow pole or otherwise hidden from view without banding or external conduit or panduit. 
(5)  All radios, network equipment and batteries must be enclosed inside the pole or on the pole inside a concealment device approved by the department. 
(6)  SWFs are not permitted on poles with traffic lights or poles that are identified as sign poles. 
(7)  SWFs are not permitted at signalized intersections of city-owned rights-of-way. 
(8)  SWFs must be designed in a manner that does not endanger public safety or impede traffic flow on roads and sidewalks. 
(9)  Any new poles installed must not leach any volatile organic compounds or toxic materials. 
(10)  Any new poles installed should be constructed in a manner to avoid unsightly rust and corrosion. The finish on the pole should conform to city standards, including selection of color, finish method, such as "baked on" or color that is tightly integrated into the material composition of the pole to prevent color fading or erosion or peeling of paint from the exterior of the pole. 
(11)  SWFs placed on a city-owned pole must not interfere with or block any banners or other attachments owned by the city. The SWF must be aesthetically compatible with the surrounding area through application of camouflage and concealment design techniques. 
(12)  Any new, modified, or replacement pole or wireless support structure installed in the rights-of-way located outside of a protected area must not exceed five (5) feet above the tallest pre-existing poles or wireless support structures within two hundred (200) feet of the proposed new wireless facility, located on the same side of the street and within the same right-of-way, except that no pole may exceed sixty-five (65) feet above ground level (AGL). 
(13)  Any poles located in protected areas or streetscaped corridors, must be consistent in height with the other decorative poles located in the right-of-way. The city will not allow new poles in any protected area without a variance from city council, and any replacement poles must match the height of the existing pole it replaces. 
(14)  SWFs proposed to be located with two hundred fifty (250) feet of another SWF must be collocated with other small wireless facilities or neutrally hosted, unless applicant provides sufficient evidence that coverage and capacity needs cannot be met using collocated or neutrally hosted wireless attachments; any small wireless facilities must be designed and constructed in a manner that allows other competing WIPs and carriers to be collocated on/in the same pole or placed on/in nearby poles. It is the express intent of this chapter that in areas where one (1) WIP has installed SWF, all other providers and carriers are permitted to install SWF in the same area consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, including 47 U.S. Code § 224, and other applicable provisions. If collocation or nearby placement is not feasible in certain rights-of-way, WIPs are prohibited from installing SWF in that area of the right-of-way, and the department has authority to deny or revoke any permits for SWF in that area if it is shown that WIP are being blocked by competing WIP from locating there. As SWF technology continues to develop and smaller and more concealed designs are available, the city may review permits and require that WIP upgrade older SWFs so that more WIP may collocate or decrease the footprint of SWFs in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Protected areas. 
(1)  The city council may designate certain areas of the city in which utilities have been placed underground, or in which streetscaping, historic preservation, or other considerations require the design and construction of small wireless facilities in a manner that conforms to the existing aesthetic and structural schemes. 
(2)  The protected areas are identified on the protected area maps included with this chapter and adopted concurrently herewith. The city council may update the protected area maps as additional areas within the city are designated as protected areas. The department will maintain a corresponding list of city-approved pole(s) for each protected area identified on the map. 
(3)  SWFs located in protected areas with existing decorative poles must use poles that conform to the height and aesthetics of the existing decorative poles. The department will maintain a list of city-approved poles for each protected area and a list of design specifications for SWF placed in each protected area, including height limits, equipment placement, and concealment requirements. 
(4)  Where SWFs are not prohibited, any poles located in protected areas or streetscaped corridors must be consistent in height with the other decorative poles located in the right-of-way. The city will not allow new poles in any protected area without a variance from city council, and any replacement poles must match the height of the existing pole it replaces. 
(5)  Pole-mounted cabinets approved by the city in protected areas must conform to the design and placement specifications determined by the department for each protected area, but cabinets on the ground are wholly prohibited in protected areas. 
(6)  Where the city has or hereafter decides to relocate utility facilities underground or replace poles with decorative poles, the city will designate such area as a protected area and must attempt to work with the WIP to accommodate placement of SWFs on city-approved poles within that area if the SWFs conform to poles used in the area. Once a new protected area has been designated, WIP, at its expense, must remove the SWFs and may apply for a permit for any new SWF. Once utilities have been moved underground and SWF have been removed pursuant to this subsection WIP may not place SWF and associate equipment back into the right-of-way without a variance from city council. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-105. - Attachment to city-owned or utility-owned poles in the city's rights-of-way. 
(a)  A permit issued under this article does not confer any right to attach small wireless facilities, wireless attachments, or ancillary equipment, or to remove or replace any city, utility or privately-owned pole with a SWF without having an attachment agreement or other authorization from the owner of the pole or wireless support structure. The city may cause a permit for wireless attachments to a city-owned structure under this article to be made conditional upon the execution of a finalized attachment agreement. Any removed and replaced pole must conform to city-approved pole. 
(b)  For city-owned poles in the rights-of-way, the city will provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to install the requested SWF, including pole replacement and if necessary, a new pole or enable the existing pole to support collocated wireless attachments and ancillary equipment within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed request. Make-ready work including any pole replacement must be completed within sixty (60) days of written acceptance of the good faith estimate by the WIP. 
(c)  A WIP is authorized to remove its wireless attachment and ancillary equipment from a pole upon ninety (90) days' written notice to the city and cease paying the annual rate to the city. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-106. - Removal, relocation, or modification of small wireless facilities in the city's rights-of-way. 
(a)  In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, consistent with the city's ordinances and master plans, and in the reasonable exercise of its police powers, the city may make or cause to be made improvements, repairs, or replacements of the public facilities located on public rights-of-way. Such construction activity may require adjustment or relocation of installations of public utilities, and small wireless facilities owned and maintained by wireless service providers. The right of public utilities to use public rights-of-way is permissive and subordinate to the reasonable exercise of the city's police power. The cost of relocating a SWF installation when the city reasonably exercises its police power is thus borne by the WIP. In such instances, the city will work in good faith with the wireless providers to identify and provide suitable alternative locations for the placement of the removed wireless facilities if available and consistent with this chapter. In areas designated by the city as protected areas the city may decline to provide alternative locations for placement of SWF that are removed in order to promote the city's protection of that corridor. 
(b)  Whenever the city determines that relocation of a SWF is necessary under this provision, the city will give WIP sixty (60) days' notice within which to relocate or otherwise remove the SWF. If the WIP does not relocate as directed by the city, the city may disconnect and remove the wireless attachment, ancillary equipment or the entire SWF at the WIP's expense. When removal is performed by the city, written notice will be sent requesting reimbursement after completion of the removal, and WIP will have thirty (30) days to reimburse such expenses after the sending of the notice. Failure to timely reimburse will terminate right to be in city's right-of-way. 
(c)  The city retains the right to cut or move or disconnect any SWF located within its rights-of-way as the city, in its sole discretion, may determine to be necessary, appropriate, or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If circumstances permit, the city will notify the WIP and provide it an opportunity to move its own SWF, prior to the city cutting or removing such facility and the city will notify the WIP after cutting or removing the SWF. The city is not liable for any damages to SWFs or other infrastructure that is cut or removed during such emergencies. When such removal is performed by the city, written notice will be sent requesting reimbursement after completion of the removal, and WIP will have thirty (30) days from the date of the notice to reimburse the city for its expenses. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Sec. 19-107. - Fees and rentals. 
(a)  The following schedule establishes the amount of payment due for fees and rentals associated with the use of the city's rights-of-way for small wireless facilities: 
(1)  A wireless provider authorized to place small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way must pay to the city compensation for use of the rights-of-way in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) annually per SWF. In addition, an annual right-of-way mitigation fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per SWF is assessed and placed in a separate fund set aside for the purpose for mitigating visual and aesthetic damages caused to the city's rights-of-way. 
(2)  The annual rate to attach or collocate a SWF on a city-owned pole is nine hundred ($900.00) per year for each installed SWF. Such compensation together with the application fee or asset contribution, and the rights-of-way fee specified in this article constitute the sole compensation that the WIP is required to pay the city or utility. But, if the WIP is also installing its own fiber optic technology to a particular location, the WIP must also provide the city with an opportunity to lay conduit or fiber for city use, at the city's expense, to the location utilizing any open trenching or boring construction by the WIP during the WIP's installation, including stubbing up the conduit within the city-approved pole. 
(b)  A WIP is authorized to remove its SWFs, wireless attachments, or other ancillary equipment at any time from the pole in the rights-of-way or other wireless support structure and may cease paying the city compensation for use of the rights-of-way as of the next due date for payment following the removal if all equipment is removed. 
(Ord. No. 19-01, § 1, 1-14-2019) 
Chapter 20 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration generally, Ch. 2; general provisions governing business licenses and taxes, §§ 13-151 et seq. 
State Law reference- Taxation power of county and municipal governments, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. IV; revenue and taxation, OCGA Title 48. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Sales and use tax. 
(a)  There is hereby levied in the city a local sales and use tax under the authority of House Bill No. 281 of the General Assembly the State of Georgia of 1979. 
(b)  The rate of the sales and use tax shall be one (1) percent as is authorized under the House Bill No. 281. 
(c)  This resolution is in compliance with the requirements of section 26A (c)(2) of the House Bill No. 281. 
(d)  The effective date of this ordinance and resolution imposing such sales tax is April 1, 1979. 
(e)  This section is adopted under the authority of section 26A of the Georgia Retailers' and Consumers' Sales and Use Tax Act as amended by House Bill No. 281 of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia of 1979 authorizing the levy herein made and the collection of such tax, and for so long as the tax herein levied continues to be levied and collected the city shall and will comply with all of the terms and conditions of such House Bill No. 281 and the general laws of the state. 
(Ord. of 3-24-79) 
Secs. 20-2-20-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Ad valorem taxation, §§ 4-10-4-18. 
State Law reference- Municipal taxation, OCGA § 48-5-350 et seq. 

Sec. 20-16. - Due date, cost fee for delinquent city taxes, interest rate on delinquent city taxes. 
(a)  The due date of the 1975 ad valorem taxes shall be December 20, 1975, and the due date of ad valorem property taxes for all future years shall be the twentieth day of December of each year. 
(b)  A cost fee of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) shall be added to each tax execution if the taxes are not paid by the date such taxes become delinquent. 
(c)  The tax executions of the city shall bear interest from the delinquent date of the taxes until paid at the rate of nine (9) percent per annum. 
(Code 1975, § 15A-10) 
Sec. 20-17. - Chief of police, authorized to collect delinquent taxes. 
    The chief of police is authorized to collect delinquent city ad valorem property taxes. 
(Code 1975, § 15A-11) 
Sec. 20-18. - Alternative method for collection of outstanding ad valorem taxes. 
    In addition to any other method provided by law for the collection of delinquent ad valorem taxes, the city is authorized to use judicial in rem tax foreclosures as provided by O.C.G.A. section 48-4-76 et. seq., for the collection of delinquent ad valorem taxes in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. section 48-4-76 et. seq. as same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 00-11, § 1, 8-14-2000) 
Secs. 20-19-20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 

Sec. 20-31. - Provision for homestead exemption. 
    The mayor and council may provide by ordinance a homestead exemption to the property tax levied by the city. 
(Ord. No. 08-3, § 1, 2-11-2008) 
Sec. 20-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-11, adopted July 14, 2008, repealed § 20-32, which pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 08-09, § 1, 5-12-2008. 
Sec. 20-33. - Exemption of homestead occupied by owner. 
    Up to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of the fair market value as determined by the Walker County Tax Assessor of the homestead of each resident of the City of LaFayette actually occupied by the owner as a residence and homestead shall be exempted from all City of LaFayette ad valorem taxation, except taxes levied to pay interest on and to retire bonded indebtedness. The exemption shall be ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) of the fair market value of the homestead, with the fair market value being the amount as determined by the Walker County Tax Assessor. Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, the fair market value of all homestead property in excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall remain subject to City of LaFayette ad valorem taxation. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, 7-14-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, adopted July 14, 2008, repealed the former § 20-33 and enacted a new § 20-33 as set out herein. The former § 20-33 pertained to exemption of homestead occupied by owner and derived from Ord. No. 08-09, § 2, 5-12-2008. 
Sec. 20-34. - Applicability of homestead exemption. 
    The homestead of each resident of the City of LaFayette, which is located within the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette, which is given a homestead exemption for a homestead occupied by the owner and is receiving said homestead exemption by Walker County, Georgia, shall be entitled to the City of LaFayette homestead exemption as set forth above in section 20-33 hereof, for so long as the owner receives a homestead exemption for owner occupied homestead by Walker County, Georgia, as shown by the official records of the county tax commissioner. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that all sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this article are or were, upon their enactment, believed by the mayor and council to be valid, enforceable, and constitutional. 
(b)  It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, each and every section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is severable from every other section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article. It is hereby further declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, no section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is mutually dependent upon any other section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article. 
(c)  In the event that any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this article shall, for any reason whatsoever, be declared invalid, unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, it is the express intent of the mayor and council that such invalidity, unconstitutionality, or unenforceability shall, to the greatest extent allowed by law, not render invalid, unconstitutional, or otherwise unenforceable any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, or sections of this article and that, to the greatest extent allowed by law, all remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs, and sections of this article shall remain valid, constitutional, enforceable, and of full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 08-11, § 2, 7-14-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-11, § 1, adopted July 14, 2008, repealed the former § 20-34 and enacted a new § 20-34 as set out herein. The former § 20-34 pertained to application for homestead exemption and derived from Ord. No. 08-09, § 3, 5-12-2008. 
Chapter 20.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES FRANCHISES AND LICENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20.5-1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
    Affiliated person means each person who falls into one (1) or more of the following categories: (1) each person having, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest in the applicant; (2) each person in which the applicant has, directly or indirectly, a controlling interest; (3) each officer, director, joint venturer or joint venture partner, of the applicant; and (4) each person, directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control with, the applicant; provided that "affiliated person" shall in no event mean the city or any creditor of the applicant solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and which is not otherwise an affiliated person by reason of owning a controlling interest in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management or common control with, the applicant. 
    Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, the Telecommunications Act of 1996, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"), but does not include telecommunications services or private telecommunications services. In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "Cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
    Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
    City means the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    City council means the city council of the city and its designee or any successor thereto. 
    Control or controlling interest means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or cause the direction of the management and policies of a person, including, but not limited to, a person's compliance with a franchise or revocable license, whether through the ownership of voting securities, by contract, or otherwise, and the beneficial ownership of shares representing ten (10) percent or more of the votes entitled to be cast by a corporation's voting shares shall create a rebuttable presumption of control. 
    Facility services means the installation, construction, operation or maintenance of conduit or related facilities in the streets by a person for sale or lease to third parties, other than affiliated persons, that use such conduit or related facilities for the transmission of telecommunication services, but such person does not itself provide telecommunications service or cable service to such third parties or any locations or other persons in the license area. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets by a telecommunications system to provide telecommunications services. 
    Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to provide facility services along licensed routes pursuant to a license, or to construct, install, operate and maintain a telecommunications system as necessary to: (a) furnish, supply and distribute telecommunications services to any locations or persons in the franchise or license area; (b) provide private telecommunications services along licensed routes pursuant to a license; or (c) transport telecommunications services across the city along licensed routes pursuant to a license without terminating or originating any telecommunications services at or from any person or location in the city. 
    May is permissive. 
    Ordinance means this chapter and all modifications and amendments thereto. 
    Person means any individual or any association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for profit, but shall not mean the city. 
    Private telecommunications services means the transmission of telecommunications by a person, regardless of the facilities used, for or in connection with the internal operations of such person's business, residence or employment and not for or in connection with the provision or offering of telecommunications services for sale or resale to any person, and shall not mean cable services. 
    Revocable license means an initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which authorizes the occupation and use of specifically identified streets, provided that a revocable license shall be issued only in the limited circumstances set forth in subsection 20.5-21(a). 
    Shall is mandatory, not merely directive. 
    Streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
    Telecommunications means "telecommunications" as defined by 47 U. S.C. § 153(43) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. 
    Telecommunications service means "telecommunications service" as defined by 47 U.S.C. § 153(46) of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, but shall not include cable services. In the event that "telecommunications service" is no longer defined in the Communications Act or the definition in the Communications Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "telecommunications service" shall mean "telecommunications service" as defined in the Communications Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Communications Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
    Telecommunications system means the system, plant, equipment or property within the streets in the franchise or license area over which telecommunications service or private telecommunications service is provided, and to be constructed, operated, and maintained by a grantee pursuant to a franchise or license ordinance or agreement. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 1.1, 9-10-2001) 
Secs. 20.5-2-20.5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRANTING AUTHORITY AND FRANCHISING PROCEDURE 

Sec. 20.5-21. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall use or occupy the streets to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided, or use or occupy the streets to provide facility services, without a franchise or revocable license granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The city intends to exercise its authority to franchise or license persons pursuant to this chapter to the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, including the 1996 Act. 
(b)  A person shall not use or occupy the streets to operate a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services or private telecommunications services are provided without a franchise, except that such person may use or occupy specific streets without a franchise if the person obtains a revocable license in accordance with the terms of this chapter. A revocable license is intended to be a limited grant of authority to use and occupy specifically identified streets and: (a) may be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is for the sole purpose of providing private telecommunications services or facility services; or (b) shall be granted to provide telecommunications services only if the use or occupation of such streets, together with the use or occupation of any streets pursuant to revocable licenses previously granted to such person and affiliated persons, shall not exceed five hundred (500) linear feet; or (c) shall be granted only if the use or occupation of such streets is by a telecommunications system that is not used by the grantee or any other person to sell, resell or otherwise provide telecommunications services to any person in the city. In the event an application for a revocable license would cause a person to exceed or fail to comply with the limits specified in this subsection (b), then such person must apply for a franchise in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and the use of specifically identified streets pursuant to all previously granted revocable licenses shall thereafter be pursuant to and in accordance with any such franchise that may be granted. 
(c)  The city council may grant one (1) or more franchises or revocable licenses in accordance with this chapter, provided that the city council reserves the right to modify any provision of this chapter by amendment hereof. 
(d)  The grant of any franchise or revocable license shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance by the city council and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise or license agreement between the city and the grantee. 
(e)  Any franchise or revocable license granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises or revocable licenses as it deems appropriate, and/or itself engage in the providing of telecommunications services, private telecommunications services or facility services. 
(f)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city. A revocable license may only be granted for use of specifically identified streets. 
(g)  The grant of franchises and revocable licenses by the city to persons constructing, operating or maintaining a telecommunications system shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the 1996 Act, as amended, governing telecommunications franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.1, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-22. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises and revocable licenses shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the city council may determine, subject to applicable law. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise or revocable license shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise or revocable license: 
(1)  Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or Social Security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  For the purpose of determining who controls applicant, a detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including the following: 
a.  The names and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names and business addresses of all persons having control over the applicant; 
c.  Financial information sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system, or to provide facility services, in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules, and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law; and 
d.  For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system, or provide facility services, in compliance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety, and welfare with respect to the applicant's use of the streets, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and the areas served by such systems. 
(3)  In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the telecommunications system or facility services to be constructed in the streets, which shall include the following: 
a.  A map indicating the location of the system or facility services in the streets, and an estimated construction schedule, if known; and 
b.  A statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant. 
(4)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references reasonably pertinent to the city's management of the streets or the compensation to be paid to the city, which shall be required or requested by the council or by any other provision of law. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.2, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-22.5. - Nonrefundable application fees for new franchises and revocable licenses. 
    No application for a new franchise or revocable license shall be considered without payment by the applicant of application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise or revocable license is granted, application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded, except if required by law. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this chapter, each applicant for a franchise must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of LaFayette, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with its proposal a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of dollars by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of Lafayette. In the event the city's reasonable costs exceed such amount, the applicant may be required by the city to pay any additional amount to cover such costs. In the event the city's reasonable costs are less than the application amount, the city shall reimburse to the applicant the amount in excess of the city's actual cost if required by applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.2.04, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-23. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations, and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.3, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-24. - Public availability of applications. 
    To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises or revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.4, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-25. - Evaluation criteria. 
    An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to construct, operate or maintain a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services are provided, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city; 
(2)  Demonstration of adequate financial and technical ability to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, which such demonstration may be made by an adequate bond, security fund, and/or such other demonstration that is reasonably acceptable to the city, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or federal communications commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The willingness and the ability of the applicant to meet construction requirements and to abide by all conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise (including any terms or conditions imposed pursuant to section 20.5-27 of this chapter), any public, health, safety and welfare requirements reasonably related to the applicant's use of the streets, and the city's management of streets; and 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, any other factors or considerations reasonably deemed pertinent by the city for managing the streets and safeguarding the interests of the city and the public in the streets, and for ensuring the city receives fair and reasonable compensation for use of the streets. 
    In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services and in accordance with applicable law, other than section 20.5-25 of the Communications Act which is not applicable to persons providing only private telecommunications services or facility services, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.5, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-26. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the city council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises or revocable licenses. In considering applications, the city council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  After considering such information provided pursuant to this chapter as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall set one (1) or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour, and place certain at which such application(s) shall be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing in accordance with applicable law. 
(c)  The city council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
(d)  The city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with this chapter and applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth in section 20.5-25 of this chapter. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements in order to grant a franchise or revocable license to an applicant when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
(e)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.6, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-27. - Terms and conditions of franchise and revocable license. 
(a)  The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this section shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or revocable license or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
(1)  The term of the franchise or revocable license, provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five (5) years and shall not be renewed for terms exceeding five (5) years; 
(2)  The franchise area authorized by the franchise, or the streets that may be used pursuant to the revocable license; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to the city; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license; 
(6)  For the limited purpose of ensuring that the grantee is complying with the terms of the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, the city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee; 
(8)  The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records with respect to its obligations under the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods in the streets; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight by the city of the grantee's use of streets and compliance with the franchise or revocable license; 
(12)  Provisions relating to an assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license or the telecommunications system that results in a change in control; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all licenses and permits necessary to provide telecommunications services by use of the city's streets from any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of city operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements of the telecommunications system, or from the provision of facility services; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the telecommunications system, or the provision of facility services; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city reasonably determines are necessary or appropriate to permit the city to manage its streets or ensure compliance with the franchise or revocable license, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(b)  The city manager shall make available to an applicant a model franchise or revocable license, as applicable, containing the terms and conditions the city seeks to impose pursuant to subsection (a). The city manager shall have the right to modify from time to time such model franchise or revocable license, so long as such modifications are consistent with this chapter and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.7, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-28. - Revocation of revocable license. 
    The revocable license shall be revocable at any time by the city for cause or, if the revocable license is for the provision of private telecommunications services or facility services, for the city's convenience. The revocable license, together with all revocable licenses granted to the applicant or affiliated persons, shall not authorize the occupation and use of more than five hundred (500) linear feet of specifically identified streets, unless the use or occupation of the streets does not involve the offering or provision of telecommunications services by the grantee, any affiliated persons or any other persons to or from any person or location in the city, or unless the use or occupation of the streets is for the provision of facility services. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 2.8, 9-10-2001) 
Secs. 20.5-29, 20.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20.5-31. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other portion of this chapter is, for any reason, declared invalid, in whole or in part, by any court, agency, commission, legislative body or other authority of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent portion. Such declaration shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof, which other portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 3.1, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-32. - Delegation. 
    Consistent with applicable law, the city council shall have the right to delegate and redelegate, and to revoke any such delegation or redelegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this chapter to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, redelegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this chapter or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or revocable license or grantee. The city council may also establish and appoint one (1) or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the city council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 3.2, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-33. - Application to existing telecommunications systems and providers of telecommunications services and private telecommunications services. 
    This chapter shall not be retroactively applied to franchises for the operation of telecommunications systems used to provide telecommunications services existing on the effective date of this article, but shall apply to any renewal or extension of such franchises. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, § 3.3, 9-10-2001) 
CITY OF LAFAYETTE 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRANCHISE OR 
LICENSE APPLICATION 
Submittal instructions: Applications for a franchise or revocable license may be submitted to: 
CITY MANAGER 
P. O. BOX 89 
CITY HALL 
SOUTH DUKE STREET 
LAFAYETTE, GEORGIA 30728 
Submit eight (8) copies of the application and all supporting documentation in typed form. Application responses must be completed using the letter and number format as indicated on the application. 
Each applicant for a franchise must furnish with submittal of the application an application fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of LaFayette. Each applicant for a revocable license must furnish with submittal of the application an application fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of LaFayette. 
For further information or clarification regarding this process, please refer to the accompanying document: Instructions To franchise and license applicants. Responses to the following questions should be submitted in writing to the above address: 
1. Applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or Social Security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
2. For the purpose of determining who controls applicant, a detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including the following: 
(a) The names and business addresses of all officers and directors of the applicant; 
(b) The names and business addresses of all persons having control over the applicant; 
(c) Financial information sufficient to demonstrate that the applicant has the financial ability to construct and maintain the telecommunications system, or to provide facility services, in a safe manner and in accordance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and to the extent not prohibited by law; and 
(d) For purposes of determining whether the applicant will construct, maintain, operate, and repair the telecommunications system, or provide facility services, in compliance with the city's management policies, rules and regulations with respect to the streets and in a manner protective of the public health, safety and welfare with respect to the applicant's use of the streets, the names and addresses for telecommunications systems owned or controlled by the applicant and the areas served by such systems. 
3. In order to permit the city to manage its streets, a description of the proposed plan of construction and maintenance of the telecommunications system or facility services to be constructed in the streets, which shall include the following: 
(a) A map indicating the location of the system or facility services in the streets, and an estimated construction schedule, if known; and 
(b) A statement describing the proposed and actual location of facilities and equipment to be used in the streets by the applicant. 
4. To the extent not prohibited by law, any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references reasonably pertinent to the city's management of the streets or the compensation to be paid to the city, which shall be required or requested by the city or by any other provision of law. 
5. The signature and official title of the applicant and the date of the submittal of the application. 
INSTRUCTIONS TO TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
FRANCHISE AND LICENSE APPLICANTS 
Submittal Instructions: 
Applications for a franchise or revocable license may be submitted to: 
CITY MANAGER 
P. O. BOX 89 
CITY HALL 
SOUTH DUKE STREET 
LAFAYETTE, GEORGIA 30728 
Eight (8) copies of the application and all supporting documentation are to be submitted in typed form. Application responses will be completed using the letter and number format as indicated on the application. 
At the time the application is submitted, each applicant for a franchise must furnish an application fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of LaFayette, and each applicant for a revocable license must furnish an application fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the City of LaFayette. 
For further information or clarification regarding this process, all questions should be submitted in writing to the above address. 
Responsibility of applicants 
It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise or revocable license to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules regulations and other directives of the City and any federal, state or local government authority having jurisdiction. 
Public availability of applications 
To the extent determined by the city council, applications for franchises and revocable licenses, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
Evaluation criteria 
An applicant shall be granted a franchise or revocable license to operate a telecommunications system over which telecommunications services are provided, provided the city council reasonably determines that the applicant has agreed to or meets the following factors: 
A: The adequacy of proposed compensation to be paid to the city. 
B. Demonstration of adequate financial and technical ability to construct and maintain a telecommunications system in the streets, which such demonstration may be made by an adequate bond, security fund, and/or such other demonstration that is reasonably acceptable to the city, and a certificate of public convenience or other authorization from the state or federal communications commission permitting the applicant to provide telecommunications services in the city. 
C: The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise. 
D: The willingness and the ability of the applicant to meet construction requirements and to abide by all conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise, any public, health, safety and welfare requirements reasonably related to the applicant's use of the streets, and the city's management of streets. 
E: Any other factors or considerations reasonably deemed pertinent by the city for managing the streets and safeguarding the interests of the city and the public in the streets, and for ensuring the city receives fair and reasonable compensation for use of the streets, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services, the city council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation, the foregoing factors to the extent applicable. 
Procedure for consideration of and action on applications: 
The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as is deemed necessary or appropriate to consider and act on application for franchise or revocable license. In evaluating the application, the city may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, or from the public, and may request the preparation of one (1) or more reports to be submitted to the city, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
After considering such information provided pursuant to the telecommunications ordinance as it determines to be appropriate, the city council shall may set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place at which such application(s) shall be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) in accordance with applicable law. Notification of the hearing will be presented to the applicant company and attendance by a representative of the company will be required at the hearing. Copies of the application will be made available for public inspection prior to the hearing. The city may institute negotiations between city officials and the applicant on the terms of the proposed franchise or revocable license. 
The city council shall consider the application for a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services in accordance with applicable law, including 47 U.S.C. § 253 as, applicable to the provision of telecommunications services, and shall grant the franchise or revocable license, provided that the applicant has agreed to the terms and conditions on which the franchise or revocable license is to be granted and meets the evaluation criteria set forth above. Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the city council, the city council may grant the revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services, and may specify the conditions under which the revocable license is granted. Alternatively, the city may reject any and all applications for a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements in order to grant a franchise or revocable license to provide telecommunications services to an applicant when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. The city also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements for the grant of a revocable license to provide private telecommunications services or facility services when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby or that such waiver is required by applicable law. 
Terms and conditions of franchise or revocable license: 
The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise or revocable license granted pursuant to this application process shall be set forth in a separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement Such ordinance or written agreement, among other things, may address the following subjects, to the extent not prohibited by law: 
A: The term of the franchise or revocable license; provided, however, that the initial term of the revocable license shall not exceed five (5) years and shall not have options to renew exceeding five (5) years. 
B: The franchise area or, if a revocable license, the streets that may be used. 
C: The compensation to be paid to the city. 
D: The circumstances upon which the franchise or revocable license may be terminated or cancelled. 
E: The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds, or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the grantee's obligations under the franchise or revocable license. 
F: For the limited purpose of ensuring, that the grantee is complying with the terms of the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, the city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the grantee. 
G: The insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the grantee. 
H: The obligation of the grantee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records with respect to its obligations under the franchise or revocable license, including, but not limited to, any compensation or street management provisions, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto. 
I: Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods in the streets. 
J: Provisions to ensure that the grantee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies. 
K: Provisions to ensure adequate oversight by the city of the grantee's use of streets and compliance with the franchise or revocable license. 
L: Provisions relating to an assignment or other transfer of the franchise or revocable license or the telecommunications system that results in a change in control. 
M: Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the grantee's failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the franchise or revocable license. 
N: Provisions to ensure that the grantee will obtain all licenses and permits necessary to provide telecommunications services by use of the city's streets from any governmental body having jurisdiction over the grantee, including, but not limited to, the federal communications commission. 
0: Provisions to ensure that the grantee will protect the property of the city from damage or interruption of city operations resulting from the construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements of the telecommunications system or from the provision of facility services. 
P: Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to telecommunications system or to the facility services; and, 
Q: Such other provisions as the city reasonably determines are necessary or appropriate to permit the city to manage its streets or ensure compliance with the franchise or revocable license, to the extent not prohibited by law. 
(Ord. No. 01-09, 9-10-2001) 
Sec. 20.5-34. - Due compensation for telegraph or telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three (3) percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telegraph or telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 1, 12-8-2008) 
Sec. 20.5-35. - Authorized designee. 
    The city manager or his/her designee, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(a)  Review application information submitted by a telegraph or telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within fifteen (15) business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
(b)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the mayor and council within sixty (60) calendar days of the receipt of such completed application. 
(c)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and sections 20.5-34, and 20.5-35 of this chapter. 
(d)  Provide a coordination function between a telegraph or telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and sections 20.5-34, and 20.5-35 of this chapter. 
(e)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
(f)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 08-17, § 2, 12-8-2008) 
Chapter 21 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; director of utilities, § 2-72; post-development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment, Ch. 6, Art. XII; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; planning, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Meter service charges for reading out and turning on when moving from one site to another within the city. 
    A transfer charge of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid for each utility meter location when the same is read out and turned on when a consumer moves from one (1) site to another in the city, irrespective of the number of meters read at any one (1) site. 
(Code 1975, § 40-10; Ord. No. 00-5, § 1, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 21-2. - Charge for avoiding disconnection of service. 
    A collection charge of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be charged any customer of a public utility service who elects to pay a delinquent bill directly to a city employee who has appeared on such customer's premises in order to disconnect service as a result of such delinquent bills. 
(Code 1975, § 40-11; Ord. No. 00-5, § 2, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 21-3. - Meters to be accessible for reading. 
    All gas, water or electricity customers of the city shall make all meters for such services accessible for readings. Such customers shall be required, when necessary, to cut shrubbery around such meters, unlock doors and gates, pen up large or vicious animals, and take whatever other measures may be appropriate to facilitate the reading of such meters without prolonged delay. 
(Code 1975, § 40-12) 
Sec. 21-4. - Failure to make meter accessible; penalties. 
    If any gas, water or electricity customer of the city fails to comply with the provisions of section 21-3, the city may charge the customer for the month in which any meter cannot be read the same charges as were charged to the customer for such service for the preceding month, with adjustments to be made as to the charges when the meter is read on the next succeeding meter reading period. If the meter is not accessible for two (2) meter reading periods in succession, the city may, in addition to charging the same charges as were charged during the preceding monthly period, also charge a ten (10) percent penalty on the total amount of such utility bill. If the meter is inaccessible for a third consecutive meter reading period, the city shall be authorized to discontinue service to the customer until such time as the meter is made easily accessible for reading, with the charges for the third period being the prevailing rate for service as shown by a final meter reading, plus a ten (10) percent penalty. 
(Code 1975, § 40-13) 
Sec. 21-5. - Unlawful use of utilities. 
(a)  "Utilities" is defined in this section as water, gas, or electric current furnished by the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to make or cause to be made any connection or re-connection for the supply of utilities on the primary or lead side of the meter installed for measuring utilities. Only city employees or authorized agents of the city may connect or re-connect utilities service to the primary or lead side of the meter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to in any manner alter, adjust, bypass, modify, or tamper with any meter, apparatus, connections, locks, seals, or equipment related to the city's providing of utilities. 
(Code 1975, § 40-14; Ord. No. 03-06, § 1, 6-9-2003) 
Sec. 21-6. - Separate meters for each dwelling unit. 
    Each separate dwelling unit (i.e., each apartment, each house, etc.) shall have separate meters for gas and electricity, which meters shall register the consumption of that dwelling unit only. No two (2) dwelling units may utilize the same gas and electric meters. 
(Code 1975, § 40-20) 
Sec. 21-7. - Delinquent date of utility bills; discontinuance; fees. 
(a)  Gas and electric bills are due and payable by the tenth day succeeding the date of the mailing of such bills. If not paid at that time, such bills are deemed delinquent. 
(b)  The penalty for all delinquent bills shall be ten (10) percent of the bill. 
(c)  If such bills, including the delinquent penalty, are not paid before the expiration of the twentieth day succeeding the date of mailing of the bill, service shall be discontinued. 
(Code 1975, § 40-21) 
Sec. 21-8. - Reconnection upon payment; service charge. 
    Upon payment of a delinquent account and penalties, plus a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) service charge per utility during business hours and a fifty dollars ($50.00) service charge per utility during nonbusiness hours, the customer's utilities shall be reconnected. 
(Code 1975, § 40-22; Ord. No. 00-5, § 3, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 21-9. - Sewer rate schedule. 
(a)  The monthly sewer rate shall amount to seventy-five (75) percent of the water bill for each customer with a minimum monthly charge of four dollars and forty-five cents ($4.45) for all residential customers and eleven dollars and eight-three cents ($11.83) for all commercial customers. 
(b)  The rate schedule set forth above contemplates a single user, such as a one-family dwelling, one-farm dwelling with appurtenances, or a single commercial operation. 
(c)  Extraordinary circumstances, such as multiple-dwelling units, industrial users, and fire protection shall be governed by special contract agreements made by the mayor and city council on recommendation of the city manager or city engineer. 
(Code 1975, § 40-30; Ord. No. 03-07, § 1, 7-14-2003) 
Sec. 21-10. - Application for utilities. 
    The consumer shall make application for utilities, in person, at the city hall, and at the same time shall make cash security deposits as follows, to-wit: 
OWNER OCCUPIED RESIDENCES 
    A deposit for a two-month average bill at said location for each utility, with a minimum of the following, to-wit: water-twenty-five dollars ($25.00); gas-sixty dollars ($60.00); electricity-sixty dollars ($60.00). If the property owner is not delinquent in the payment of all utilities during twelve (12) consecutive months, the property owner may request a refund of the above deposit. For a new utility customer to the city, who was previously outside the city, upon the customer presenting to the city a letter of payment history from the customer's most recent utility provider/providers that the customer has not been delinquent on any utility payment for the immediate past twelve (12) consecutive months, no utility deposit will be required for each utility for which a letter of payment history is provided, as aforesaid. 
RENTER OCCUPIED RESIDENCES 
    A deposit for a two-month average bill at said location for each utility, with a minimum of the following, to-wit: water-fifty dollars ($50.00); gas-one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00); electricity one hundred thirty dollars ($130.00). 
(Code 1975, § 40-31; Ord. No. 00-5, § 4, 4-10-2000) 
Sec. 21-11. - Charges for initial water and sewer service. 
    Each consumer subscribing to the water service of the city which requires a new connection shall pay a connection fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) if the service is located within the city limits and nine hundred dollars ($900.00) if the connection is located outside of the city limits. Each consumer subscribing to use the sewer service of the city which requires a new connection shall pay a connection fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each connection within the city limits and four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) for each connection located outside of the city limits. The above connection fees shall be applicable to all water lines and sewer lines of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 40-32; Ord. No. 03-08, § 1, 7-14-2003) 
Sec. 21-12. - Minimum charges. 
    The minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule above, shall be made for each such connection subscribed for. Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only, and, except for fire protection, the city shall not under any condition furnish water free of charge to anyone. 
(Code 1975, § 40-33) 
Sec. 21-13. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a service line from its distribution line to the property line, where the distribution line exists or is to be constructed, and runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. No service charge, other than the connection fee referred to in section 21-11, will be made for a water meter. A proportionately greater charge than the connection fee will be made for a meter of larger dimensions. 
(b)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render service. 
(c)  The city may install its meter at or near the property line or, at the city's option, on the consumer's property. 
(d)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections or backflow. 
(Code 1975, § 40-34) 
Sec. 21-14. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, members of his household and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use such water. Water shall not be used for irrigation, fire protection nor other purposes, except when water is available in sufficient quantity without interfering with the regular domestic consumption in the area served. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  Where a meter or meter box is placed on the premises of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer therefor, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department and all rules and regulations of the city. 
(e)  In order to be received as a consumer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system. All applicants, by becoming consumers of the city, covenant and agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(Code 1975, § 40-35) 
Sec. 21-15. - Access to premises and extension of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and its facilities and the sewer service and its facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Code 1975, § 40-36) 
Sec. 21-16. - Change of occupancy. 
    Not less than three (3) days' notice must be given, in person or in writing, at the city hall to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party or consumer shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure, up to the time specified for departure, or up to the time the service is discontinued based upon such notice, whichever period is longer. The new occupant or consumer shall apply for water service within twenty-four (24) hours after occupying the premises; and failure to do so will make him liable for paying for the water consumed since the last meter reading, and likewise, will make him liable for the normal sewer charges. 
(Code 1975, § 40-37) 
Sec. 21-17. - Meter reading; billings, collections. 
(a)  Bills to customers for city utility service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills shall be paid at the city hall and a failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of utility users or consumers to pay the charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Nonpayment within ten (10) days from the due date shall subject the consumer to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the total delinquent account; 
(2)  Nonpayment within twenty (20) days from the due date will result in the utilities being shut off and discontinued from the utility user's or consumer's property; 
(3)  Nonpayment for sixty (60) days after the original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate any type of contractual agreement or relationship with the consumer or customer; and in such event, the utility user shall not be entitled to receive, nor shall the city be obligated to supply, any utilities to that customer or property thereafter. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, including any penalty, such security deposit as may be required by the mayor and council is made and paid in full, and a service charge of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each utility connection is paid for each meter reconnected. 
(Code 1975, § 40-38; Ord. No. 03-09, § 1, 7-14-2003) 
Sec. 21-18. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer service is discontinued and all bills are paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit will be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves a right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse; 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules; 
(3)  Emergency repairs; 
(4)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control; 
(5)  Legal processes; 
(6)  Direction of public authorities; 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood or unavoidable accident. 
(Code 1975, § 40-39) 
Sec. 21-19. - Complaint and adjustments. 
    If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claims, in person, at the city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this article if the bill is not paid in full. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and the payment shall not prejudice his claim. Furthermore: 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided that if the meter is found to over-register beyond five (5) percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made by the city to the consumer. 
(3)  If the seal of a meter is broken by other than the city's representative or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from the record of his previous bills and from other proper data. 
(Code 1975, § 40-39.1) 
Sec. 21-20. - Liability. 
    From and after October 13, 1980, the owner of the property and the utility customer on the property shall be jointly and severally liable for all damage to the utility meters of the city located on the premises occupied by the customer. 
(Ord. of 10-13-80, § 1) 
Sec. 21-21. - Costs of replacement, repair to be billed to customer. 
(a)  The customer will be billed by the city for the costs of replacing or repairing any such utility meter, such charges to be added on to the next regular utility bill or statement of the customer. The customer shall be entitled to pay such costs or charges pertaining to such meter in two (2) equal monthly installments. 
(b)  If the customer does not pay the charges referred to in subsection (a) above when they become due, the city shall have the right to discontinue utility service to the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-13-80, §§ 2, 3) 
Sec. 21-22. - Lien. 
(a)  The charges referred to in section 21-21, together with any and all other utility charges for utility services to the premises, are hereby declared to be a lien against the real estate to which the utility services have been provided. 
(b)  No future utility services shall be provided to the premises until the lien created by subsection (a) above has been paid by the property owner or by any other person on behalf of the property owner. 
(Ord. of 10-13-80, §§ 4, 5) 
Sec. 21-23. - Easement for utilities required. 
(a)  A ten-foot easement in writing will be required for all properties to be served which do not have adjoining lots on the back lot line. 
(b)  A five-foot easement on each side of the back property line will be required for all properties to be serviced which have property lines which adjoin on the back. This will make a total easement ten (10) feet wide for this purpose. 
(c)  A one-foot easement is required on each side lot line where streetlights are to be installed or are required. This easement shall be one (1) foot wide on each side of the side lot lines, thereby making a total easement of two (2) feet in width. This easement shall extend from the front lot line to the back lot line. 
(d)  No permanent structures of any type whatsoever will be allowed on easements. 
(e)  All of the aforesaid easements must be granted in writing on forms prescribed by the city and approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § I) 
Sec. 21-24. - Metering and secondaries. 
(a)  All meter bases shall be mounted on the side of the transclosure. Installation of the same shall be performed by the electric department of the city at such cost as is prescribed by the governing body of the city. 
(b)  The electric department of the city shall inspect all secondary connections before they are approved. 
(c)  All secondary conductors shall be run underground by the property owner or developer to the meter base, in conjunction with and under the supervision of the electric department of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-11-78, § II) 
Sec. 21-25. - Tapping fee. 
(a)  A special rate for tapping fee for water and sewer taps is hereby established in all approved subdivisions located within the corporate limits of the city provided that the subdivision meets all of the requirements of the city and has been approved by the mayor and council. For the purposes of this section a subdivision is defined as a tract of land which has been divided into twelve (12) or more building lots which are laid out in a cluster and which provide for paved streets which meet all of the city requirements for rights-of-way and construction and which also provide for adequate easements dedicated to the city for all public utilities including water, sewer, electricity and natural gas, when the same is available, and which are designed to city specifications. To be approved a subdivision must be formally approved by the mayor and council of the city at a regular meeting or a duly called meeting of the mayor and council. 
(b)  In approved subdivisions in order to obtain the special rate hereby created the water and sewer lines must be installed by the subdivider with lateral lines installed by the subdivider up to the property line of each lot. 
(c)  In approved subdivisions, the tapping fee for water taps shall be forty dollars ($40.00) less than the regular tapping fee which is in effect at the time that the water lines are installed and lateral lines are installed to the property line. This tapping fee shall include the installation and setting of a meter, cut-off valve and meter box by the city. 
(d)  The tapping fee for a sewer tap in an approved subdivision shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) less than the regular tapping fee which is in effect at the time that the sewer lines are installed and lateral lines are installed to the property line. This fee shall only include the cost involved in connecting the two (2) lines. 
(e)  In order to obtain the special water tapping fee and special sewer tapping fee, the subdivider must install at his own expense all water lines and all sewer lines within the subdivision and all of the water lines and all of the sewer lines must meet city specifications, be inspected and approved by the appropriate city officials, and when installed, inspected and approved all of the water and sewer lines must be dedicated to the city by the subdivider and all of the lines must be conveyed by the subdivider to the city. 
(Ord. of 9-11-78) 
Sec. 21-26. - Discount of electrical services for qualifying individuals. 
(a)  The city is desirous of providing a discount on electric bills for those individuals who qualify, and thus, on a first come basis until the total discounts granted by the city reach the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), the city shall grant a discount in the amount of ten (10) percent for all qualifying individuals, with each such individual meeting the following qualifications, to-wit: (1) utilities listed in the name of the applicant; (2) applicant must reside in the residence for which a discount is being sought; (3) applicant must be seventy (70) years of age or older; (4) total gross annual income for the residence of the applicant may not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00); and (5) applicant must file with the city each year for which a discount is sought an application for electric service discount. There shall be only one (1) discount per applicant. 
(b)  This section shall be enforced by the city manager for the city or his designee or designees. 
(c)  Any person violating this section including, but not limited to, the filing of a false application for electric service discount, shall be subject to civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction and/or criminal prosecution before the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 99-4, §§ 1-3, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 21-27. - Definitions. 
    Controlled substance means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor to the substances described in Schedules I through V of O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-25 through 16-13-29 and Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part 1308. 
    Manufacture means the production, preparation, propagation, compounding, conversion, or processing of any controlled substance, either directly or indirectly by extraction from substances of natural origin, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, and includes any packaging of the substance or labeling or relabeling of its container. 
    Utilities means services furnished by the city to the public including water, gas, or electric current. 
(Ord. No. 04/7, § I, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 21-28. - Disconnection of utilities to houses and/or structures used for the manufacture of any controlled substance. 
    Upon the finding by the director of public safety or his designee that any house and/or structure situated within the city that is provided utilities by the city and is currently or has in the past been used for the manufacture of any controlled substance, the utilities provided therein by the city shall immediately be disconnected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 04/7, § I, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 04/08, § I, 4-12-2004) 
Sec. 21-29. - Requirements for the re-connection of utilities for houses and/or structures used for the manufacture of any controlled substance. 
    No house and/or structure in which the utilities have been disconnected pursuant to this article shall be furnished with utilities from the city unless and until the owner of said house and/or structure first obtains certification from an entity authorized in the handling and disposal of hazardous materials whereby the house and/or structure and the contents therein have been determined to contain no hazardous materials as a result of said house and/or structure's use for the manufacture of any controlled substance. 
    Any house and/or structure in which the utilities have been disconnected pursuant to this article shall be considered an "unsanitary building" as defined in Chapter 12, Article I, Section 12-12, of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 04/7, § I, 3-8-2004; Ord. No. 04/08, § I, 4-12-2004) 
Sec. 21-30. - Removal of materials from houses and/or structures used for the manufacture of any controlled substance. 
    It shall be the sole responsibility of the owner of the house and/or structure in which the utilities have been disconnected pursuant to this article to ensure the proper disposal of any and all hazardous materials found within said house and/or structure. No such material will be removed or in any way handled by any employee of the city; provided, however, nothing in this section shall be construed to limit in any way the removal of hazardous materials by law enforcement personnel authorized to do so and in the performance of their lawful duties. 
(Ord. No. 04/7, § I, 3-8-2004) 
Sec. 21-31. - Process for enforcement; disputing utilities disconnection; appeals; and emergency hearings. 
(a)  Process for enforcement. 
(1)  Upon a finding by the director of public safety or his designee that any house and/or structure situated within the city that is provided utilities by the city and is currently or has in the past been used for the manufacture of any controlled substance, written notice shall be issued by the director of public safety or his designee to the utilities account holder and owner of record of subject property. 
(2)  In addition to any requirements otherwise provided herein, all notices issued pursuant to this section and article shall plainly and clearly state to the utilities account holder and owner of record of the subject property the location, date, and time that a post-termination of utilities hearing will be held, and during which the utilities account holder and record owner will be afforded the opportunity to contest the disconnection of utilities. Any notice provided hereunder should be served, in the discretion of the director of public safety or his designee, either personally or via certified mail to the utilities account holder's and record owner's last known mailing address. A copy of said notice shall also be visibly posted on the subject property. 
(b)  Disputing utilities disconnection. 
(1)  Unless otherwise provided herein, the post-termination hearing provided herein will be conducted by the Municipal Court, City of LaFayette, Georgia, at a regular session of said court at the location, date, and time as provided in the notice to the utilities account holder and record owner. All effort should be made so that the post-termination hearing provided herein occur at the municipal court's first session immediately following the issuance of the notice given hereunder. Hearings not occurring at the municipal court's first session immediately following the issuance of the notice given hereunder shall be held at the municipal court's next regular session. 
(2)  The post-termination hearing provided herein shall be limited to the following issues: 
a.  To determine whether the utilities disconnection in issue was warranted under the circumstances by a preponderance of the evidence; and 
b.  To provide the utilities account holder and record owner of the subject property with the opportunity to dispute the finding of the director of public safety or his designee that the subject property had been used for the manufacture of any controlled substance. 
(3)  The following rules shall govern the post-termination hearing provided herein: 
a.  Any and all evidence relevant to said issues, whether presented by the director of public safety or his designee or by the utilities account holder or record owner and without regard to the admissibility of same, may be entered into evidence and should be considered by the court. 
b.  Failure of the utilities account holder or record owner to attend any hearing provided hereby, regardless of the reason for such absence, shall indicate that the utilities account holder or record owner does not dispute the findings of the director of public safety or his designee and, for purposes of said hearing, all allegations shall be deemed admitted by the utilities account holder or record owner not in attendance. Said failure to attend shall also indicate, and the court shall consider it as such, that the utilities account holder or record owner not attending has waived any participation thereby in said post-termination hearing. 
c.  Upon the determination at said hearing that the utilities disconnection in issue was warranted under the circumstances and except as otherwise provided in (c) or (d) of this subsection, utilities for the property in issue shall remain disconnected until and unless the requirements of section 21-29 of this section and article have been satisfied. 
(c)  Appeals. 
(1)  All appeals made under this section shall be for the sole purpose of determining the propriety of the municipal court's determination that the utilities disconnection in issue was warranted under the circumstances. 
(2)  Unless otherwise provided by law, appeals made hereunder shall be made to the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, and shall be by writ of certiorari only and in accordance with Chapter 4, Title 5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended, and otherwise in accordance with the procedures outlined by this Code and Charter concerning appeals of municipal court decisions as to municipal code violations. 
(d)  Emergency hearings. 
(1)  In the event that utilities are disconnected under this section, the utilities account holder and/or record owner may petition for an emergency hearing regarding said termination as follows, to-wit: 
a.  Within twenty-four (24) hours of the utilities termination as provided under this section, the utilities account holder and/or record owner may, either orally or in writing, request an emergency hearing regarding said utilities termination to the City Manager, City of LaFayette, Georgia, or his designee. 
b.  In the discretion of the city manager or his designee and upon consideration of the circumstances presented, the city manager or his designee may either grant or deny an emergency hearing. If an emergency hearing is denied, the post-termination hearing will occur as otherwise provided in the notice to the utilities account holder and record owner. 
(2)  If an emergency hearing is granted, same shall be heard by the city manager or his designee and otherwise made in accordance with the procedures set forth in subsection (b) herein and within seventy-two (72) hours of the grant of the petition for the emergency hearing. 
(3)  Appeals from any emergency hearing as provided herein shall be made as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 04/08, § I, 4-12-2004) 
Sec. 21-32. - Identity theft prevention program. 
(1)  Short title. This section shall be known as the identity theft prevention program. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(3)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
    City means the City of LaFayette. 
    Covered account means: 
1.  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
2.  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(4)  Findings. 
a.  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
b.  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, electricity, natural gas and garbage collection. 
c.  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts has been minimal. 
d.  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, and transferring accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
e.  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
f.  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
1.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
2.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
3.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and 
4.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(5)  Process of establishing a covered account. 
a.  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer a valid government issued identification containing a photograph of the customer, the customer's Social Security number, and any information necessary for the city to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
b.  Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned account numbers and to encrypt account numbers. 
(6)  Access to covered account information. 
a.  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
b.  Such password(s) shall be changed by city manager on a regular basis, shall be at least eight (8) characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
c.  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
d.  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager. 
(7)  Credit card payments. 
a.  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
b.  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
c.  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four (4) digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(8)  Sources and types of red flags. All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
a.  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: 
1.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
2.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
3.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
4.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
i.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
ii.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
iii.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
iv.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
b.  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
1.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
2.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
3.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
4.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
5.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
c.  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
1.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
i.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
ii.  The Social Security number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
2.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
3.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
4.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
5.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
6.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
7.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
8.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
9.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
d.  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
1.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
2.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
3.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
4.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
5.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
6.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
7.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
8.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
e.  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(9)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
a.  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
1.  Contact the customer; 
2.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
i.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
ii.  Close the account; 
3.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
4.  Notify a debt collector within forty-eight (48) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
5.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
6.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
b.  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
1.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
2.  Deny the application for the new account; 
3.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
4.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(10)  Updating the program. The mayor and council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the mayor and council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the mayor and council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
a.  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
b.  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
c.  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
d.  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
e.  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(11)  Program administration. The city manager is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the mayor and council for consideration by the council. 
a.  The city manager will report to the mayor and council annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
1.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
2.  Service provider arrangements; 
3.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
4.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
b.  The city manager or his designee is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city manager shall exercise his discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(12)  Outside service providers. In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city manager shall exercise his discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. 08-15, § 2, 10-23-2008) 
Sec. 21-33. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(1)  Short title. Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(2)  Purpose. Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(3)  Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
    City  means City of lafayette. 
    Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(4)  Policy. In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
a.  Compare the information in the consumer report with: 
1.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(1); 
2.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
3.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
b.  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(5)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. 
a.  In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
1.  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
2.  The city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and 
3.  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
b.  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(6)  Methods confirming consumer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
a.  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
b.  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
c.  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
d.  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. 08-15, § 2, 10-23-2008) 
Sec. 21-34. - Utility cost adjustment. 
(a)  Utility defined. Any of the following utility services provided by the city: (1) electricity; (2) natural gas; (3) water; (4) sewerage; and (5) garbage and refuse removal. This Code section shall be applicable to each type of utility set forth above. 
(b)  Utility cost adjustment defined. An increase or decrease in rates charged to customers of the city's utility services sufficient for the city to recover total utility costs including, but not limited to: (1) the wholesale cost of the utility; (2), investment in future utility service; (3) cost of construction, maintenance, and operation of the utility distribution system; (4) administrative costs attributable to the operation of the utility service; (5) city, county, state, public service commission, and federal regulatory fees and costs of compliance; and (6) demand for or surplus of the utility. 
(c)  Utility cost adjustments. Utility cost adjustments will be made by the city manager. The city manager shall consider making utility cost adjustments on a monthly basis if base revenues are below expected levels and/or if unexpected costs are incurred. All utility cost adjustments are at the sole discretion of the city by and through the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 13-3, § 1, 10-14-2013) 
Sec. 21-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM FOR MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 21-36. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This article sets forth the measures the city will take in accordance with state and federal law requirements to help prevent the entry of contaminants or pollutants into any area of the city's water distribution system through cross-connections, as defined in this article. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this article are applicable to any system or mechanism supplied by the city's water distribution system including sprinkler and fire protection systems, residential systems and in particular, piped water for human consumption or incorporated into products or processes for human consumption. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-10) 
Sec. 21-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Consulting engineer means the person or firm of civil and/or professional engineers designated from time to time by the city as the city's consulting engineers for its utility systems, including its water system. 
    Contaminant means any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter in water that if introduced into the potable water supply would create a health hazard. 
    Cross-connection means any physical arrangement whereby the city water supply and public water system is or may be connected directly or indirectly with a nonpotable water supply or unapproved water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device that contains or may contain contaminated water, liquid, gases, sewerage, other wastes, or materials of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as the result of backflow, by-pass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over devices, or other temporary, permanent, or potential connections through which or because of which backflow or back-siphonage could or would occur. 
    EPD means the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources. 
    Federal act means the Safe Drinking Act, P.L. 93-523. 
    Federal regulations means all regulations adopted pursuant to the federal act. 
    Georgia or state act means the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 (Part 5 of article 3, chapter 5, Title 12 OCGA and all amendments thereto). 
    Georgia or state regulations means regulations duly promulgated by EPD pursuant to the state act. 
    Person means any individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, county, municipality, state agency or other entity. 
    Pollutant means a nontoxic substance that if introduced into the public water system would be objectionable, but would not create a health hazard. 
    Public water system means the water distribution system owned and operated by the city and all interconnections therewith, whether within or outside the municipal limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-11; Ord. No. 05-02, § 1, 6-13-2005) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-38. - Application. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all persons and facilities that are connected directly or indirectly to the public water system, whether such facilities are physically located within the municipal limits of the city or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-12) 
Sec. 21-39. - Further statement of policy. 
    It shall be the policy of the governing authority of the city to operate its public water system in compliance with the federal act, federal regulations, the state act and the state regulations so as to comply with all provisions thereof and to otherwise ensure the integrity of the public water system and protection from pollution and contamination by cross-connections owned, maintained or operated by any person connected to the public water system. This policy shall be carried out by isolating potential sources of contaminants or pollutants at various points in the public water system and customer connections thereto, including those customers' premises, and by protecting the public water system at the point of delivery to the customers' premises. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-13) 
Sec. 21-40. - Prohibited acts and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be illegal for any person to introduce any substance into the public water system, or to have a cross-connection with the public water system, that has the potential for introducing a contaminant into the public water system except for those substances or connections required by the city for treatment of water. As used in this article "cross-connections with a potential for introducing a contaminant to the public water system" shall mean those cross-connections that have been determined in accordance with the provisions of this article to create a potential hazard to the public water system or that do in fact result in the introduction of a contaminant to the public water system. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof by the municipal court for the city, be punished as provided in the Charter and this Code. Further, without limiting the foregoing, after such notice as may be appropriate under the circumstances (considering the opportunity for reasonable notice to the customer owning or using a water supply in violation of this article versus the danger to the health and welfare of all other persons connected to the public water system), any cross-connection maintained in violation of this article shall be disconnected from the public water system at the direction of the public works superintendent, mayor of the city, city manager or other authorized representatives of EPD. Once a disconnection is made in accordance with this chapter, a reconnection to the public water system shall not be made until the offending person's water systems and all interconnections or potential interconnections thereto have been fully inspected and found to be in compliance with this article and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-14; Ord. No. 05-02, § 2, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 21-41. - Implementation of cross-connection control program. 
(a)  The mayor and council hereby adopt, as though fully set out herein, as its rules and regulations for the implementation of this article, the city's "Cross Connection Control Program" approved by the Drinking Water Permitting and Engineering Program of the Environmental Protection Division of Georgia Department of Natural Resources by letter dated May 24, 2005, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk of the city and has been identified to the mayor and council, and copies of which will be available for public inspection. The consulting engineers, the city utility department and the city building inspection department shall take such steps as may be necessary and appropriate to implement the program in substantial conformity with the implementation schedule contained therein. They shall also take reasonable steps to implement public awareness programs so that all persons who are customers or otherwise connected to the public water system shall become aware of the potential hazard of cross-connections and resulting contamination to the public water system. 
(b)  The governing authority recognizes that manpower and resources will not permit an immediate implementation of the cross-connection control program and thereby recognizes the priority given to all public water system customers who have the potential for high-risk contamination of the system and thus direct that substantial efforts be made to locate and eliminate high-risk and high-hazard cross-connections. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-15; Ord. No. 05-02, § 3, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 21-42. - Implementation of rules and regulations. 
    The consulting engineer, the superintendent of the city water department, the city codes enforcement officer, and the city building official shall have the authority to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to carry out and enforce this article and the cross-connection control program implemented hereby. All rules and regulations so adopted shall be in writing, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and posted on the bulletin board at city hall, and a copy thereof shall be provided to the mayor and council for its review prior to final implementation thereof. Proposed rules and regulations shall be approved and implemented upon the mayor and council's adoption of a resolution identifying such rules and regulations and expressly authorizing their implementation pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-16; Ord. No. 05-02, § 4, 6-13-2005) 
Sec. 21-43. - Appeals. 
    Any person who is aggrieved by a determination of any person, including, but not limited to, the city's codes enforcement officer determination that they are maintaining or have maintained a cross-connection in violation of this chapter, the cross-connection control program or the regulations promulgated thereunder, shall have the following rights of appeal: 
(1)  On an emergency appeal basis, upon written application to the city manager, where the determination of the person from whom the appeal is taken requires the disconnection of the appellant from the public water system prior to the time that a normal appeal under subsection (2) below may be heard. 
(2)  Before the mayor and council on written application by filing of a written appeal with the city clerk at least one (1) day prior to the next scheduled meeting of the mayor and council at which such appeal will be heard. 
(3)  All appeals under this section shall be for the purpose of deciding the propriety of decisions of the persons whose act required either the appellant to install a cross-connection prevention device under this article and regulations promulgated thereunder, or a disconnection of the appellant from the public water system. Appeals of citations for violations of this article and the regulations shall be heard by the municipal court and the decision of the municipal court shall be appealable only as provided by section 7-26 of the Charter. 
(Ord. of 1-13-86, § 41-17; Ord. No. 05-02, § 5, 6-13-2005) 
Secs. 21-44-21-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 21-61. - Short title. 
    This article may be cited as the "Underground Utility Damage Prevention Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 1) 
Sec. 21-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Damage means and includes the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
    Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tools, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
    Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging, ditching, drilling, grading, plowing-in, pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but does not include the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
    Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power, including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows, and other equipment used for plowing-in or pulling-in cable or pipe. 
    Operator means any person, as defined in this section, who owns or operates a utility. 
    Person means any individual, any corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity organized under the laws of any state, any subdivision or instrumentality of a state, and any employee, agent or legal representative thereof. 
    Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam, or sewerage. 
    Working day means every day except Saturday, Sunday, and any national and legal state holidays. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-63. - Excavation and demolition permits. 
    A permit issued pursuant to law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 3) 
Cross reference- Street excavations, § 19-21. 
Sec. 21-64. - Prohibition. 
    Except as provided in section 21-67, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building, without having first ascertained in the manner prescribed in sections 21-65 and 21-66 the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. Each operator shall maintain a list of all underground utilities and plats or maps showing their location. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 4) 
Sec. 21-65. - Notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 21-67 before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 21-64, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephonic notice of intent to excavate or demolition at least three (3), but not more than ten (10), full working days on each operator which has a list required by section 21-64 indicating that it has underground utilities located in the proposed area of excavation or demolition. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) must contain the name, address, and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, of the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, as well as the starting date, anticipated duration, type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and a statement as to whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If the notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the operators notified, to document compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Where demolition of a building is proposed, operators shall be given reasonable time to remove or protect their utilities before demolition of the building is commenced. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 5) 
Sec. 21-66. - Response to notice of intent to excavate or demolish. 
(a)  Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 21-65 shall, not less than two (2) working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition (unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative), supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities, including providing adequate temporary markings indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section the approximate location of an underground utility is defined as a strip of land at least three (3) feet wide, but not wider than the width of the utility, plus one and one-half (11/2) feet on either side of the utility. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 6) 
Sec. 21-67. - Emergency excavation or demolition. 
    Compliance with the notice requirements of section 21-65 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health, or property; provided however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and request emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health, or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health, or property would result before the procedures under sections 21-65 and 21-66 could be fully complied with. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 7) 
Sec. 21-68. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
    In addition to the notification requirements of section 21-65, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 21-64 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 8) 
Sec. 21-69. - Excavation or demolition damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b), each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 21-64 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operations designated in section 21-64 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic, or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, and the police and fire departments, and shall take any other action reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until the arrival of the operator's personnel or the police and fire departments. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 9) 
Sec. 21-70. - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a penalty or fine of an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such violation. Actions to recover the penalty provided for in this section shall be brought by the city attorney at the request of any person in the city in which the cause or some part thereof arose or in which the defendant has its principal place of business or resides. All penalties recovered in any such actions shall be paid into the general fund of the city. This article does not affect any civil remedies for personal injury or property damage except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article. 
(Ord. of 8-8-83, § 10) 
Secs. 21-71-21-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INDUSTRIAL WASTES 

Sec. 21-86. - Discharge unlawful without permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for an industry or person to discharge industrial wastes to the sewer or the wastewater treatment plant except as authorized by the city engineer pursuant to a permit to discharge issued by the city. All industrial users proposing to connect to or to contribute to the sewer connection system or wastewater treatment plant shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting or contributing wastewater. All existing industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article and all proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting or contributing to the wastewater system. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(a)) 
Sec. 21-87. - Application for permit. 
    Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application on the form prescribed by the City. In support of the application, the users may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location (if different from address); 
(2)  SIC number according toe the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in section 21-125 as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136, as amended. Results collected within the previous year will be acceptable; 
(4)  Time and duration of discharge; 
(5)  Average daily and three-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers connections and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards, a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(b); Ord. of 4-8-96, § 1) 
Sec. 21-87.1. - Period of use. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a three-year period. The user must apply for the permit renewal a minimum of ninety (90) days prior to permit expiration by submitting a current application for and industrial discharge permit on the form prescribed by the city. The renewal application shall contain current wastewater information as outlined under section 21-87, plus any additional information that reflects a change from the previous application. The city retains the right to modify allowable discharge limits for specific pollutants if federal or state standards are changed in the interim or for other just cause. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(c)) 
Sec. 21-88. - User responsibilities, contents of permit. 
    The permit will specify the user's responsibilities. Failure of the user to comply with the permit requirements will result in penalties and/or discontinuance of sewerage service. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user's charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests and reporting schedule; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notification of slug discharges; 
(11)  Requirements for installing a stainless steel automatic, mechanically-cleaned screen of either a vibration or brush type in the industrial users effluent waste system immediately prior to entrance into the city sewer; 
(12)  Requirements for textile operations to install a screen with a minimum mesh size, as specified by the city, to prevent the passage of lint; 
(13)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article or as required by 40 CFR, Part 412, Section 403.11. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(d), Ord. of 4-8-96, § 2) 
Sec. 21-89. - Transferability of permit. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(e)) 
Sec. 21-90. - Compliance with standards, plans to be submitted to city. 
    Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be submitted to the city for review before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. The city, in no way, shall be responsible for the design operation of the pretreatment facility; this review is intended only to ensure compatibility of the pretreatment system with the wastewater system. 
(Ord. of 11-14, 83, § 8(f)) 
Sec. 21-91. - Requirements generally. 
(a)  The city shall annually publish in the local newspaper a list of all permitted industrial dischargers to the city sewerage system which will identify all users who were in significant noncompliance with any pretreatment requirements during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The user will be required to submit to the city reports indicating the nature and concentration of effluents on a periodic basis. Specific reporting requirements will be indicated in the user's permit. 
(c)  No industry will exceed the pretreatment limits as established by the EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
(d)  No user will be allowed to dilute the wastewater to a level that would bring that user into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(g)-(j); Ord. of 4-8-96, § 3) 
Sec. 21-92. - Information available to public, trade secrets to be safeguarded. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user contends such information and data constitutes a trade secret. If information is identified as being confidential or of a "trade secret nature," the matter will be reviewed by the city attorney and his recommendation will be followed. Furthermore: 
(1)  When requested by the person furnishing a report and approved by the city attorney, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses relating to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs, provided that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review of enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. 
(2)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency except to document compliance with the pretreatment program, nor will such information be transmitted to the public by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(k)) 
Sec. 21-93. - Monitoring facilities. 
    The city shall require to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(l)) 
Sec. 21-94. - Pretreatment standards. 
(a)  Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The city shall notify all affected users of the new standard and applicable reporting requirements. 
(b)  Where the city's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the state for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reducing the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five (95) percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) or (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403)-"General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(m)) 
Sec. 21-95. - Compliance with new, revised standards. 
    Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the city engineer within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the necessary information. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(n)) 
Sec. 21-96. - Accidental discharges; plan required. 
(a)  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a plan by July 1, 1984. No user who commences contribution to the wastewater system after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. 
(b)  Furthermore, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  Written notice; Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge or slug loading, the user shall submit to the city engineer a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve use user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the wastewater system, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(2)  Notice to employees: A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 8(o)) 
Sec. 21-96.1. - Significant noncompliance. 
    Significant noncompliance shall mean an industrial user has met one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, in which sixty-ix (66) percent or more of all measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit of the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the City determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of treatment works personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant which has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the City's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in the local limits control mechanism, or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or, 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the City determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program." 
(Ord. of 4-8-96, § 4) 
Sec. 21-97. - Removal, transportation and disposition of scavenger wastes. 
(a)  The city may issue a formal permit for the discharge of scavenger wastes into the city sewerage system after submission of an application on forms supplied by the city. Scavenger wastes shall mean putrid or offensive matter, the contents of all privies, septic tanks and cesspools. All other materials and substances, chemicals or chemical compounds and/or industrial wastes will not be permitted to be discharged into the public sewerage system except as heretofore provided. 
(b)  The discharge of the scavenger wastes into the city sewerage system shall be made only at a location in the sewage treatment plant as shall be designed by the city. 
(c)  Scavenger wastes will be admitted into the sewerage system only by permit and subject to payment of fees or fixed charges. The fee or charge shall be based upon the full capacity of each scavenger vehicle for each discharge. 
(d)  The applicant shall be the owner of the vehicle discharging the wastes. Any false, misleading or untruthful statements as to the nature of the material shall be cause for rejection of any further discharge from the applicant. 
(e)  Permitted discharges may also be suspended or terminated at any time by the city for willful, continued or persistent violations of these rules and regulations. 
(f)  All equipment, such as trucks, tanks, pumps and hoses used in the collection and/or transportation of scavenger wastes shall be modern equipment in good repair. When more than one (1) vehicle is used by an applicant, each vehicle shall bear an identifying number. 
(g)  All applicants for a permit shall furnish the following information with each application: 
(1)  Name and address of applicant; 
(2)  Volume of scavenger waste for each numbered vehicle; and 
(3)  Number of scavenger vehicles in collection service. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 9) 
Sec. 21-98. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  The city and its duly authorized representatives, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this section. The city representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways of facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the city's duly authorized representatives shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees. The city indemnifies the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging, sampling operations, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(c)  The city's duly authorized representatives, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all private properties which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, replacement and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(d)  All sewer customers of the city, located either within or outside the city limits, shall be subject to the terms of this article. 
(e)  At the order of the city engineer, all persons discharging wastewater into the city sewer system shall have their discharge tested by a city-approved independent testing laboratory at said person's expense at a frequency specified by the city at its discretion. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 10) 
Sec. 21-99. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 11) 
Sec. 21-100. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in the notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for above, shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Each date in which any violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the city by reason of the violation. 
(d)  Continued violation of the requirements of this article shall be sufficient justification for revocation of the industrial discharge permit and a maximum fine allowable by the Charter. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 12) 
Sec. 21-101. - Show cause hearing. 
    Upon formal request by the sewer user, the mayor and council may allow the user to show cause by hearing before council as to why the wastewater discharge permit should not be revoked. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 13) 
Sec. 21-102. - Billing and service disconnection. 
(a)  Sewer charges shall be billed with water charges, and failure to pay sewer charges shall be treated in the same manner as for failure to pay water charges. 
(b)  The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a wastewater discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. 
(Ord. of 11-14-83, § 14) 
Secs. 21-103-21-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SANITARY SEWERAGE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1.1, §§ 1-14, adopted Apr. 13, 1998, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 21-121-21-128, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Nov. 14, 1983(2), Arts. 1-7; Ord. of Apr. 8, 1996, §§ 5-7; Ord. of June 10, 1991; Ord. of Apr. 8, 1997, §§ 8-10, 11) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide sewage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(6); acquisition, construction, etc., of [municipal] water and sewage systems, OCGA § 36-34-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 21-111. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article regulates the use of public and private sewers, private sewage disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, the discharge of cooling water, garbage, hauled wastewater, sewage, storm water, wastewater and other wastes into the public sewers, and provides penalties for the violation thereof: in the City of LaFayette, County of Walker, State of Georgia, be it ordained by the Council of the City of LaFayette, State of Georgia. 
(b)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the City of LaFayette and enables the city to comply with applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). 
(c)  The federally mandated objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the public sewers which will interfere with the treatment processes in the publicly owned treatment works or may contaminate the resulting sewage sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the public sewers which will pass through inadequately treated into receiving waters, or into the atmosphere, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To improve opportunities to recycle and reclaim municipal and industrial wastewaters and sludges; and 
(4)  To provide fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvements of the publicly owned treatment works. 
(d)  This article provides for the regulation of all discharges into the POTW through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to certain industrial users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring, reporting, and enforcement activities relative to industrial users, and provides for the setting of sewer use charges and fees, including fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programs established herein. 
(e)  This article shall apply to all persons within the City of LaFayette, Georgia, and to persons outside the city who are users of the city's wastewater system, by contract or agreement with the city, written or unwritten. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 1(1.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-112. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the city manager may be delegated by the city manager to the director of wastewater system or to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 1(1.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-113. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD 5 -Five-Day Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
C°-Degrees Centigrade 
CFR-Code of Federal Regulations 
COD-Chemical Oxygen Demand 
EPA-U.S. Environmental Protection Agency 
EPD-Environmental Protection Division of Georgia 
F°-Degrees Fahrenheit 
gpd-gallons per day 
MBAS-Methylene Blue Active Substance 
mg/l-milligrams per liter 
NPDES-National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW-Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA-Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC-Standard Industrial Classification 
TSS-Total Suspended Non-filterable Solids 
U.S.C.-United States Code 
WEF-Water Environment Federation 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 1(1.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-114. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    Act or "the Act." The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq., 86 Stat. 816, Public Law 92-500. 
    Approval authority. Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, or its successor agency. 
    Authorized representative of the user. 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: (a) The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation, or any other person who performs policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or (b) The manager of manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures and by-laws. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  Individuals described in subsections (1) through (3), above, may designate other authorized representatives by written notice to the city specifying the individual responsible for the overall operation, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters, of the user's facility. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD 5 . An empirical measure of the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five (5) days at 20° C, expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Building drain. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a building drainage system which receives the discharge of all wastewater from within a building and conveys the same to a building service sewer five (5) feet outside the foundation wall of such a building. 
    Building sewer. That part of a privately owned sewer that begins five (5) feet outside a building and extends to a public sewer, an on-site sewage management system, or other place of disposal. Also called a "house connection" or "lateral". 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of Users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Chemical oxygen demand or COD. A measure of the oxygen equivalent of the organic matter content of a sample that is oxidized by a strong chemical oxidant in a laboratory test. 
    City. The legal governing body of the City of LaFayette or its duly authorized representative. 
    City engineer. A professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia, appointed by the city council to that position, or a duly authorized consulting engineer acting on behalf of the city. 
    City building official. The employee of the city or his/her duly authorized representative, charged by the city with the administration and enforcement of the State of Georgia minimum standard codes, as amended and as adopted by the city. 
    Compatible pollutant. BOD 5 , suspended solids, COD, oil and grease, and such additional pollutants as are now or may be in the future specified by the city for its wastewater treatment plant where the plant has been designed and/or used to reduce or remove such pollutants. 
    Composite sample. A sample composed of several individual grab samples collected at regular intervals and mixed together in proportion to the flow at the time of collection of each individual sample over a stated time period of at least twenty-four hours collected at intervals no longer than two (2) hours. 
    Cooling water. Water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant added to the water is heat. 
    Director of wastewater system (director). The person designated by the city to administer the operation, maintenance and improvements of the POTW. 
    Domestic wastes. Liquid wastes from the noncommercial preparation, cooking and handling of food; or containing human excrement and similar matter from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions. 
    Environmental protection agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the categorical standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    Garbage. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food. 
    Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a wastewater stream without regard to the flow in the wastewater stream and without consideration of time. 
    Hauled wastewater. Any waste from holding tanks such as scavenger vessels, chemical toilets, camper or trailer tanks, septic tanks, or vacuum-pump tank trucks, or any sewage or industrial waste transported by tank truck. 
    Incompatible pollutant. Any pollutant which is not a "compatible pollutant" as herein defined. 
    Industrial user. Any source of discharge of pollutants into a POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act. See also definitions for "user" and "significant industrial user (SIU)." 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both (1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and (2) therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or any more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    MBAS. A measure of the anionic surfactant content of a sample by reaction with methylene blue active substances in a laboratory test, reported in mg/l. 
    Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES). Program for issuing, conditioning and denying permits for the discharge of pollutants from point sources into the navigable waters, the contiguous zone and the oceans pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
    Natural outlet. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water. 
    New source. 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such pretreatment standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: (a) The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or (b) The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (c) The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to an existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: (a) Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program, any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or, significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or (b) Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Oil and grease. A measure of the groups of oil and grease substances in a sample that is recovered by trichlorotrifluoroethane solvent extraction in a laboratory test, reported as mg/l. 
    Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation). 
    Penalty. Any amount of monies set forth by the City Council of LaFayette to be levied against a user of the wastewater system who/which does not comply with any provision as set forth in this article. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution. The negative logarithm of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
    Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, salt, munitions, dyes, boiler blowdown, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed upon an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards. Any requirement or regulation which limits or prohibits discharge of pollutants, whether prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and/or local limits. 
    Private sewer. Any building sewer or other sewer pipe located on private property and not owned and maintained by the city. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances as listed in section 21-119 of this article. 
    Public sewer. A sewer owned, operated, and maintained by the city, whether on public right-of-way or easement. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW. A "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the City of LaFayette. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to the treatment plant. Any public sewers that convey wastewater to the treatment plant from persons located outside the city who are users of the system are included, whether or not a written contract or agreement exists. 
    Residential or domestic user. Any premise or person connected to and discharging domestic waste or sewage to the public sewers, and with a volume that does not exceed twenty-four thousand (24,000) gallons per month and, for billing purposes, is defined as a dwelling place or place of residence. 
    Sanitary sewer. A sewer piping system which carries wastewater and onto which storm, surface, or, ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank. A tank system designed or used to receive, treat and dispose of the discharge of domestic waste or sewage from a building sewer. 
    Septic tank waste. Any wastewater, sewage, or sludge from a septic tank or from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers or trailers. 
    Sewage. Human excreta, all water carried wastes and wastewater generated by water-using fixtures and appliances (household showers, dish washing operations, etc.). 
    Sewer. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Sewer surcharge. A charge or fee for discharge of compatible pollutants under the city's industrial waste surcharge program to compensate the city for additional expenses incurred in treatment and disposal of compatible pollutants discharged in excess of local limits. 
    Sewerage. The city's publicly owned system of sewers, pumping systems, sewage treatment facilities and sludge disposal system. 
    Shall or may. Shall is mandatory while may is permissive. 
    Shredded garbage. Waste from the preparation of cooking and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
    Significant industrial user or SIU. All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; and any other industrial user that: 
(1)  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blow down wastewater); 
(2)  Contributes process wastewater which makes up five (5) percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the city's treatment plant; or 
(3)  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
    Significant noncompliance. Industrial user violations which meet one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the city determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or, 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the city determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug load or slug. Any wastewater discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge at a flow rate or with pollutant concentration which could cause noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
    Standard industrial classification (SIC) code. A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Standard methods. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the most recent edition of the Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published jointly by American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. 
    Storm sewer. A sewer piping system which carries storm waters, surface waters and drainage but excludes all sewage, industrial wastes and similar wastewaters and pollutants. 
    Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt and ground water. 
    Surcharge limits. Concentration limits for compatible pollutants established by the city in accordance with the city's industrial waste surcharge program. 
    Suspended solids or total suspended nonfilterable solids (TSS). A measure of the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, a sample of water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering, reported as mg/l. 
    Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator or the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    Unpolluted water. Water containing no pollutants that are limited or prohibited by the effluent pretreatment standards in effect. 
    User. Any person who discharges or causes or allows the discharge of any sewage, pollutant, domestic waste, industrial waste, or other wastewater into the city's public sewers or wastewater treatment system. See also the definitions for "industrial user" and "significant industrial user." 
    Violation. The transgression of, or noncompliance with, any requirement or limit set forth in this article. 
    Wastewater. The liquid and water-carried sewage, industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with any ground water, surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is discharged into or permitted to enter into the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste and disposal of sludge. 
    Watercourse. A channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    Waters of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the State of Georgia, or any portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 1(1.4), 4-13-98) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 21-115. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or allow to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on any public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, sewage, garbage, sludge, pollutant, wastewater, or other objectionable waste, solid or liquid. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sewage, sludge, pollutant, wastewater, or other objectional waste except as may be provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for storing or disposal of sewage in any part of the city where a public sewer is reasonably available within two hundred (200) feet of the property line. 
(d)  The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupation, employment, commercial use, recreation, or other purpose situated within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, is hereby required, at no expense to the city, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect the facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within ninety (90) days after date of written notice from the city to the property owner requiring the property owner to make connection thereto, provided that the public sewer is reasonably available within two hundred (200) feet of the property line. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-116. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not reasonably available within two hundred (200) feet of the property line, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article and applicable federal and state law. 
(b)  Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, septic tank, privy, privy vault, or cesspool for single-family dwelling, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the Walker County Health Department Sanitarian. 
(c)  A permit for private sewage disposal shall not become effective until the private sewage disposal system installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Walker County Sanitarian. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private sewage system shall comply with all recommendations of the Georgia Department of Human Resources and other local or state agencies having jurisdiction. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  Private sewage disposal facilities shall be operated and maintained in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes reasonably available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection 21-115(d), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer, at no expense to the city, in compliance with this article, and all septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and filled with clean sand within sixty (60) days of notification to do so by the director or other county or state agency having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(g)  No statement contained in this section shall be construed to nullify any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate federal, state, city or county regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-117. - Extensions and additions. 
(a)  No extension or addition to the city's public sewers intended to serve more than one (1) user shall be constructed, accepted for city ownership, or connected to the POTW until: 
(1)  Reports, plans, and specifications have been prepared by, or under the direct supervision of, and the construction is executed under the direct supervision of, a registered professional engineer; 
(2)  The applicable reports, plans, and specifications have been submitted to and accepted by the director; 
(3)  As-constructed plans, reports of testing and inspection, and other data required by the director have been submitted to and accepted by the director; and 
(4)  All permits, licenses and approvals required by federal, state, city and other local ordinances have been obtained. 
(b)  For each extension or addition to the city's public sewers, the city building official shall maintain a permanent record of the building permit application and issuance thereon, which record shall indicate the name of the developer, contractor and professional engineer of record pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-118. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city building official. 
(b)  There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (1) residential and/or commercial service, and (2) service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or an agent thereof shall make application on a form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information required by the city building official. Permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city when the application is filed in accordance with a rate schedule adopted by the city council from time to time and made available to the public at the office of the city manager. 
(c)  No costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of a building sewer from the building to the property line shall be borne by city. The user shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for each building. Where a building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the city may grant permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer, upon a showing by the applicant that it is not feasible that the two (2) buildings so connected will ultimately be on separate building lots. 
(e)  Existing, previously approved building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when found by the city building official, upon examination and testing at no cost to the city, to meet all the requirements of this section. 
(f)  The design, size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the city's approved building and plumbing codes. In the absence of code provisions or amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in the WEF Manual of Practice No. FD-5 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement or first floor. No building sewer shall be made parallel to or within three (3) feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads which may be superimposed. The building sewer shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment. The building sewer shall be constructed to that point of connection as directed by the city building official. 
(h)  No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof down spout, exterior foundation or sub-surface drains, area-way drains, or other sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain. 
(i)  Before any underground portions thereof are covered, the applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the city when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. All connections to the public sewers shall be conducted under the supervision of an authorized representative of the city. 
(j)  All excavations for building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and all other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(k)  The director shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth, and direction of all new sewer connections including any landmarks as may be necessary to make an adequate description. 
(l)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing oil or grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private, single-family living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. All interceptors shall be supplied and properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.4), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-119. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the public sewers or POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in subsection (b) apply to each user whether or not the user is an industrial user and whether or not the user is subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewaters: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 or more than 10.0, or otherwise capable of causing corrosive or structural damage to the POTW or any part thereof; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which could cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in Interference, but in no case solids greater than one-half (1/2) inch or 0.20 cm in any dimension; 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD 5 , etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, could cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 149°F (65°C), or which could inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case heat in wastewater in such quantities that the temperature of wastewater at the introduction into the POTW treatment plant exceeds 104°F (40°C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that could cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which could result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Holding tank waste, trucked or hauled wastewater or other pollutants, except as approved by the director and at designated discharge points in accordance with section 21-127 of this article; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, could create corrosive damage, a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewaters, including but not limited to, dye wastewater and tanning solutions, which impart color which cannot be removed by the treatment plant and thereby create violation of the city's NPDES permit conditions; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Ground water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, cooling water, noncontact cooling water, or unpolluted water, unless specifically authorized by the city; 
(13)  Sludge, screenings, or other residues from agricultural or industrial processes or from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the city in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater, alone or in conjunction with other sources, which could cause the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or any other substances which could cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin or containing substances which solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 0°C (32°F) or 65°C (150°F); 
(18)  Wastewater causing two (2) readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the public sewers, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five (5) percent or any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter; or 
(19)  Any substance or wastewater which is, or would create, a hazardous waste as listed under 40 CFR Part 261. 
(c)  Storage prohibitions: No person shall process or store on their premises any pollutants, substances, sludges, or wastewaters in a manner such that they could be discharged to any public sewer, accidentally or intentionally, in violation of any of the discharge prohibitions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.5), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-120. - Local limits. 
    No person shall discharge into the public sewers any wastewaters containing the listed pollutant concentrations in excess of the following limits: 
Parameter Monthly Average 
(mg/l) Weekly Maximum 
(mg/l) BOD 5 1500 2250 COD Monitor Only Monitor Only Total Suspended Solids 450 675 Ammonia-NH 3 60 100 Oil and Grease 150 225 MBAS 70 100 Phosphorus 35 50 Phenols (total) 5.0 7.5 Arsenic 0.02 0.03 Antimony 225 337 Cadmium 0.03 0.045 Chromium (total) 4.6 6.90 Copper 0.70 1.10 Cyanide 0.07 0.10 Lead 0.12 0.18 Mercury 0.0002* 0.0003 Molybdenum 0.06 0.09 Nickel 0.30 0.45 Selenium 0.04 0.06 Silver 0.10 0.15 Zinc 2.5 3.75 Total Toxic Organics - 2.13**  
    Local limits marked with an asterisk (*) shall be the values shown herein or the Georgia EPD detection limit, whichever is greater. Local limits marked with double asterisks (**) shall be the "maximum for any one day." The "monthly average" limit is defined as the arithmetic mean of values of the effluent samples collected in a period of thirty (30) consecutive days. The "weekly maximum" limit is defined as a daily maximum limitation except that it may be reported as the arithmetic mean of values for all effluent samples collected during the seven-day period beginning at midnight Saturday and ending midnight the following Saturday. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. 
    Local limits apply at the point of discharge into the public sewers. Local limits apply to hauled wastewater discharged to the public sewers or directly to the POTW treatment plant. 
    The city may impose mass limitations on discharges from any industrial user in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based local limits listed above. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.6), 4-13-98; Ord. No. 2007/12, § 1, 12-10-2007) 
Sec. 21-121. - Categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the city may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the city shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(c)  An industrial user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(d)  A significant industrial user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.7), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-122. - City's right of revision. 
    The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements than set forth herein above. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.8), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-123. - Dilution. 
    No industrial user shall increase the use of process water, add cooling water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitations on industrial users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 2(2.9), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 21-124. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Industrial users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 21-119, section 21-120, and (if applicable) section 21-121 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the city. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be acceptable to the city before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 3(3.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-125. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the city may require an industrial user to install a monitoring manhole and/or flow measuring flume, to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, to discharge certain wastewaters only into specific sewers, to relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, to separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and take such other actions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and demonstrate the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The city may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, suitable storage and flow-control facilities to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Industrial users with the potential to accidentally discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 3(3.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-126. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    At least once every two (2) years, the city shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges. The city may require any significant industrial user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the city engineer, acting on behalf of the city, may develop such a plan applicable to the significant industrial user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(b)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(c)  Procedures for immediately notifying the director of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 21-140.7 of this article; and 
(d)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 3(3.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-127. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Hauled wastewater may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the city and at such times as are established by the director. Such wastewater shall not violate any requirement of section 21-119 or section 21-120 of this article, or any other requirements established by the city. 
(b)  Persons proposing to discharge hauled wastewater into the POTW shall apply for and obtain wastewater discharge permits prior to discharge. The city may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The city reserves the right to prohibit the disposal of any hauled wastewater into the public sewers or treatment facilities. The discharge of hauled wastewater shall be subject to all other requirements of this article, including specifically the prohibited discharge standards and local limits. 
(c)  Septic tank and industrial waste haulers shall discharge loads only at locations designated by the director and no hauled wastewater shall be discharged without prior consent of the director. The director may collect samples of each hauled wastewater load to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this article. The director may require any waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. All costs of such sample collection and analysis shall be at no expense to the city. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers shall provide a waste-tracking form for every load, with this form including at least, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, and all known or suspected waste constituents. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 3(3.4), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 

Sec. 21-128. - Wastewater analysis. 
    When requested by the director, an industrial user shall submit, within ninety (90) days of the request, information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require industrial users to update this information. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 4(4.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-129. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the city, except that any significant industrial user holding a valid wastewater discharge permit on the effective date of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified within the wastewater discharge permit. 
(b)  The city may require other industrial user's to obtain other permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and shall subject the permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 21-140.7 through 21-140.31 of this article. Holding a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 4(4.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-130. - Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections. 
    Any industrial user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, notify the director of intent to continue discharge under the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 4(4.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-131. - Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. 
    Any industrial user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW shall obtain such wastewater discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 21-132 of this article, shall be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 4(4.4), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-132. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
    Industrial users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall submit an application and an industrial waste questionnaire on forms approved by the director. The director may require any industrial user to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(a)  All information required by subsection 21-140.2(b) of this article; 
(b)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(c)  Number of employees, hours of operation (proposed and/or actual); 
(d)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rates of production; 
(e)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(f)  Detailed as-constructed site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details, certified by a professional engineer or architect, and showing all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(g)  Time, duration and maximum flow rates of all discharges; and 
(h)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications may be returned to the industrial user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 4(4.5), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-133. - Application signatories and certification. 
    Wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports shall be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
    "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 4(4.6), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-134. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
    The director will evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application and data furnished by the applicant and will, within forty-five (45) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 4(4.7), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 

Sec. 21-135. - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed three (3) years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than three (3) years, at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit shall indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 5(5.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-136. - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permits shall contain: 
(1)  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration; 
(2)  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable; 
(3)  Effluent requirements based on applicable local limits and pretreatment standards; 
(4)  Monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements, including an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
(5)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule and a statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  Limitations upon the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
(2)  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment facilities, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed by a professional engineer to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
(3)  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
(4)  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
(6)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations; and 
(7)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of, a stainless steel mesh screening facilities of either automatic or manually cleaned type. For textile operations, the mesh of the screen shall be small enough to prevent the passage of lint. Mesh sizes to be used shall be submitted to the director for approval. The industrial user shall maintain the screening facility in proper working condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 5(5.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-137. - Wastewater discharge permit appeals. 
    The director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the permittee, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance. 
(a)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(b)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(d)  If the director fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 5(5.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-138. - Wastewater discharge permit modification. 
    The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(b)  To address significant alterations or additions to the permittee's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(c)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(d)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(e)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(f)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the questionnaire or application for a wastewater discharge permit or in any required reporting; 
(g)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; or 
(h)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 5(5.4), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-139. - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall not be transferred to new owners or operators. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 5(5.5), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
    The city may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(a)  Failure to notify the city of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(b)  Failure to provide prior notification to the city of changed conditions pursuant to section 21-140.6 of this article; 
(c)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the questionnaire and application for a wastewater discharge permit; 
(d)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(e)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(f)  Refusing to allow the city timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(g)  Failure to meet prohibited discharge standards or local limits; 
(h)  Failure to pay fines, penalties, surcharges, sewer use charges or other financial obligations to the city; 
(i)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(j)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(k)  Failure to provide notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; 
(l)  Significant noncompliance with any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article; 
(m)  Cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership and the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to a new owner; or 
(n)  Upon the city's determination at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), that a significant industrial user, other than a user subject to categorical pretreatment standards, has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation and should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 5(5.6), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.1. - Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
    An industrial user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall, not later than ninety (90) days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit, apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 21-132 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 5(5.7), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 21-140.2. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical standard users currently discharging to, or scheduled to discharge to, the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical standard users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (b)(1)-(5), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Industrial users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 21-140.9 of this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 21-140.10 of this article. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by a professional engineer registered in Georgia, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operations or maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operations and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 21-140.3 of this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 21-133 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.3. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedules required by this article: 
(a)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(b)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) months; 
(c)  The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the established schedule; and 
(d)  In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.4. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the director a report containing the information described in section 21-140.2(b)(4)-(6) of this article. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 21-133 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.5. - Periodic compliance reports. 
    The city may sample and analyze any industrial user's discharges in lieu of requiring the industrial user to conduct self-monitoring sampling, analysis, and compliance reporting. 
(a)  The director may require any industrial user, at a frequency determined by the director, to submit periodic compliance reports indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports shall be signed and certified in accordance with section 21-133 of this article. 
(b)  All wastewater samples shall be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep monitoring facilities in good working order shall not be was for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If any industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the director, using the procedures prescribed in section 21-140.9 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.4), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.6. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Industrial users shall notify the director of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
(a)  The director may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 21-132 of this article. 
(b)  The director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 21-134 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 21-138 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(c)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.5), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.7. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that could create pass through or interference at the POTW, the industrial user shall immediately telephone and notify the director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, its concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the industrial user. 
(b)  Within five (5) days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Each industrial user shall post a permanent notice on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (a), above. Industrial users shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are fully advised of the emergency notification procedure at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.6), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.8. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user shall notify the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user is not required to re-sample if the city monitors at the industrial user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.7), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.9. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.8), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.10. - Sample collection. 
    Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. Samples for other pollutants shall be collected using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the director may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the industrial user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limits. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.9), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.11. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date officially postmarked by the United States Postal Service. For reports which are not mailed postage prepaid into a mail facility of the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.10), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.12. - Recordkeeping. 
    Industrial users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the industrial user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the industrial user or the city, or where the industrial user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 6(6.11), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 21-140.13. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
    The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(a)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities hereunder. 
(b)  The city shall have the right to set up on the industrial user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the industrial user's operations. 
(c)  The director may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated annually to ensure their accuracy. 
(d)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(e)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the industrial user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 7(7.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.14. - Search warrants. 
    If the city has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Magistrate or Superior Court of Walker County. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 7(7.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.15. - Confidential information. 
    Information and data of an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the director's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request for confidentiality must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" is defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. This section is subject to the Open Records Act, and the city will maintain the confidentiality of information to the extent it may do so under the Open Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 8, 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.16. - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The director shall publish annually, in the Walker County Messenger, a list of the significant industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. Should any such significant industrial user have the matter on appeal, said information should likewise be published by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 9, 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 8. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 21-140.17. - Notice of violation. 
    When the director finds that a user has violated a provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. A user shall, within ten (10) days of the receipt of a notice of violation, submit to the director an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof. Response to a notice of violation shall not relieve a user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.18. - Notice of significant noncompliance. 
    When the director finds that a user violation, or violations, constitute significant noncompliance with any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may serve upon that user a written notice of significant noncompliance. The user shall, within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, submit to the director an explanation of the violation, or violations, and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions. Response to a notice of significant noncompliance shall not relieve a user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of significant noncompliance. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of significant noncompliance. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.19. - Consent orders. 
    The city may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the violation or violations that constitute noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 21-140.21 and 21-140.22 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.20. - Show cause hearing. 
    The city may order any user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) upon the user at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, the city's taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.4), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.21. - Compliance orders. 
    When the city finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may issue an order to that user directing the user to come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged into the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the city's taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.5), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.22. - Cease and desist orders. 
    When a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the city may issue an order to that user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(a)  Immediately comply with all requirements of this article; and 
(b)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
    Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the city's taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.6), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140-23. - Administrative penalties. 
(a)  When the city determines a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, an administrative penalty may be levied on such user by the city manager in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. 
(b)  Unpaid charges and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1.5 percent per month. A lien against the user's property shall be sought for unpaid charges and penalties. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such penalties or charges shall file a written request with the city manager, along with full payment of the amount, within ten (10) days of being notified of the penalty or charge. Where a request has merit, the city may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the penalties or charges. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative penalty shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the city's taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.7), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.24. - Emergency suspensions. 
    The city may suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever in the city's sole opinion, such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city may also suspend, after notice and opportunity to respond, a user's discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(a)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate discharge to the public sewers. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 21-140.25 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(b)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 21-140.20 or 21-140.25 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.8), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.25. - Termination of discharge. 
    In addition to the provisions in section 21-140 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(a)  Significant noncompliance with wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(b)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(c)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(d)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(e)  Significant noncompliance with the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 21-140.20 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, the city's taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 10(10.9), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 9. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 21-140.26. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the city finds any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may petition the Superior Court of Walker County for the issuance of a temporary and/or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The city may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the city's taking any other action against any person. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 11(11.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.27. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other average discharge limit, civil penalties may accrue for each day during the period of the violation. Each day a violation exists, same may be considered a separate violation. 
(b)  The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, the city's taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 11(11.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.28. - Criminal prosecution. 
    The city may seek criminal prosecution against any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, causes personal injury or property damage, or knowingly makes false statements or misrepresentations in connection with and/or regarding any provision of this article. For the purpose of this article, each day a violation exists shall be considered a separate violation. Upon conviction, the city may seek criminal penalties of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation and/or up to six (6) months imprisonment or labor on the roads and streets or other public works of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 11(11.3), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.29. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more than one (1) enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 11(11.4), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 10. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION 

Sec. 21-140.30. - Water supply severance. 
    Whenever a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement or other standard, the city may sever city water service to the user's premises. Water service will be reconnected, at the user's expense, after satisfactory demonstration, in the city's sole opinion, of the user's ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 12(12.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.31. - Public nuisances. 
    A violation of any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the city. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the City Code and state statutes governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 12(12.2), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 11. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES 

Sec. 21-14-32. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (c), below, are met. 
(c)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset. (If this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  Industrial users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(f)  Industrial users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 13(13.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.33. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
    An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions established in subsection 21-119(a) or the specific prohibitions established in subsections 21-119(b)(3) through 21-119(b)(7) where the industrial user can demonstrate that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and that either: 
(a)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with each local limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(b)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the industrial user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 13(13.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.34. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, 
(1)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  An industrial user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time the industrial user it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the industrial user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The city may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(d)  (1)  Bypass is prohibited, and the city may take an enforcement action against an industrial user for a bypass, unless; 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user submitted notices as required under subsection (c) of this section. 
(2)  The city may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the city determines that it will meet the three (3) conditions listed in subsection (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 13(13.3), 4-13-98) 
DIVISION 12. - WASTEWATER TREATMENT RATES 

Sec. 21-140.35. - Sewer use charges and fees. 
(a)  The city shall bill all users of the city's sewerage system monthly for sewer use at a rate based on each user's total metered water use. Water and sewer billing rates shall be as adopted by the city council from time to time and all sewer users shall be required to pay a sewer use charge based on a percentage of their water bill. All sewer users shall be city water customers. 
(b)  The city shall levy surcharges against all significant industrial users which have discharged compatible pollutants in concentrations in excess of surcharge limits as established under section 21-140.36 of this article. 
(c)  The city shall bill all significant industrial users a pro rata share of all costs incurred by the city in operating the city's industrial pretreatment program as established under section 21-140-37 of this article. 
(d)  Billing rates for wastewater services shall be published at least annually in a separate rate schedule which shall be made available to the public at the office of the city manager. 
(e)  Failure to pay sewer use charges, surcharges, pretreatment fees, penalties, and other charges assessed under this article shall be treated in the same manner as for failure to pay water use charges. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 14(14.1), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.36. - Industrial waste surcharge program. 
    The director shall establish an industrial waste surcharge program which shall be applicable to all significant industrial users having discharges of compatible pollutants in monthly average concentrations which are in excess of the following surcharge limits: 
(a)  Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD 5 ) 300 mg/l 
(b)  Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD) 600 mg/l 
(c)  Total Suspended Solids (TSS) 250 mg/l 
(d)  Oil and Grease (O & G) 75 mg/l 
(e)  Surfactants (MBAS) 5.0 mg/l 
(f)  Phosphorous 35 mg/l 
    Fees for compatible pollutants in excess of surcharge limits shall be assessed annually by the director in accordance with unit treatment costs calculated annually by the city engineer for each such compatible pollutant. Surcharge fees shall be billed annually by the city to each such significant industrial user in accordance with the city's industrial waste surcharge program. Any discharge of compatible pollutants in excess of maximum allowable concentrations set forth in section 21-120 shall be a violation of local limits also subject to enforcement action by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 14(14.2), 4-13-98) 
Sec. 21-140.37. - Pretreatment cost recovery program. 
    The director shall establish a pretreatment cost recovery program which shall be applicable to all significant industrial users and which shall allocate the expenses for administration of the city's industrial pretreatment program to significant industrial users on an annual basis. The city's costs associated with administration of the industrial pretreatment program shall include, but are not limited to, compliance sampling, laboratory analysis, special investigative sampling and testing, applicable salaries and benefits, consulting and legal fees, state and federal fines and penalties, and other related costs. Such costs shall be determined annually by the city engineer and shall be assessed annually by the director to each significant industrial user in proportion to wastewater volume as determined by metered water use. In addition, the director shall assess each individual significant industrial user at least annually for the cost of city's compliance monitoring and laboratory analysis fees applicable to that significant industrial user, for the cost of any special remedial measures taken to protect the POTW from that significant industrial user's discharge, and/or for any other extraordinary actions taken because of noncompliance by that specific significant industrial user. Pretreatment cost recovery fees shall be billed annually by the city to each such significant industrial user in accordance with the city's pretreatment cost recovery program. 
(Ord. No. 1.1, § 14(14.3), 4-13-98) 
ARTICLE VI. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN/WATER CONSERVATION PLAN[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, adopted Jan. 8, 2001 did not specify manner of codification, hence; inclusion of these provisions were codified as superseding former Art. VI, §§ 21-141-21-145 which pertained to water conservation plan and derived from Ord. No. 6-88, §§ 1-6(d), adopted June 17, 1988. 
Cross reference- Installation of water-saving facilities, § 6-20; Consumer's responsibility and liability for use of city water, § 21-14. 

Sec. 21-141. - Purpose and scope. 
    This article described two (2) related policies of the city for the management of the city water system. First is the drought contingency plan for temporary implementation during a water shortage emergency. The second is LaFayette's Water Conservation Plan, a program of policies for long-range conservation of water. 
    The purpose of LaFayette's Drought Contingency Plan ("plan") is to provide guidelines for the city to follow in the event of water shortage emergencies. The plan establishes priorities of water use and provides for allocation of available water during four (4) stages of water shortage, in increasing order of severity of the shortage. 
    Conditions that could cause implementation of the plan could be anything that causes a decrease in water availability from the city water facilities, such as failure of one (1) or more pumps, prolonged power outage, control malfunction, or water main breaks, sudden increases in water demand because of fire emergencies, excessive heat, cold, or drought. When demand for water exceeds the city's water system's capacity, action must be taken to prevent serious shortages and disruption of water service and fire protection to the customers. In a growing community, such as in Lafayette and Walker County, it is probable that the growth in water demand may sometimes exceed the water system's capacity to produce water. Problems and delays could arise in obtaining and developing sufficient sources of water, in financing and constructing needed treatment facilities, pumping stations, storage tanks, and distribution pipes, etc. Even with the best planning and construction, it is not considered economically feasible to provide excess capacity for every possible contingency, for excessive growth, or for every drought. 
    While the plan is intended to deal with short-term shortages that may occur from time to time, the plan is a program of policies adopted by the city to promote long-term efficient use and conservation of the water resources available to the city and Walker County, thus minimizing the frequency and duration of emergency water shortages. 
(Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 21-142. - Existing facilities. 
    The city operates and maintains a public water supply system serving the city, and certain areas outside the corporate limits of the city. The city operates a surface water plant, a spring and a well, which is treated through a package plant. The city also has a contractual agreement with Walker County Water and Sewer Authority and Catoosa County Utilities. 
(Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 21-143. - Determination of low flow conditions. 
    The city checks stream flows and spring levels on a daily basis. Low flow conditions, among other observed conditions of the system, and input from the Georgia EPD will trigger the decisions on the severity of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 21-144. - Drought contingency plan. 
(a)  Water use priorities a general ranking of priority water uses in decreasing order of importance are to be as follows: 
(1)  Household use. 
(2)  Public necessity. 
(3)  Livestock. 
(4)  Industry and commercial use. 
(5)  Construction. 
(6)  Irrigation. 
(7)  Nonessential fire fighting. 
(8)  Swimming pools. 
(9)  Car washing. 
(10)  Street cleaning, line flushing, hydrant testing, etc. 
(b)  Implementing the drought contingency plan. Implementing the plan will be contingent upon numerous interrelated factors that may cause a temporary shortage of water. In general, any event or series of events which disrupts, or threatens to disrupt the city's water supply and distribution system will be carefully evaluated and the appropriate stage of the plan will be implemented in response. In certain cases, the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) may order the plan to be implemented whether or not the city has acted. 
(c)  Implementation stages. The plan will be implemented in four (4) stages, depending on the severity of the water shortage. Each stage has specific goals for reducing water consumption. 
Stage No. 1-Minor water emergency 
The city will, when minor conditions occur, first put the following priority conservation methods in place. Under minor conditions when a request is made hereunder by the city manager, compliance shall be on a voluntary basis. 
 Public service announcements will be made on local radio stations and in the newspaper requesting that customers curtail the use of unnecessary water in watering lawns and gardens, washing cars, and other practices that are not essential during emergency conditions. 
 Fire departments and others will be asked to curtail water main flushing, dust control, and other nonessential use of water. 
Stage No. 2-Moderate water emergency 
If water shortages continue, such that up to fifteen (15) percent to eighteen (18) percent reduction in water use is deemed necessary, the city will declare a moderate water emergency condition and will take the following additional actions: 
 Make additional news releases to the news media and advise of the increased intensity of the water shortage by explaining the degree of severity of the water shortage problem and the need for additional curtailment of water use. 
 Make additional and more urgent appeals to all customers, especially the significant industrial users, for additional voluntary reductions of water use with a goal of eighteen (18) percent reduction. 
 Use city employees to read meters of significant industrial users to gauge the extent of their water reduction. 
 Use city employees and law enforcement agencies to monitor outdoor use of water by all customers. 
 Prohibit all outdoor use of water for car washing (except at commercial facilities), watering lawns, garden and landscape watering, pavement hosing, and filling swimming pools 9:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. 
 Water customers observed using water in violation of Stage No. 2 restrictions will be warned by the city and requested to comply with the plan. If after one (1) such warning and request, the customer fails to comply, then the customer's water service will be cut off at the meter and a reconnection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged to return the customer to service. If said service is cut off and then reconnected, any additional violation of Stage No. 2 restrictions by said customer will cause the city to cut off service at the meter until emergency water shortage conditions have improved to the point where Stage No. 2 restrictions are lifted by the city and a reconnection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) will be charged to return the customer to service. 
Stage No. 3-Severe water emergency 
In cases where up to thirty (30) percent reduction in water use is deemed necessary, the city will declare a severe water emergency condition and may add the following actions: 
 Notify the news media that a severe water emergency has been declared and request cooperation in reaching all water customers with the need to further curtail water use. 
 Hand deliver letters to individual large water users outlining the severity of the problem and requesting significant voluntary curtailment of water use. Industrial users will be requested to reduce average consumption by at least thirty (30) percent of their normal use and advised that city employees will read water meters to monitor the level of reduction achieved. 
 Prohibit all water usage by governmental agencies not required for health and safety. 
 Prohibit all outside water usage at all times by all customers except that water use which is essential or required for health or safety. 
 Prohibit all once-through cooling water use or water-cooled air-conditioners with recirculation. 
 Prohibit the escape of water through breaks or excessive leaks in plumbing facilities by cutoff of the water service of offending customers. 
 Require commercial car washing and commercial laundries to reduce water use up to fifty (50) percent of normal use as demonstrated by meter readings. 
 If a water customer violates the Stage No. 3 restrictions, after one (1) request is made of the customer for compliance, the customer's water service will be cut off and a reconnection fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) will be charged to return the customer to service. If said service is cut off and then reconnected, any other violation of Stage No. 3 restrictions by said customer will cause the city to cut off service at the meter until the emergency water shortage conditions have unproved to the point where Stage No. 3 restrictions are lifted by the city. A reconnection fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) will be charged to return the customer to service. 
Stage No. 4-Critical water emergency 
If a water shortage emergency becomes so severe that it is declared critical water emergency and a fifty (50) percent or greater reduction is deemed necessary, the city will add the following additional actions: 
 Additional prohibitions will be imposed on the use of any water activities not essential or required for health and safety. 
 After twenty-four-hour notice to industrial users, the flow of water to the users will be shut off or reduced to the absolute minimum necessary to protect health and safety. 
 Prohibit all water use for commercial car washing, commercial laundries, construction activities, and irrigation for agriculture. 
 Notify all water customers that any water use greater than their average monthly use (on an annual basis) will be penalized by a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per month until the emergency has subsided. 
 The city may also issue any other requirements to reduce water use in other specific ways, using the priority list herein as a guide to the degree of curtailment. 
 All city personnel will monitor unnecessary use of water and report violations of Stage No. 4 restrictions. 
 Upon a customer's first violation of Stage No. 4 restrictions, the customer's water will be discontinued, upon notification to the customer, until the water shortage conditions have improved to the point where the city lifts Stage No. 4 restrictions. A reconnection fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) will be charged to return the customer's service. 
(Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 21-145. - Water conservation plan. 
(a)  Management of water system losses. EPD guidelines recommend that system losses be reduced to ten (10) percent or less. The city is currently attempting to minimize unaccounted water use and it is evident that continuing efforts will be needed to bring the water losses within acceptable limits. 
    Typically, water system losses are the result of system leaks, line breaks, unmetered sales, uncalibrated or faulty meters, and unmetered uses such as fire hydrant use and line flushing. Sometimes the water is allowed to bleed off in certain locations during cold weather to prevent freezing. 
    The following policies will be initiated by the city to ensure that the water system returns to an acceptable water loss ratio: 
 All distribution system leaks will be repaired as quickly as possible. City employees, including members of fire and police departments, are trained to report any water line leaks or breaks. 
 Best construction practices have been implemented (hot taps on large water mains and looping dead end lines) to reduce water losses due to flushing. 
 The city's water meter maintenance program will be expanded to include checking and calibration of all large meters (one and one-half (11/2 in. and larger) and the large meters at the water sources. Residential meters will be automatically replaced whenever readings begin to vary unaccountably or do not register within the expected range. 
 The city will continue to maintain monthly records reflecting the difference between water production and metered sales. The city will then take additional steps to identify and eliminate the source or sources of system losses. 
 The city water system maps showing the location and size of all lines, valves, and hydrants will be periodically updated as new mains are added and as information is discovered during repair or replacement operations. 
 The city will continue to evaluate all water service meters to insure they are adequately sized for the average and peak flow rates. Meters that are inadequately sized will be replaced with the recommended meter sizes. 
 The storage tanks are observed continually for evidence of overflowing. Automatic level controlled equipment will be kept in proper calibration by routine maintenance. 
 The city has raw and finished water metering at all sources for water. 
 In order to promote water conservation, the city will continue to update local building codes to require all plumbing fixtures and piping in new construction be sized in accordance with the State Plumbing Code and Georgia Water Conservation Law, Code Section 8-2-1 et seq.; the city will continue the current practice of metering all water services and requiring a separate meter for each dwelling unit; and, the city will continue the current practice of utilizing the same uniform unit rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons for all water usage above the monthly minimum. No discount is given for larger water customers. The rate structure is strictly on a "flat" basis. No discount is given for irrigation water meters. 
(Ord. No. 01-2, § 1, 1-8-2001) 
Sec. 21-146. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
    Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable City of LaFayette ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Sec. 21-147. - Enforcement. 
(a)  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in the ordinance from which this section was derived. 
(b)  The City of LaFayette Codes Department shall be the enforcement authority for the ordinance from which this section was derived. The city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(c)  Any violation of the ordinance from which this section was derived may be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the City of Lafayette Municipal Court or by any other legal means as set forth in the City of Lafayette Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 11-03, § 1, 2-14-2011) 
Chapter 22 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Vehicles for hire, § 1-21(j). 
Cross reference- Wreckers, § 13-111 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, Ch. 14; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 

Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, have the meanings as set out herein: 
    Driver and operator shall mean and include any and every person in charge of or driving or operating a cab, as defined herein, whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise. 
    Driver's permit shall mean the permission granted by the governing body to a person to drive a taxicab within the city. 
    License shall mean the license or authority granted by the governing body to engage in the taxicab business within the city. 
    Owner shall mean and include any person having control of the operation or maintenance and collection of the revenue derived from cabs. 
    Taxicab shall mean a motor vehicle operated for hire, the destination of which is under the direction of the passenger transported therein. 
(Code 1975, § 11-10) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-2. - Operation of business, license prerequisite. 
    No person shall operate any taxicab business within the city until the license provided for in this chapter has been granted and issued. 
(Code 1975, § 11-20) 
Sec. 22-3. - Application for operator's license; fee. 
(a)  The application for a license for the operation of a taxicab business shall be made to the city manager. Such application shall be in writing and include: 
(1)  The make, model, year and color of each vehicle to be used in such business; 
(2)  The full name and address of the owner of each such vehicle; 
(3)  Proof of liability insurance in force on each such vehicle indemnifying the public against negligence and carelessness in the operation of such vehicle in an amount not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for property damage and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for personal injuries; and 
(4)  A statement from chief of police that each such vehicle has met the required safety standards, which he is empowered by section 20-4 to establish. 
(b)  The privilege license fee for the operation of the taxicab business shall be paid at the time of filing the application. 
(Code 1975, § 11-21) 
Sec. 22-4. - Regulations governing licensee. 
    All licenses for the operation of a taxicab business are issued subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages. No alcoholic beverages, whether in the possession of the passenger or not, shall be transported in a taxicab; 
(2)  Posting of rates. Each taxicab shall have posted on both sun-visors the schedule of rates charged for carrying passengers; 
(3)  Outside lettering. On the exterior of one (1) door on each side of the taxicab and on the rear of the taxicab shall be printed in bold letters of not less than five (5) inches the name of the licensee and the number of the licensee's business license; 
(4)  Dome lights. All dome lights on taxicabs shall comply with the following specifications: 
a.  Length, twelve (12) to fourteen (14) inches; 
b.  Height, six (6) inches maximum; 
c.  Letters three (3) inches minimum; 
(5)  Inspection of vehicle. Every taxicab operating under this chapter shall be periodically inspected by the chief of police at such intervals as shall be established by the city manager to ensure the continued maintenance of safe-operating taxicabs within the city. Each taxicab shall comply with such reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the chief of police in order to provide safe transportation; 
(6)  Sanitary condition. Every taxicab operating under this chapter shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(7)  Driver's permit. Only persons who have been issued a driver's permit under the provisions of this chapter shall operate a taxicab for hire. 
(Code 1975, § 11-22) 
Sec. 22-5. - Revocation of license; no refunds. 
(a)  The city manager may revoke any license issued under this chapter if in his opinion any provision of this chapter has been violated. 
(b)  No refund of the license fee shall be made in the case of any license which is revoked. 
(Code 1975, § 11-23) 
Sec. 22-6. - Driver's permit-Required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab licensed by the city without first having obtained a driver's permit as provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 11-30) 
Sec. 22-7. - Same-Application; fee. 
(a)  The application for a driver's permit shall be made in writing and under oath to the city manager and shall contain the following information about the applicant: 
(1)  Full name; 
(2)  Age, height and weight; 
(3)  Home, street and post office addresses; 
(4)  Description of any handicaps; 
(5)  Results of an eye test administered by the chief of police; and 
(6)  Whether he has ever been convicted of violating any federal, state, or city law, and if so, a summary of each conviction including time, place, and type of offense. 
(b)  At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay to the city clerk the sum of five dollars ($5.00). 
(Code 1975, § 11-31) 
Sec. 22-8. - Investigation of application for driver's permit; report; issuance of permit; effective period. 
(a)  The city manager and the chief of police are charged with the duty of investigating each application for a permit to drive taxicabs and reporting to the city clerk the results of the investigation. The city clerk shall then approve or refuse the application. 
(b)  If the city clerk does approve the application, the city manager shall issue to the applicant a taxicab driver's permit bearing the name, address, age, signature, and photograph of the applicant. If the city clerk does not approve the application, the applicant may seek the city council's review of the city clerk's decision not later than twenty (20) days after notice of the city clerk's denial is received by said applicant. 
(c)  Such permit shall be in effect for the remainder of the calendar year. A permit for every calendar year thereafter shall be issued to the applicant upon the payment of an amount set by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 11-32; Ord. No. 02-02, § 1(a)(b), 3-11-2002) 
Sec. 22-9. - Temporary driver's permit; issuance, period valid, eligibility, information to be stated thereon. 
    Upon the concurrence of the mayor, the city manager, and the chief of police a temporary driver's permit for any person to drive a taxicab within the city may be issued for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, provided the recipient has a state driver's permit that has never been revoked, suspended, cancelled or modified and which does not show the holder thereof to have been convicted of operating an automobile under the influence of intoxicants or for violating any state statute governing the operating of motor vehicles. Every temporary driver's permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall have written or printed thereon the name of the person to whom issued, the name of the taxicab company for whom such person is to drive, the age, height, and address of such driver, the date of issuance of such permit, and "Temporary Permit Expiring _______ Days from Date Hereof" which quoted words shall be in black face type. Such permit shall be signed by the chief of police and the mayor. 
(Code 1975, § 11-33) 
Sec. 22-10. - Maximum period valid. 
    In no event shall a temporary driver's permit be of any force or effect beyond a period of thirty (30) days from the date on which it was issued. 
(Code 1975, § 11-34) 
Sec. 22-11. - Posting driver's permit in cab required. 
    Every driver who has been issued a permit under this chapter shall post his driver's permit in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Code 1975, § 11-35) 
Sec. 22-12. - Suspension and revocation of driver's permit. 
(a)  Suspension. The chief of police, the city manager, and the city clerk shall have authority to suspend any driver's permit for failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. Such suspension shall not last a period of more than thirty (30) days. 
(b)  Revocation by city council. The city council shall have the right to revoke any driver's permit for failure of the holder to comply with the provisions of this chapter. However, the revocation shall not be permanent unless the holder has been given notice and an opportunity to present evidence before the city council. 
(c)  Revocation by municipal court. The municipal court shall have the power to revoke any driver's permit issued under this chapter upon conviction of the holder of violating any provision of this chapter. Such revocation shall be in addition to any other penalty which the municipal court may choose to impose. 
(d)  Revocation by city clerk. The city clerk shall have the right to revoke any driver's permit for failure of the holder to comply with the provisions of this chapter. However, the revocation shall not be permanent unless and until the holder has been given notice and an opportunity to present evidence before the city council. Permanent revocations imposed by the city clerk shall be immediately forwarded to the city council for a hearing that serves to afford permit holders with said notice and opportunity to present evidence. 
(Code 1975, § 11-36; Ord. No. 02-03, § 1(a)-(c), 3-11-2002) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city adopted by the mayor and council on October 14, 1974. Amendments to the zoning ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation and material in brackets [ ] has been added for clarity. The numbering system used in this appendix is the identical system used when the zoning ordinance was first codified as Chapter 29 of the 1975 Code. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, Ch. 4; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 6; cemeteries, Ch. 7; flood damage prevention, Ch. 11; health and sanitation, Ch. 12; licenses, permits, and miscellaneous regulations, Ch. 13; parks and recreation, Ch. 16; planning, Ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 29-10. - Preamble and enacting clause. 
    In pursuance of the authority conferred by the Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, and for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or the general welfare of the City of LaFayette; lessening congestion in the streets, securing safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; providing adequate light and air; preventing the overcrowding of land, avoiding undue concentration of population; facilitating the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements; conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the City, all in accordance with a comprehensive plan, the Mayor and Members of the Council of the City of LaFayette do ordain and enact into law, this Chapter. 
Section 29-11. - Short title. 
    This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of LaFayette, Georgia." 
Section 29-12. - Definitions. 
    Except specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definition. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." The word "building" includes the word "structure." The words "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." The word "Map" or "Zoning Map" means the Official Zoning Map of LaFayette, Georgia. 
    For the purpose of this Chapter, certain terms or words shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  Accessory Use or Building: A use or building customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
(2)  Alley: A public or private thoroughfare which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
(3)  Alteration of Building: Any change in the supporting members of a building except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to the building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another. 
(4)  Automobile Filling Station: A building or lot having pumps and storage tanks at which fuels, oils, or accessories for the use of motor vehicles are dispersed, sold or offered for sale at retail and where repair services are incidental. 
(5)  Automobile Repair and Service Station: A building, lot, or both, in or upon which the business of general motor vehicle repair and service is conducted, but excluding a junk and/or auto wrecking business. 
    (5.5) Borrow Pit: An excavated area where naturally earthen materials are to be removed for use as ordinary fill at another location, and shall include land from which dirt, gravel, rock or related material will be excavated and used for road and other fill purposes. (Ord. No. 99-9, § 1, 10-11-99) 
(6)  Building: Any structure, except a mobile home, having a roof supported by columns or by walls and which is designed for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
(7)  Building, Principal: A building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located. 
(8)  Building Area: The maximum horizontal projected area of a building, excluding open steps, terraces, and corners projecting not more than thirty (30) inches, and excluding self-supporting balconies above the first floor and projecting into the yards. 
(9)  Centerline Of Streets: A line surveyed and monumented as such or, if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
(10)  Conditional Use: A use of land which is permitted in a particular zoning district only after review by the Planning Commission and action by the Board of Appeals. Before authorizing such use, the Board of Appeals must find that the use is in compliance with all provisions of this Chapter, and is in compliance with the conditions established by this Chapter for such use. 
(11)  Court: An open space, other than a yard, which may or may not have direct street access around which is arranged a single building or a group of related buildings. 
(12)  Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed or used for permanent residential occupancy by one or more families or individuals. 
(13)  Dwelling Unit: One (1) or more rooms in a residential building designed as a unit for occupancy by one (1) family for working, living and sleeping, [purposes]. 
(14)  Dwelling, Single-Family: A detached building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) family. 
(15)  Dwelling, Two-Family: A detached building designed or altered to provide dwelling units for two (2) families. 
(16)  Dwelling, Multiple-Family: A building or portion thereof designed or altered to provide dwelling units for three (3) or more families. 
a.  Dwelling, Upstairs: A portion of a building which is: 
(1)  Designed or altered, and used for residential occupancy; and 
(2)  Located above the street level story of a building that is located and operating as a permitted use in either a B-1 Commercial District (Central Business District) or a B-2 Commercial District (General Business District). No pets shall be permitted in any upstairs dwelling. (Ord. No. 08-7, § 1, 4-14-2008) 
(17)  Family: One (1) or more persons occupying premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse or hotel. 
(18)  Flood: The general overflow of a stream which results in inundation of lands not normally covered by water. In this Chapter land subject to flood shall be any land which is below the elevation reached by an overflow rising to six (6) feet above median stream flow elevation, unless it can be determined in a study by a registered engineer that a lower elevation would be a reasonable elevation for carrying out the intent of this Chapter. 
(19)  Floodway: The channel of a stream and that part of the adjoining floodplain designated so the minimum area required for passage of flood flow and in which no filling shall be allowed, which in this Chapter shall be any land which is below the elevation reached by an overflow rising three (3) feet above median stream flow elevation, unless it can be determined in a study by a registered engineer that a lower elevation would not be subject to flood. 
(20)  Floodway Fringe: The area outside the floodway but immediately adjacent to it which is subject to flood and within which the supplemental regulations for the floodway apply (see subsection 29-60.) 
(21)  Group Housing Project: A group housing project is defined as two (2) or more buildings which are located on a parcel of land not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout makes it impractical to apply the requirements of this Chapter to the individual building units which may be so oriented that the main entrance does not directly face the street. 
(22)  Height of Building: The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level adjoining the building to the highest point on the roof. 
(22.5)  Home Occupation: An occupation or profession which is customarily carried on in a dwelling unit or in a building or other structure accessory to a dwelling unit; and is carried on by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit; and is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes; and which conforms to the conditions [set out in section 29-60 ("Home Occupations")]. (Ord. of 2-9-87) 
(23)  Junkyard: Any use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles or the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof, the keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk including scrap metal, used paper, or other scrap materials, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials; storages, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, used cloth or rags, used plumbing fixtures, appliances, furniture, and used brick, wood or other building materials. Such uses shall be considered junkyards whether or not all or part of such operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, addition to, or accessory to other uses on the premises. 
(24)  Lot: A portion or parcel of land devoted to a common use and occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use together with the customary accessory uses and open spaces belonging to the same. 
(25)  Lot, Depth of: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
(26)  Lot, Double Frontage: A lot extending the entire width of the block and having street frontage on both the front and rear lot lines. 
(26.1)  Lot, Small: Any lot of record which at the time of the adoption of this amendment is insufficient in width or area to enable the title owner thereof to conform to the dimensional requirements of this section including, minimum lot size, lot coverage, and minimum yard dimensions. Where, at the time of the adoption of this amendment, the title owner of two (2) or more small lots, as defined herein, which are contiguous to each other such adjoining lots shall be considered as a single lot and not small lots, as defined herein, and shall be subject to all the requirements of this section, except in the instance where after combining all the contiguous lots the combined lots would still have insufficient width or area to enable the title owner thereof to conform to the dimensional requirements of this section including, minimum lot size, lot coverage, and minimum yard dimensions. (Ord. No. 06/02, § 2, 5-8-2006) 
(27)  Lot, Width: The distance between the side lot lines measured at the building setback line. 
(28)  Mobile Home or Trailer: A detached residential dwelling unit designed for transportation on streets and highways on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers, and arriving on the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling, complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations, such as location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations, connection to utilities and the like. 
(29)  Mobile Home Park: A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for nontransit use. 
(30)  Nonconforming Use: The use of a building, structure or land existing at the time of enactment of this Chapter or subsequent amendments which does not conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located. 
(30.5)  Personal Care Home: Personal care home means a building, a facility or place in which is provided two (2) or more beds and other facilities and services, including rooms, meals, and personal care, for nonfamily ambulatory adults. For the purpose of this zoning ordinance, a personal care home shall be limited to those homes which are classified as "Family Personal Care Home" and "Group Personal Care Home" as defined under the Rules of Department of Human Resources (State of Georgia) Physical Health, Chapter 290-5-35, and the same shall specifically not include what is classified and defined as a "Congregate Personal Care Home" under said Rules, and all of the definitions contained in section 290-5-35-.01 of said Rules are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein and made a part hereof, except that "Personal Care Home" under this ordinance shall specifically exclude and not include a "Congregate Personal Care Home" as classified and defined under said Rules. (Ord. No. 1-88, § C, 1-11-88) 
(31)  Planned Shopping Center: A commercial development of at least three (3) acres located on a single lot and developed in conformance with section 29-60 of this Chapter. 
(32)  Rooming or Boarding House: A dwelling, other than a hotel, motel or lodginghouse, where meals and/or housing accommodations for three (3) or more persons are provided for hire. 
(33)  Setback or Building Line: A line beyond which no foundation, wall, eave or other part of any building shall project unless specified exceptions are made elsewhere in these regulations. 
(34)  Sign, Advertising: Any freestanding or partly or wholly attached structure displayed for the purpose of conveying some information, knowledge or idea to the public. 
(35)  Sign, Business: A sign situated on the same lot or premises as the principal use, advertising the principal use only. 
(36)  Sign, Incidental or Accessory: 
(1)  A nonilluminated sign, not exceeding one (1) square foot in area and attached wholly to a building. 
(2)  A sign pertaining only to the rent, lease, or sale of the premises upon which displayed and not exceeding six (6) square feet in area. 
(3)  A sign not exceeding twelve (12) square feet in area upon the premises of a church or other institution for the purpose of displaying the name of the church or institution and the activities or services. 
(4)  Directional or information signs of a public or quasi-public nature not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area which state the name or location of a town, village, hospital, community center, private school, college or youth organization, church or other place of worship, or the name or place of meeting of an official or civic body. 
(36.1)  Solar Collection Device: 
(a)  Solar collection device, for the purpose of this Ordinance, shall pertain to equipment utilized for providing an electric power source to a structure either in part or entirely. A solar collection device does not pertain to accent, landscape or exterior lighting devices. 
(b)  A solar collection device may not be mounted to the sides or any other portion of a primary structure other than its roof. 
(c)  Roof mounted systems: 
a.  Single-family and duplex dwellings: 
i.  No taller than one (1) foot, as measured on a vertical axis to the roof below, to which it is installed, unless the roof pitch is 2:12 or less, in such case two (2) feet is permitted. No portion of a solar collection device shall project above the maximum projection line depicted within figures attached hereto as Exhibit A. 
b.  Non-residential and residential multi-family (excluding single-family or duplex dwellings): 
i.  If < 2:12 pitch roof, no taller than eight (8) feet as measured on a vertical axis to the roof below, to which it is installed (see attached hereto as Exhibit B). 
ii.  If 2:12 to 6:12 pitch, no taller than four (4) feet as measured on a vertical axis to the roofline to which it is installed (see attached hereto as Exhibit B). 
iii.  If > 6:12 pitch, no taller than two (2) feet, as measured on a vertical axis to the roofline to which it is installed (see attached hereto as Exhibit B). 
c.  All buildings regardless of use: a roof mounted solar collection device shall not extend beyond any roof overhang nor shall it extend beyond a horizontal plane as drawn from the highest point of a roof pitch. 
(d)  A solar collection device may not be attached to a street facing roof face. 
(e)  If the dwelling has a roof that is perpendicular to the street, then the solar collection device shall have the same pitch as the roof, and to the extent possible, shall lay flat on the roof. 
(f)  If ground mounted, solar collection devices shall not exceed five (5) feet in height, must be placed to the side or rear of the primary structure and must be screened from view. 


(37)  Street: A public or private way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
(38)  Structure: Anything constructed or erected including signs, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    (38.1) Townhouse, fee simple. A type of dwelling unit that is no less than one (1) nor more than two (2) stories in height above ground level which has individual outside front and rear entrances, is separated from other dwelling units by common party walls that are four-hour fire rated masonry construction extending from the foundation through the roof line for a minimum of three (3) feet, occupies its own lot and is part of a contiguous group of at least three (3) such townhouses. The firewall separating single story units and two-story units must extend only to the roof decking of the two-story unit. (Ord. of 4-14-86. § A) 
(38.2)  Warehouse: An establishment, conducted within a completely enclosed building, that is engaged in the storage of goods, materials, equipment, or products. 
(39)  Yard: An open space on the same lot with a principal building open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
(40)  Yard, Front: A yard extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(41)  Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the full width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(42)  Yard, Side: A yard situated between the building and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
(Ord. No. 17-02, § 2, 2-13-2017; Ord. No. 18-09, § 1, 6-11-2018) 
ARTICLE II. - DISTRICTS 

Section 29-20. - Establishment into districts. 
    In order to carry out the purposes and provisions of this Chapter, the City of LaFayette, Georgia, is hereby divided into ten (10) types of districts designated as follows: 
R-1 Residential (Low Density) R-2 Residential (Medium Density) R-3 Residential (High Density) B-1 Commercial (Central Business District) B-2 Commercial (General Business District) I-1 Industrial (Limited Industrial) I-2 Industrial (General Industrial) F-1 Floodway F-2 Floodway Fringe O-1 Office.  
(Ord. of 2-11-86(2), § A) 
Section 29-21. - Official zoning map. 
    The boundaries and designations of the districts provided for herein are hereby established as shown on the map identified by the title "Zoning Map of LaFayette, Georgia," and the signature of the Mayor of LaFayette and attested by the City Manager. The Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter. The original of this Map shall be filed in the office of the City Manager and shall show thereon the date of its adoption and of subsequent amendments. 
Section 29-22. - District boundary lines. 
    When there is uncertainty as to the boundary of any district as shown on the Zoning Map adopted herein, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundary lines are shown as approximately following the centerlines of streets, alleys, highways, streams, lakes, or easements, or the boundary lines of streets, alleys, highways, lot lines, land lot lines, or civil boundaries, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundary lines are shown approximately parallel to the centerlines or right-of-way lines of streets, alleys or highways, such district boundary lines shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the Zoning Map. If no distance is given, the distance may be determined by the scale of the Map. 
(3)  Where a lot held in one ownership and of record at the effective date of this Chapter is divided by a district boundary line, the entire lot shall be construed to be within the less restrictive district, provided that such extension shall not include any part of such lot more than forty (40) feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(4)  Where property is hereafter annexed and not zoned upon annexation, it is hereby declared R-1 Residential. 
ARTICLE III. - APPLICATION, REGULATIONS, AND SUBDIVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - APPLICATION AND REGULATIONS[2] 
    The regulations set by this Chapter within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class, type or use of building or land, except as hereinafter provided. 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-02, adopted Mar. 9, 2009, enacted provisions intended for use as Div. 2, subdivisions and land development. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, Div. 1 has been added to Art. III for purposes of clarification. 

Section 29-30. - Use. 
    No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, structurally altered or moved unless in conformity with all the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
Section 29-31. - Height and density. 
    No building or other structure shall hereafter be created or altered to exceed the height, or to have a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family, or occupy a greater percentage of lot area than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this Chapter. 
Section 29-32. - Reduction of lot area. 
    No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per family, or other requirements of this Chapter, are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is subsequently acquired for public purposes. 
Section 29-33. - Principal building. 
    No building hereafter shall be erected except on a lot as defined herein, and in no case shall there be more than one (1) principal building on each lot except as otherwise provided herein. 
Section 29-34. - Street frontage. 
    No building shall be erected on a lot without direct access to a public street, and no lot shall be created which does not abut for at least 25 feet along a public street. With regard to only lots located in B-1 and B-2 Districts that do not have a direct access to a public street, the requirements of this Subsection may be satisfied if any such lot has a perpetual non-exclusive easement at least 25 feet in width for the purposes of ingress, egress, and utilities extending from said lot to a public street. 
(Ord. No. 04-12, § 1, 8-9-2004) 
Section 29-35. - Corner and double frontage lots. 
    On lots having frontage of more than one street in residential districts, a minimum front yard shall be provided for each street in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
DIVISION 2. - SUBDIVISIONS AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 09-02, adopted Mar. 9, 2009, enacted provisions intended for use as § 29-36, subdivisions and land development. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the discretion of the editor, Div. 2, § 29-36, has been added to Art. III for purposes of clarification. 

Section 29-36. - Subdivisions and land development. 
(1)  Title. This ordinance shall be known and may be referred to as the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance of City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
(2)  Purposes. This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes: 
(a)  Promote the orderly, planned, efficient, and economic development of the City of LaFayette and to guide future growth in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
(b)  Ensure that lands subdivided are of such character that they can be used for building purposes without danger to the health or safety of residents, and to secure safety from fire, flood, or other menace. 
(c)  Prevent the pollution of air, land, streams, and ponds, as well as encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the City of LaFayette, and preserve the topography and beauty of the community and the value of land. 
(d)  Ensure the proper provision of improvements such as drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, and transportation facilities. 
(e)  Provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
(f)  Establish procedures for the subdivision and re-subdivision of land in order to further the orderly development of land. 
(g)  Provide for the proper monumenting of subdivided land and proper legal descriptions. 
(h)  Help eliminate the costly maintenance problems that develop when streets and lots are established without proper consideration given to various public purposes. 
(i)  Facilitate and inform lot purchasers who generally lack the specialized knowledge needed to evaluate subdivision improvements and design. 
(3)  Rules of Construction. For the purpose of these regulations, the following rules of construction shall apply: 
(a)  In case of a conflict between the text of these regulations and any caption, figure, illustration, table, or map, the text of these regulations shall control. In case of a conflict between a chart and an illustration, the chart shall control. All illustration included in these regulations are for illustrative purposes only. 
(b)  In case of any conflict in limitations, restrictions, or standards applying to an individual use or structure, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
(c)  The words "shall," "must," and "will" are mandatory in nature, implying an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision. 
(d)  The word "may" is permissive in nature. 
(e)  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
(f)  Words used in the singular number include the plural number and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. 
(g)  Words used in the masculine gender include the feminine gender. 
(h)  Any act authorized by these regulations to be carried out by a specific official or agency of the City is impliedly authorized to be carried out by a designee of such official or agency. Any transfer of duties to a different official impliedly transfers the authority to carry out acts under these regulations. 
(i)  The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day; if the last day is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday. that day shall be excluded. 
(4)  Definitions. 
    Access: A way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property. 
    Access easement: An easement devoted to vehicular access which affords a principal means of access to abutting property or properties, but which is not necessarily open to the general public and which is not necessarily improved to standards of the City. 
    Agricultural facility: Includes, but is not limited to, any land, building, structure, pond, impoundment, appurtenance, machinery, or equipment which is used for the commercial production or processing of crops, livestock, animals, poultry, honeybees, honeybee products, livestock products, poultry products, timber, forest products, or products which are used in commercial aquaculture. Such term does not include any farm labor camp or facilities for migrant farm workers. 
    Agricultural operation: Those practices involving the establishment, cultivation, or harvesting of products of the field or orchard; the preparation and planting of pasture land; farm ponds; dairy operations; livestock and poultry management practices; the construction of farm buildings; the plowing, tilling, or preparation of soil at an agricultural facility; the planting, growing, fertilizing, harvesting, or otherwise maintaining of crops; the application of pesticides, herbicides, or other chemicals, compounds, or substances to crops, weeds, or soil in connection with the production of crops, timber, livestock, animals, or poultry; the breeding, hatching, raising, producing, feeding, keeping of livestock, hogs, equines, chickens, turkeys, poultry or other fowl normally raised for food, mules, cattle, sheep, goats, dogs, rabbits, or similar farm animals for commercial purposes, but not the regular slaughtering, or processing of such animals; the production and keeping of honeybees, the production of honeybee products; the production, of eggs or egg products; the manufacturing of feed for poultry or livestock; the rotation of crops, including without limitation timber production; commercial aquaculture; and the application of existing, changed, or new technology, practices, processes, or procedures to any agricultural operation. Agricultural operation does not include a roadside stand or agricultural processing. 
    Alley: A strip of land dedicated to public use providing vehicular and pedestrian access to the rear of properties which abut and are served by a road or street. 
    Block: An area of land within a subdivision that is entirely surrounded by public streets, public lands, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, or other well defined and fixed boundaries. (See Figure). 

    Comprehensive plan: Any plan adopted by the Mayor and City Council of the City of LaFayette, Georgia, or portion of such plan or plans. This definition shall be construed liberally to include the major thoroughfare plan, master parks and recreation plan, or any other study, document, or written recommendation pertaining to subjects normally within the subject matter of a Comprehensive Plan as provided by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989, if formally adopted by the local governing body. 
    Conservation: The management of natural resources to prevent waste, destruction, or degradation. 
    Conservation areas, primary: Any property qualifying as conservation use property under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4; and any steep mountain slopes, floodplains, wetlands, soils subject to slumping, water bodies, upland buffers around wetlands and water bodies, critical wildlife habitat, and sites of historic, cultural, or archaeological significance, located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes; and any "sensitive natural area" as defined herein. 
    Conservation areas, secondary: Prime farmland, natural meadows, mature woodlands, farm fields, localized aquifer recharge areas, and lands containing scenic views and sites, located outside of building envelopes and lots established for building purposes. 
    Conservation easement: A legally enforceable agreement between a property owner and the holder of the easement, in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and recorded in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Walker County. A conservation easement restricts the existing and future use of the defined tract or lot to conservation use, agriculture, passive recreation, or other use approved by the Mayor and City Council and prohibits further subdivision or development. Such agreement also provides for the maintenance of open spaces and any improvements on the tract or lot. Such agreement cannot be altered except with the express written permission of the easement holder and any other co-signers. A conservation easement may also establish other provisions and contain standards that safeguard the tract's or lot's special resources from negative changes. 
    Conservation subdivision: A subdivision where open space is the central organizing element of the subdivision design and that identifies and permanently protects all primary and all or some of the secondary conservation areas within the boundaries of the subdivision. 
    Contiguous common parcels: Parcels adjoining or touching other land at a common point and having a common owner, regardless of whether portions of the parcels have separate tax lot numbers, or were purchased in different land lots, or were purchased at different times. 
    Cross-section: A profile of the ground surface perpendicular to the centerline of a road, stream, or other feature. 
    Cul-de-sac: A dead-end street of limited length having a primary function of serving adjoining land, and constructed with a turnaround at its end. 
    Cul-de-sac, temporary: A nonpermanent vehicular turn around located at the termination of a street or alley. 
    Curb radius: The curved edge of a road at road intersections. 
    Deceleration lane: An added roadway lane, of a specified distance and which may include a taper, as approved by the Land Use Officer that permits vehicles to slow down and leave the main vehicle stream. 
    Dedication: The deliberate appropriation of land by an owner for any general and public use or purpose, reserving to himself no other rights than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the public uses to which the property has been devoted. Dedication of land must be formally approved and accepted by the Mayor and Council. 
    Dedication plat: A plat that indicates property to be dedicated for public right-of-way or land for public use. A plat dedicating property must be approved by the Mayor and Council. 
    Detention: The temporary restraining of storm water on-site. 
    Detention pond: A pond or pool used for the temporary storage of storm water runoff and which provides for the controlled release of such storm water. If the pond becomes a permanent amenity of the site then the property therein must have a specific owner or must be under the direct responsibility of a permanent group (such as a home owners association). If the area becomes a pond and holds water after normal storm-water runoff has taken place then the pond must be fenced according to swimming pool requirements. 
    Development: Any manmade change on improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings, structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, drilling, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Development plan: Any plan containing substantial information required to be filed by this ordinance, which shows how the property to be affected by the development will be changed and improved in a specific manner, including the installation of roads and utilities and the erection of buildings and structures, among other specific requirements. 
    Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually non-erodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Easement: A grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. (See Figure) 

    Escrow account: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee where the subdivider deposits either cash, a note, a bond, or some other instrument readily convertible to cash for specific face value specified by the Land Use Officer to cover the costs of required improvements. 
    Excavation: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "cut." 
    Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    Final plat: The final drawing of a subdivision and, as applicable, dedication, prepared for filing for record with the Clerk of the Walker County Superior Court, and containing all elements and requirements set forth in this ordinance. The plat must be signed and stamped by a state licensed engineer or surveyor. 
    Fire flow: The flow of water required to extinguish the largest probable fire served by a water facility. 
    Forestry: An operation on a tract or parcel of land involving the growing, conserving, and managing of forests and forest lands (includes the term "silviculture"). Forestry operations or practices include the raising and harvesting of timber, pulp woods and other forestry products for commercial purposes. Incidental uses to forestry include the erection of accessory structures and improvements normally associated with timber production including, but not limited to storage buildings, the construction of roads, insect and disease control, fire protection, and may include the temporary operation of a sawmill and/or chipper to process the timber cut from the parcel or parcels. This term does not include the cutting of timber associated with approved land development. This definition does not include processing of timber into finished or semi-finished products or other than temporary storage of logs. 
    Gated community: Residential areas containing lots and that restrict access to roads and spaces. Gates can include guard houses, electronic arms operated by card, codes, or remote control devices. Visitors must stop to be verified for entry. 
    Grade, natural: The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling, or excavating. 
    Gradient: The rate of vertical change between two (2) distance points, determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance (i.e., rise over run). 
    Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Greenway: A linear park or open space conservation area that provides recreational opportunities, pedestrian and/or bicycle paths, and/or conservation of open spaces or natural areas. The creation of this type of area and its maintenance must be approved by the City. 
    Habitat for endangered or threatened species: An area verified by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as: 1) actually containing naturally-occurring individuals of a species that has been listed as endangered or threatened under the Federal Endangered Species Act, as amended, and, 2) being likely to support the continued existence of that species by providing for a significant portion of that species' biological requirements, and that meets the definition of "natural conditions" as defined by this ordinance. 
    Half street: A portion of the ultimate width of a road or street where the remaining portion of the road or street shall be provided at a future date. 
    Home owners association: An organization formed for the maintenance and operation of the common areas of a development, where membership in the association is automatic with the purchase of a dwelling unit or lot within the development, with the ability to legally assess each owner of a dwelling unit or lot and which has authority to place a lien against all dwelling units and lots within the development. This association must be created, have members with bylaws of operation and continue to function as long as the subdivision exists. The association is responsible for enforcing any covenants, conditions and restrictions that apply to the property. 
    Impact: The effect of any direct man-made actions or indirect repercussions of man-made actions on existing physical, social, or economic conditions. 
    Improvements: The physical addition and changes to land that may be necessary to produce usable, desirable and acceptable lots or building sites. 
    Intra-family land transfer: A division of land within one or more specified land use districts that creates at least one (1) additional lot but not more than four (4) additional lots, each of which is not less than one (1) acre nor more than five (5) acres in size, where each and every lot within the subdivision is conveyed to the children, spouse and children, surviving heirs, in-laws, or immediate relatives of the property owner, or some combination thereof, and where no more than one (1) lot in the subdivision is deeded to any one individual. Each lot created in an intra-family land transfer is conveyed by final plat, and each lot meets all the requirements of this ordinance for the creation of a lot or lots such as access, lot size, and lot width, but not require meeting subdivision regulations. This definition shall not include or authorize any land subdivision that involves or will involve the creation of lots for sale or otherwise involves a property transfer for money, tangible or intangible personal property, real property exchanges, or other conveyances for consideration. 
    Land suitability analysis: A method used by land planners, in preparing land use plans at a community wide scale or land plans at a site development scale, to evaluate the fitness of land for various uses based at least partially on environmental criteria. The end product of land suitability analysis is typically a map or set of maps depicting the appropriateness of land areas for various land uses. 
    Land trust: A private, nonprofit conservation organization formed to protect natural resources, such as productive farm or forest land, natural areas, historic structures, and recreational areas. Land trusts purchase and accept donations of conservation easements. Land Trusts educate the public about the need to conserve land and some provide land-use and estate planning services to local governments and individual citizens. 
    Letter of credit: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee whereby a subdivider secures an instrument from a bank or other institution or from a person with resources sufficient to cover the cost of improvements required by the City of LaFayette. The instrument pledges the creditor to pay the cost of improvements in case of default by the subdivider. 
    Lot: A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description (such as on a subdivision plat of record or a survey map or plat) or described by metes and bounds, and intended for use, transfer of ownership, or for building development. The word "lot" shall not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
    Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of public road right-of-ways or private roads or access easements, where they exist. 
    Lot, corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
    Lot, double frontage: A lot other than a corner lot that has frontage upon two (2) or more streets that do not intersect at a point abutting the property. 

    Lot, flag: A tract or lot of land of uneven dimensions in which the portion fronting on a street is less than the required minimum width required for construction of a building or structure on that lot. Such lots have elongated access from the road and a conventionally proportioned building site at the rear of the lot. 
    Lot, through: See "Lot, double frontage". 
    Lot frontage: The width in linear feet of a lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any street. 
    Lot of record: A lot which is part of a subdivision approved in accordance with land subdivision requirements, a plat of which has been lawfully recorded in the records of the Clerk of the Walker County Superior Court; or a parcel of land, the deed of which was lawfully recorded in the same office prior to the adoption of this ordinance. 
    Lot width: The shortest distance between side lot lines measured at the regulatory/required front building line, or in the absence of a front building line regulation, the distance between side lot lines measured at the front line of the building located or intended to be located on the lot. 

    Metes and bounds: A system of describing and identifying land by distances or measures (metes) and bearings or direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference, such as a monument or other marker or the corner of intersecting roads. 
    Model home: A principal residential building, temporarily open to viewing by prospective homebuyers, on property containing or proposed to contain a residential subdivision, and which may also be used temporarily as real estate sales office for lots in the residential subdivision. 
    Mortgage lot: A lot which is created for the primary or sole purpose of meeting the requirement of a bank or lending institution for a loan or mortgage in cases where property descriptions must be smaller than the total acreage of the tract on which the principal building that is the subject of the loan is located. 
    Natural conditions: The flora, fauna, soil and water conditions that would develop on a specific tract of land if all human interference were to be removed. The tract of land must have been undisturbed for a sufficient period of time for natural processes to dominate the tract. This period of time will vary among environments. 
    Off-site: Beyond the boundaries of the property in question. 
    On-site: Within the boundaries of the property in question. 
    Open space: Any combination of primary conservation areas and secondary conservation areas, as defined, that together form a permanent, undivided or relatively undivided, undeveloped area. As much as twenty-five (25) percent of the open space may be devoted to active recreational facilities, as defined. Easements for electric transmission lines or any other above ground improvement shall not be considered open space. Stormwater management features, such as lakes, ponds, and ways, may be considered open space at the discretion of the Land Use Officer, provided that such areas are designed and maintained in a manner that contributes to open space and the aesthetics of the subdivision. 
    Open space, public: An area within a development or subdivision designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of all residents or for the use and enjoyment of the public in general. 
    Original tract: A unit of land which the owner holds under single or unified ownership, or which the owner holds controlling interest on the effective date of this ordinance, where all land abutting said tract is separately owned by others, not related to or associated by business partnership with the owner. 
    Package treatment plant: A sewage treatment facility, usually privately operated, typical having a treatment capacity of less than one million (1,000,000) gallons per day. In most cases, a package treatment plant is considered a temporary means of wastewater treatment until connection to a public sanitary sewerage system is available. 
    Pavement width: The width of a given lane, road, or other road pavement, measured from back-of-curb to back-of-curb, or to the edge of pavement where no curbs are required or exist. 
    Pedestrian way: A public right-of-way or private easement across a block or within a block to provide access for pedestrians and which may, in addition to providing pedestrian access, be used for the installation of utility lines. 
    Performance bond: A type of subdivision improvement guarantee in the form of a bond, secured by the subdivider from a bonding company, in an amount specified by the Building Official to cover the costs of required improvements, and payable to the City. The City may call in the performance bond in the event the subdivider defaults on required improvements. 
    Performance guarantee: Any financial deposit or other security that may be accepted by the City as a guarantee that improvements required as part of an application for subdivision or land development are satisfactorily completed in conformance with approved plans. 
    Person: A natural human being, estate, association, firm, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. 
    Potable water: Water that is suitable for human consumption, human contact, or in the preparation of foods for human consumption. 
    Preliminary plat: A tentative drawing or map of a proposed subdivision. A preliminary plat is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a land subdivision. 
    Planned unit development: A form of development usually characterized by a unified site design for a number of housing units, clustered buildings, common open space, and a mix of building types and land uses in a slightly more dense setting than allowable on separate lots. 
    Professional engineer: An engineer duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of civil engineering. 
    Protective covenants: Contracts made between private parties as to the manner in which land may be used, with the view toward protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. 
    Recreation, active: Leisure activities that are facility oriented, such as swimming pools, tennis courts, and ball fields. 
    Recreation, passive: Leisure activities that are natural resource oriented, such as hiking trails, conservation areas, and nature preserves. 
    Registered land surveyor: A surveyor duly registered or otherwise authorized by the State of Georgia to practice in the field of land surveying. 
    Reservation: The designation by plat or deed of a certain area reserved for possible future public purposes. A reservation does not transfer title of the reserved area to the public unless the local governing body accepts the area for public purposes. 
    Resubdivision: The act of changing an existing lot created by a plat and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia. 
    Reserve strip: A strip of land across the end of, or along the edge of, a street, alley, or lot for the purpose of controlling access which is reserved or held until future street extension or widening. 
    Retaining wall: A wall or similar structure used at a grade change to hold soil on the up-hillside from slumping, sliding, or falling. 
    Retention: The permanent maintenance of storm water on-site. 
    Retention pond: A pond or pool used for the permanent storage of storm water runoff. This pond must be designed with a protective fence similar to the requirements for swimming pools. 
    Right-of-way: A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, or condemnation and intended to be occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, or other similar use. Generally, the right of one to pass over the property of another. 
    Right-of-way, public: That area, distinguished from an easement or private road right-of-way, which is owned in fee-simple title by the local governing body or other government, for the present or future use of roads, roads and highways, together with its drainage facilities and other supporting uses and structures. 
    Right-of-way, private: That area, distinguished from an access easement or public right-of-way, dedicated to property owners of the subdivision involved or to other individuals, and which affords permanent access to abutting property or properties. A private right-of-way is distinguishable from a public road right-of-way in that maintenance and ownership of the road and accessory improvements is by private individuals or a private association rather than the local governing body or another governmental entity. 
    Riprap: Rocks, rubble, or stones, irregularly shaped and at least six (6) inches in diameter, used for erosion control and soil stabilization. 
    Scenic views and sites: Those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the Comprehensive Plan, or by other reasonable means. 
    Sensitive natural area: Any area, as identified now or hereafter by the Department of Natural Resources, which contains one or more of the following: habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; rare or exemplary natural communities; significant landforms, hydroforms, or geological features; and/or other areas so designated by the Department of Natural Resources that are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
    Septic tank: An approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewerage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
    Sewer: An artificial and usually subterranean conduit designed to carry off sewage and/or water. The term includes any pipe, manhole, connection, or other appurtenances thereto, located in a public right-of-way or easement that is designed to transport sewage and/or water. 
    Sewer, sanitary: A sewer that carries sewage and residential, commercial or industrial waste. 
    Sewer, storm: A sewer that carries storm, surface, and ground water drainage but excludes sewage and residential, commercial, and industrial wastes. 
    Sidewalk: A hard-surfaced pedestrian access area adjacent to or within the right-of-way of a public road. 
    Site plan: A drawing of a multi-family residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial development, showing the general layout of a proposed development including among other features the location of buildings, parking areas, and buffers and landscaping. The site plan is the basis for the approval or disapproval of the general layout of a development in the case of a multiple-family residential, institutional, office, commercial, or industrial development. 
    Sight visibility triangle: The areas at the corners of an intersection of two (2) roads, or at the intersection of a road and any driveway, which may vary based on type of road involved, that are to be kept free of vegetation, trees, shrubs, ground covers, berms, fences, buildings, structures, or other materials or objects that may impair or impede a person's ability to observe other persons or traffic on the adjacent intersecting roadway and/or driveway. 
    Slope: Degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually expressed in percent or degree; the ratio of the difference in elevation between two (2) points on the ground, and the horizontal distance between these two (2) points. For purposes of determining steep slopes, slopes shall be measured between two (2) points on the ground separated by five hundred (500) feet or more. 
    Steep slopes: Lands with slopes of at least thirty-five (35) percent, as indicated in the Comprehensive Plan of the City, or which can be calculated with aid of a United States Geological Survey 1:24,000, 7.5 minute quadrangle topographic map or other available topographic information. 
    Street: Any vehicular way, other than an alley, that: 
(a)  Is an existing federal, state, county or municipal roadway; 
(b)  Is constructed and open to vehicle travel as approved by other official action of the Mayor and City Council. 
    Street, collector: Unless otherwise defined by the Major Transportation Plan or Comprehensive Plan, a collector street is a public street whose function is to collect traffic from neighborhoods and local streets and which connects to another public street of equal of greater classification. A collector also may provide direct access to adjacent properties. 
    Street, local: Unless otherwise defined in the Major Transportation Plan or Comprehensive Plan, any public street, except an alley, collector, or arterial, and which has a primary function to provide direct access to adjoining properties and which serves a limited area only, usually a single land subdivision. 
    Street, major arterial: Unless otherwise defined by the Major Transportation Plan or Comprehensive Plan, a major arterial street is a street connecting two (2) or more towns or communities, connecting two (2) highways of equal or greater capacity, or serving as the primary access to a large land area. A major arterial may also serve a large traffic generator (e.g., an industrial area) and perform a secondary function of providing local access. 
    Street, marginal access: A residential street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through-traffic. 
    Street, private: A road or street that has not been accepted for maintenance by the City and that is not owned and maintained by a state, county, city, or another public entity. 
    Subdivider: Any person, as defined by this ordinance, who undertakes the subdivision of land, and any person having such a proprietary interest in land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person. 
    Subdivision: A division of a tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building development, whether immediate or future, including all division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets. The word "subdivision" includes re-subdivision and, when appropriate to the context, relates either to the process of subdividing or to the actual land or area which is subdivided. 
    Subdivision, minor: A subdivision of four (4) or fewer lots, which does not involve the construction of a new public or private street. Because minor subdivisions do not involve the construction of a new public or private street, they are processed administratively by the Building Official as final plat applications that do not require preliminary plat approval. Any improvements to an existing public street abutting the tract proposed for minor subdivision, or the installation of utilities along said existing public road, as may be required to comply with this ordinance, shall be done according to plans and permit requirements of this ordinance. 
    Subdivision, major: The division of a tract or parcel of land into five (5) or more lots which may or may not involve the construction of a new public or private street; or any subdivision that involves the construction of a new public or private street. Because major subdivisions involve construction of a new public or private street or the upgrade of an existing private access way to City standards, construction plans and development permits are required, and major subdivisions are therefore processed in multiple steps including preliminary plat approval (unless specifically exempted), approval of construction plans and issuance of development permits, and final plat approval. 
    Trail: A way designed for and used by equestrians, pedestrians, and/or cyclists using non-motorized bicycles. 
    Tree: Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant usually having a single trunk diameter of three (3) inches or more which normally attains a mature height of a minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
    Tree, flowering ornamental: A tree that produces seasonal flowers and blossoms and is used primarily for aesthetic or ornamental purposes (e.g., flowering dogwood; eastern redbud). 
    Tree, hardwood: Any leaf-bearing (not needle-bearing) tree that is not coniferous (cone bearing). This definition is based on the colloquialism, and does not necessarily reflect any true qualities of the tree. 
    Tree, shade: A broadleaf tree having an average height at maturity of at least twenty (20) feet and having a broad spread relative to its height (excluding trees with pyramidal, conical, or columnar crowns) and a dense canopy, so as to provide shade to structures or parking areas in the summer months. 
    Undergrounding: The placement of utility lines below ground, with the removal of above-ground poles, wires and structures as applicable. 
    Utility: Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines, roads, cable telephone line, fiber optic cable, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, storm water systems and drainage ways, and railroads or other utilities identified by the City. As appropriate to the context, the term "utility" may also include all persons, companies, or governmental agencies supplying the same. 
    Vacation: The termination of, or termination of interest in, an easement, right-of-way, or public dedication of land. 
    Variance: A grant of relief from the strict requirements of this ordinance which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this ordinance; a minimal relaxation or modification of the strict terms of this ordinance as applied to specific property when, because of particular physical surroundings, shape, or topographical condition of the property, compliance would result in practical difficulty; or a grant of relief from the strict requirements of this ordinance due to a proposed project not being able to meet policies and objectives specifically identified in the Comprehensive Plan. Variances must be approved by the Board of Appeals. 
    Vicinity map: A map, not necessarily to scale, showing the general location of the proposed subdivision or land development in relation to major roads, government boundaries, and/or natural features. 
    Well: A hole or shaft excavated, bored, drilled, dug, or driven to tap an underground supply of water. 
(5)  Authority and Delegation. 
1.  Authority. These regulations are adopted pursuant to powers vested in the City of LaFayette by the State of Georgia Constitution, Georgia Law, home rule powers, state administrative rules for the adoption and implementation of Comprehensive Plans, and the protection of vital areas of the State. 
2.  Delegation of Powers to Planning Commission. The Planning Commission is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, and disapprove preliminary plats of major subdivisions, and to give an opinion on granting variances from the requirements of this ordinance. The Zoning Appeals Board has the authority to grant variances to the ordinances dealing with major subdivisions. Only the City Council has the authority to give final approval of major subdivisions. 
3.  Delegation of Powers to the Building Official. The Building Official is vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove final plats of minor subdivisions and minor re-subdivisions, lot combination plats, lot line adjustments, dedication plats, construction plans and final plats of major subdivisions when preliminary plat approval has been obtained from the Planning Commission. The Building Official shall also be authorized to review major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions for conformity to the requirements of this ordinance, and to make reports and recommendations to the Planning Commission on major subdivisions and major re-subdivisions, and to administer, interpret, and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
4.  Delegation of Powers to the Building Official. The City's Building Official is vested with the authority to require and approve land development improvements and to require improvement guarantees for public improvements as specified in this ordinance. The Building Official will use approved City of LaFayette technical documents such as approved design specification for water, sewer, gas and road design to implement all improvements. 
(6)  Applicability and General Provisions. 
1.  Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to all real property within the corporate limits of the City of LaFayette, Georgia. 
2.  Land is One Tract Until Subdivided. Until property proposed for subdivision has received final plat approval and been properly recorded, the land involving the subdivision shall be considered as one tract, or as otherwise legally recorded. 
3.  Subdivision of Land. No person shall sell, advertise, or offer to sell, by deed, map, plat or other instrument, any parcel of land not subdivided under the requirements of this ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer or sell land by reference to, or by exhibition of, or by other use of, a plat of a land subdivision that has not been approved and recorded in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. The description of such land by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer shall not exempt the transaction. No plat of land subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County, and it shall be unlawful to record such a plat of land subdivision, unless and until it shall have been approved in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
4.  Development or Improvement of Land. No person shall disturb or develop land or engage in development except in accordance with this ordinance. It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to disturb or develop any land until construction plans submitted and development permit, if required, has been approved by the Building Official in accordance with this ordinance. No person shall begin construction of any improvement on any lot prior to the approval of a preliminary plat, if required by this ordinance, nor prior to approval of a development plan for said improvement as required by this ordinance. The Building Official shall not authorize or permit the clearance of trees and vegetative materials, except for grubbing, outside approved construction limits. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  Preliminary Plat and Plans Required Prior to Construction. No person shall commence construction of any improvements on any lot, prior to the approval of a preliminary plat if required by this ordinance, nor prior to approval of construction plans and engineering plans for said improvements are approved as required by this ordinance. 
7.  Building and Other Permits. No building permit or certificate of occupancy, if required by the local government, shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, on any parcel of land regulated by this ordinance that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
8.  Public Streets and Lands. No land dedicated as a public street or for other public purpose shall be opened, extended, or accepted as a public street or for other public land unless such improvements are constructed in accordance with the specifications of this ordinance and said land and/or improvements are formally approved and accepted as public improvements by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with procedures established in this ordinance. 
9.  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by an interpretation or decision of the Building Official or other official responsible for the administration of this ordinance may file an appeal to the Board of Appeals in accordance with Section 29-82 of this code. 
10.  Special Review of Subdivisions along State Routes. No subdivision plat containing land that abuts a state route shall be approved until such plat has been submitted for review and comment by the Georgia Department of Transportation, in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 32-6-151. When the City of LaFayette receives such a plat, it shall be required that the subdivider or developer submit two copies of the proposed subdivision plat to the Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) if such proposed subdivision includes or abuts on any part of the state highway system. The GDOT shall recommend approval and note its recommendation on the copy of the plans to be returned to the City's Building Official or recommend rejection. If the plat is recommended for rejection, the reasons for rejection and requirements for approval shall be indicated in writing. A recommendation for rejection shall be binding on the Building Official and the Planning Commission unless the Planning Commission, by official action recorded in its minutes, overrules the recommendation for rejection. 
(7)  Exemptions from Plat Approval. The following types of land subdivisions, transfers, and sales are specifically exempted from the plat approval requirements of this ordinance; provided, however, that such exemptions shall not apply to land development requirements and improvement requirements of this ordinance. 
(a)  The creation and sale of cemetery plots. 
(b)  The sale of lots consistent with previously approved and recorded plats or deeds. 
(c)  The creation of leaseholds for space within a multiple-occupancy building or the division of property into leaseholds for commercial, industrial, or institutional use. 
(d)  The creation of leaseholds for the agricultural use of property where the use does not involve the construction of a building to be used as a residence or for other purposes not directly related to agricultural use of the land or crops or livestock raised thereon. 
(e)  Any division of land to heirs through a judicial estate proceeding, or any division of land pursuant to a judicial partition, or any division of land occurring from the foreclosure of a deed of trust; provided, however, that such exemption shall not require the City to issue permits if the resulting lots or parcels fail to meet any applicable regulations of the local jurisdiction concerning lot size, lot width, and other dimensional requirements. 
(f)  Intra-family land transfers and mortgage lots, as defined by this ordinance. 
These exemptions from plat approval do not relieve the landowner from land development requirements established in this ordinance. 
(8)  Lot Combinations. An existing lot line forming the boundary between two (2) conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision or a lot line between lots or parcels that have merged to form one (1) building lot may be removed or eliminated through a final plat revision process which conforms to the requirements of this ordinance. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat depicting all lots involved in the lot combination shall be required to be approved by the Building Official and recorded as a final plat. Such combination plat shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision, if applicable, and shall indicate thereon that the replat is for the purpose of removing the lot lines between specific lots. (See Figure). 

(9)  Boundary Line Adjustments. One or more existing lot lines forming boundaries between conforming platted lots located within the same subdivision, or one or more lot lines between abutting lots or parcels may be adjusted through a final plat revision process that requires the approval of the Building Official and recording of a plat meeting the specifications of a final plat. In the case no final plat applies to the subject lots or parcels, a boundary survey and plat of the entire lots involved in the boundary line adjustment shall be required to be approved by the Building Official and recorded. Such plat showing said boundary line adjustment shall be titled with the same name as that of the original subdivision and shall include thereon that the replat is for the purpose of adjusting the lot lines between specific lots. (See Figure) 

(10)  Design Requirements for Blocks. 
1.  Block Length. Intersecting streets shall be provided at such intervals so as to provide adequate cross traffic. Blocks in residential subdivisions should not exceed eighteen hundred (1,800) feet nor be less than six hundred (600) feet in length, except where topography or other conditions justify a departure from these standards. The Planning Commission may require pedestrian ways and/or easements through the block be located near the center in blocks longer than eight hundred (800) feet. 
2.  Block Width. The width of the block shall normally be sufficient to allow two (2) tiers of lots of appropriate depth. Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be of such width as to be considered most suitable for their respective use, including adequate space for off-street parking and deliveries. (See Figure). 

(11)  Design Requirements for Lots. 
1.  Natural Features and Assets. In the subdividing of land, appropriate consideration must be given to all natural features, such as tree growth, watercourses, historic sites or similar conditions which, if preserved, will add attractiveness to the proposed development and safety from hazards. At the preliminary review meeting the developer must submit an aerial map showing all natural features and assets to discuss developer's plan for development. 
2.  Access and Minimum Lot Frontage. Each lot shall have access to a public street and a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet in R-2, R-3 and B-2 zones and ninety (90) feet for R-1 zoning for lots adjacent to public street, flag lots are allowed to have twenty-five (25) feet or more of lot frontage on a public street; provided, however, that the local governing body may permit one or more lots to be accessed by private streets, as more fully specified in this ordinance; provided further, that in the case of a lot accessed by a circular cul-de-sac, the minimum lot frontage may be reduced to thirty (30) feet with a minimum width of seventy-five (75) feet at the setback line. All lot widths except for the flag lot may be given a variance if reviewed and approved according to ordinance. 
3.  Adequate Buildable Area Required. Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or that is unsuitable for residential or other use for topographical or other reasons, shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or of property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. Each lot shall contain an adequate building site with positive drainage from the buildable area not subject to flooding and outside the limits of any existing easements or building setback lines required by the local governing body (See Figure). Considerable evaluation should be given to lots where the drainage either surface or subsurface has a real negative affect. These are usually the last lots sold in the subdivision. 

4.  Lot Remnants Not Permitted. All remnants of lots below any required minimum lot size that may be required, left over after subdividing of a larger tract, must be added to adjacent lots, rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. The Building Official may permit a lot remnant for a specific purpose such as a detention pond, provided that access and design is appropriate and the lot remnant is restricted to specific non-building use. 
5.  Service Areas. Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to the use intended. 
6.  Lot Area. The minimum lot area shall not be less than that established by the zoning regulation in which the subdivision is located, or any other such ordinance provisions, if applicable. 
7.  Lot Width. No portion of a lot shall be narrower than that established by the zoning ordinance in which the subdivision exists, with the exception of cul-de-sac lots at the street frontage and flag lots that have a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. If sewers are not available the health department must establish the lot size requirement if a septic system is allowed. 
8.  Lot Depth. Lots shall have a depth of not less than one hundred (100) feet, unless circumstances make these limitations impracticable. 
A variance of lot sizes and dimensions may be given during the subdivision approval process, but not for individual lots. Additional approval must be given by the Board of Appeals and City Council. 
9.  Flag lots. 
(a)  Intent. Flag lots, as defined in this ordinance, are strongly discouraged. However, subdivisions designed with one (1) or more flag lots may be approved where conditions of hardship make standard design or frontage impossible or impractical due to the configuration of the lot to be subdivided. 
(b)  Denial if reasonable alternative exists. The Building Official in the case of minor subdivisions and the Planning Commission in the case of other subdivisions shall have due cause to deny any plat that proposes any flag lot, when a reasonable alternative to such lot pattern is available. 
(c)  Panhandle (flag pole) length restriction. If permitted, no flag lot shall be allowed to be platted that has a "panhandle" portion (i.e., portion that does not meet the required lot width) that is more than four hundred (400) feet in length. 
(d)  Prohibition of abutting flag lots. If permitted, no flag lot shall abut another flag lot in any subdivision. 
10.  Side Lot Lines. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. 
11.  Corner Lots. Corner lots shall have adequate width to meet the front building setback requirements, if applicable, from all rights-of-way. 
12.  Double Frontage Lots. Double frontage or "through" lots should be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from arterials or overcome specific disadvantages of topography or orientation. Double frontage lots with frontage on a major arterial street shall have additional depth in order to allow space for screen planting along the lot line abutting a major arterial street. 
13.  Mortgage Lot. This provision addresses situations where a bank or other lending institution requires the creation of a small (e.g., 1-acre to 5-acre) tract of property from a larger existing parcel (usually farmland or timber land) in order to provide a mortgage or loan on a home or other principal building, rather than referring to the entire existing lot of record. 
(a)  In cases where a person can show the Building Official in writing that an application for loan or mortgage involving real property has been filed with a bank or lending institution, and said bank or lending institution requires, for purposes of the loan or mortgage, a description of property that encompasses less land area than the lot of record, one (1) or two (2) mortgage lots (see definition) may be lawfully created from the parcel of record without constituting a subdivision. Minimum lot sizes established by any land use district or other ordinance requirement of the City shall not be construed to prevent the creation of mortgage lots pursuant to this subsection, even if the resulting mortgage lot created is less than the minimum lot size required by said land use district or other ordinance requirement. The applicant shall be required in the case of a mortgage lot to file with the Building Official a copy of the survey plat creating the mortgage lot, and may be recorded in the records of the Walker County Superior Court Clerk as a mortgage lot plat of record. 
(b)  If created, a mortgage lot shall be no less than one (1) acre and no larger than five (5) acres in size. This provision shall not allow for the creation of a mortgage lot from any lot of record that is five (5) acres or less in area. 
(c)  No mortgage lot shall be created unless it meets the requirements within this ordinance for creating a lot. 
(12)  Easements. Where a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream traverses a subdivision, these conveyances must be maintained by the property owners of property on which they exist unless the City of LaFayette agrees to maintain them and the drainage conveyance has a City approved easement connecting to a public right-of-way giving access to the conveyance. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities that are approved and accepted by the City of LaFayette. Where easements are needed for utility locations, the subdivider shall provide them as Utility Easements to the City at a width designated by the City. All easements required pursuant to this section shall be shown on the preliminary plat and recorded on the final plat. All easement areas as designated for a subdivision must be accepted by the City or the area will be maintained by the owner of the property on which the easement exists. 
(13)  Survey Monuments for All Lots Required. For all subdivisions, a Georgia registered land surveyor shall install permanent survey monuments at all property corners and land lot lines, prior to final plat approval. Lot corners shall be marked with metal rods not less than one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and eighteen (18) inches in length and driven so as to be stabilized in the ground. Permanent survey monuments shall also be installed in accordance with the most recent edition of Section 180-7-.05 Monument, of the Rules of State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers & Land Surveyors and the Georgia Plat Act (O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67). At least four (4) permanent monuments shall have GPS coordinates given for each subdivision plat. 
(14)  Preliminary Plat. 
1.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure compliance with the basic design concepts and improvement requirements of subdivisions and land developments through the submittal of a preliminary plat of all major and minor subdivisions for review and approval by the Building Official and the City's Planning Commission (major subdivision only unless desired by the Building Official to review minor subdivisions). 
2.  Required. All major and minor subdivisions, as defined, shall require the submission of a preliminary plat to the Building Official for review and approval. Review and approval by the Planning Commission (for major subdivisions only). Prior to the issuance of any permit for land disturbance or development, or the installation of any improvements, the Planning Commission must approve the preliminary plat, if required. 
3.  Preliminary Plat Application and Specifications. Preliminary plat applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 4-1, and preliminary plats shall meet the minimum plat specifications shown in Table 4-2. 
4.  Procedures. Upon receipt of a completed preliminary plat application, the Building Official shall schedule the application for the next public meeting before the Planning Commission and forward all pertinent materials in the application to the Planning Commission for review. An application for preliminary plat approval must be submitted as least seven (7) days before the regular meeting date of the Planning Commission to be considered on that agenda. The Planning Commission shall have up to thirty-two (32) days from the date the public meeting is held to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the preliminary plat application. The basis of the Planning Commission's review of and action on a preliminary plat shall be whether the preliminary plat meets the purposes and requirements of this ordinance, and all other ordinances that relate to the proposed development. The Planning Commission will set their next meeting date if necessary to approve the preliminary plat. 
5.  Disposition. Approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of one (1) year, in which time a completed construction plans application must be submitted. If a completed application for construction plans is not submitted during that time, preliminary plat approval shall expire and be null and void. 
6.  Amendments to Approved Preliminary Plats. The Building Official is authorized to approve minor amendments to preliminary plats. Any proposed amendment to a preliminary plat that is determined by the Building Official to constitute a public interest shall be deemed a major amendment. For all amendments to preliminary plats determined to be major amendments, Planning Commission approval shall be required. The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the proposed major amendment to a preliminary plat. Procedures for considering a major amendment to a preliminary plat shall be the same as required for an initial application for preliminary plat approval. 
(15)  Construction Plans and Development Permit. 
1.  Application. Upon approval of a preliminary plat and proof of mailing is given to the City that notification has been made to Georgia EPD of land disturbing activity (NOI) and providing the City a copy of the E. & S. Plan (if required), the subdivider or land developer may request a construction plan approval and approval of a development from the City. The construction plan approval and development permitting process is administrative. Applications for construction plan approval and development permit shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 4-1 and Table 4-2. No application for construction plans shall be accepted for processing nor development permit approved by the Building Official until a preliminary plat has been approved by the Planning Commission (for major subdivisions only) and the proposed construction plans are found by the Building Official to be in substantial conformity with said approval and any conditions of such approval. 
2.  Decision Criteria. The only basis upon which the Building Official may deny a construction plan or development permit is the failure of the application to meet the requirements of this ordinance or any other applicable local regulations or the failure of the construction plans and application to meet the requirements of preliminary plat approval specified by the Planning Commission. 
3.  Certificate of Approval. All copies of the construction plans shall be noted by inscription on the plan noting such approval by the Building Official. Construction plan approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year, unless substantial activity toward improvements on the land has been initiated and said substantial activity is ongoing, or unless the Building Official approves an extension of time. 
4.  Engineered Drawings. Engineering drawings for public streets, including cross sections and centerline profiles, and public and private water, sewer, drainage, and utility systems, shall be certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Georgia. Prior to approval and recording of a final plat, or prior to the approval of any certificate of occupancy, a registered engineer or a registered land surveyor for the subdivider/developer shall submit one (1) copy of all finished, as-built plans of improvements in an approved format, demonstrating that said improvements, as installed, meet the requirements of this ordinance and certifying that the plans accurately reflect actual construction and installation. The Office of the Building Official shall maintain all as-built street and utility plans for future use by the City. 
5.  Permits for Construction in Public Right-Of-Way. Permits from the Office of the Building Official shall be required for construction in any public right-of-way. Permits will not be issued until such time that plans have been submitted meeting all the local, state and federal regulations and requirements and the plans must also be reviewed and approved by the Building Official. 
6.  Improvements to Abutting Land. For subdivisions and land developments that abut and access an abutting City public street, the subdivider or land developer shall install curb and gutter, sidewalk, other road improvements, and, if required, a deceleration lane, according to standards and specifications of this ordinance and of the City of LaFayette, along all abutting City public streets. When a subdivision or land development uses an unpaved public right-of-way for access, the subdivider or land developer shall improve that right-of-way to a pavement width consistent with City road design standards. Said improvements shall be from the subdivision or land development entrance to the paved City road which the Building Official determines will be the primary direction of travel for residents of the subdivision or occupants of the land development. Said right of way shall be improved by the developer/subdivider to meet all criteria established by the City for street design and construction. 
(16)  Final Plat. 
1.  When Required. All major subdivisions, resubdivisions, minor subdivisions, and dedications shall require final plat approval. The final plat approval process is administrative. 
Applications shall be made in accordance with requirements shown in Table 4-1. 
All final plats must have a state licensed surveyor's or engineer's stamp and signature thereon. 
Table 4-1 
Application Requirements 
REQUIREMENT MINOR SUBDIVISION MAJOR SUBDIVISION Preliminary Plat Construction Plans Final Plat Pre-application review with staff Required Application form completed Required Required Required Required Letter requesting approval with name, address, and phone of applicant Required Required Number of copies of plat 4 8 8 10 Filing fee per Resolution/schedule Mayor and City Council to determine Required Required Required Required Description of type of water supply and sewerage system and utilities to be provided Required Required Required Required Letter of approval from Walker County Health Department for any septic tank use. Required Required Required Required Data on existing conditions Required Required Hydrological or other engineering study If Building Official Requires Required Subdivision entrance monument and landscaping elevation/plan Required Warranty deed for the dedication of streets and other public places Required Required Approval from each City Utility indicating that it will supply the utility to the project Required Required As-built drawings of public improvements Required Required Subdivision improvement guarantee Required Required Certificate of title Required Required Plat Certificates Required Required Surveyor Stamp and signature Required Required  
2.  Criteria for Approval. The Building Official may grant final plat approval if the following conditions, as applicable, are met. 
(a)  The Planning Commission has previously approved a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision, if required (not required for minor subdivision). 
(b)  Where new improvements are involved in the subdivision, construction plans have been approved by the Building Official, all improvements have been installed and inspected by the Building Official, and subdivision improvement guarantees as required by this ordinance have been submitted. 
(c)  The final plat meets all applicable requirements of this ordinance. 
(d)  A complete final plat application has been submitted, including all supporting materials required by this ordinance for final plats. 
The Building Official shall consider final plats and applications that meet the above-referenced conditions a ministerial action of approval. Denial of a final plat shall be permitted only upon specific findings that one or more of the above-referenced criteria have not been met. 
Table 4-2 
Plat and Plan Requirements 
REQUIRED INFORMATION (Required to be on the plat or construction plans) Preliminary Plat Construction Plans Final Plat Scale (minimum) 1"=100 feet 1"=100 feet 1"=100 feet Sheet size (maximum) 24×36" 24"×36" 24"×36" North arrow and graphic engineering scale Required Required Required Reference to north point (magnetic, true north, or grid north) Required Required Required Proposed name of subdivision or project and phases, if any Required Required Required Vicinity map Required Required Required Total acreage of the property being subdivided Required Required Required Name, address, and telephone of owner of record Required Required Required Name, address and telephone of subdivider Required Required Required Name, address and telephone of preparer of plat Required Required Required Date of plat drawing and revision date(s), if any Required Required Required Exact boundaries of the tract to be subdivided by bearings and distances, tied to one or more benchmarks all subdivision lot lines with GPS coordinates (as required Sect. 29-36.13) Required Required Required Names of owners of record of all abutting land Required Required Required Municipal, County and land lot lines inside the property or within 500 feet. Required Required Required Existing buildings and structures on or encroaching on the tract to be subdivided Required Required Not Shown Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract Required Required Required Environmental conditions (streams, wetlands, watershed protection districts, flood hazard areas, river corridor boundaries, etc.) Required Required Required Block boundaries lettered and each lot numbered consecutively counterclockwise without repetition Required Required Dimensions and acreage of all lots Approximate Approximate Exact Locations of streets, alleys, lots, open spaces, and any public use reservations and/or common areas Required Required Required Right-of-way widths and pavement widths for existing and proposed streets Required Required Required Locations, widths and purposes of easements Required Required Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature and curve data Required Required Acreage to be dedicated to the public Discussed Required Street names Required Required Street mailing address for each lot Required Topography Required Required Not Shown Minimum front building setback lines for all lots Required Required Required Location and description of all monuments Required Certificate of ownership and dedication Required Plat recording and signature block Required Plat Certificates: survey, owner, health department (see text) Required Signature block for Planning Commission approval Required Required Land surveyor's stamp, certificate, signature, including field survey and closure statement Required Required Statement of and reference to private covenants Recommended Required Schedule of construction for all proposed projects with particular attention to development planned for the first year Required Required  
3.  Approval Certificate. Upon approval of the final plat, a certificate, stamped directly on the plat, shall state: 
"Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of City of LaFayette, Georgia, and all requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this final plat was given preliminary approval by the Planning Commission on ___________, 20___, and final approval by the Building Official and it is entitled to recordation in the Clerk's Office, Walker County Superior Court. 
  
_____     
"Building Official" 
4.  Additional Plat Certificates. In addition to information required by Table 4-1 to be supplied on a final plat, each final plat shall contain the following certificates. 
Surveyor's Certificate. A certificate by a Georgia Registered Land Surveyor directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or persons under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "future," and that their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Subdivisions and Land Development Ordinance of City of LaFayette, Georgia, have been fully complied with. 
By: _____     
Registered Georgia Land Surveyor No.:___" 
Owner's Certificate. A certificate by the owner directly on the final plat, signed in an appropriate manner as follows: 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, and that all State, City and County taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid. Said owner donates and dedicates to the public for use forever the public street right-of-ways as shown on this plat. 
_____     
Owner 
Signed, sealed and delivered 
in the presence of: 
_____
Witness 
_____     
Notary Public" 
Health Department Approval Certificate. 
"This final plat has been approved by the Walker County Health Department as being consistent with applicable state and local environmental health requirements. 
_____     
Director of Walker County Health Department" 
[5.]  Distribution of Recorded Final Plat. The final plat is a source of essential information to tax officials, public safety officials, and utility officials, among others. The Owner or Developer shall be responsible for ensuring that each agency listed in this subsection receives a copy of the final recorded plat with assigned addresses: 
1.  The County Tax Commissioner 
2.  The County Tax Assessor 
3.  The County Health Department 
4.  The County GIS Coordinator 
5.  The County 911 Coordinator 
6.  The County Public Works Department 
At the discretion of the Building Official, additional agencies or persons may be added to the above list. 
(17)  Dedications of Streets and Public Lands. Public improvements shall be inspected by a City official according to local and state regulations as they are constructed. The Building Official shall inspect all public improvements and shall notify the subdivider or land developer in writing of nonacceptance or preliminary acceptance. If the public improvements are not acceptable, the reason for non-acceptance shall be stated and corrective measures shall be outlined in a letter of notification. Upon notification, the subdivider or land developer shall correct all deficiencies identified in the non-acceptance letter within the time limit established by the Building Official. Once deficiencies are corrected, the subdivider or land developer shall again request inspection in writing. Acceptance of public improvements as required by this ordinance shall be made by the local governing body. As-built drawings of the improvements in acceptable format shall be submitted to the Engineering Department following approval. 
Subdivision streets and right-of-ways and other lands to be dedicated to the public shall be accepted or rejected by the City upon formal dedication by the Owner. Upon acceptance a general warranty deed conveying fee simple title of such right-of-ways and lands must be provided by the owner/developer to the City. The warranty deed shall be accompanied by an attorney's certificate of title and a tax transfer form addressed to the Mayor and City Council certifying that the grantor in such deed is vested with marketable fee simple title to the property conveyed thereby, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, and further that the individual executing such deed has full authority to do so. Acceptance of such dedication shall be accomplished by Resolution of the Mayor and City Council. 
(18)  Subdivision Improvement Guarantees. In order to protect the City and prospective purchasers of and residents in a subdivision, the subdivider/developer shall provide to the City financial security to guarantee the installation of public improvements including all phases of the project up to and including completion for both Minor and Major Subdivisions having a land size of three (3) acres or more. The subdivider's or developer's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
(a)  An escrow of funds with the City; 
(b)  An escrow with a bank or other financial institution upon which the City can draw; 
(c)  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the City can draw; 
(d)  A performance bond for the benefit of the City upon which the City can collect, or a certificate of deposit with assignment letter; and 
(e)  Any other form of guarantee approved by the Mayor and City Council that will satisfy the objectives of this section. The guarantee shall be in an amount to secure the full costs, as determined solely by the City, of constructing or installing the improvements and utilities required. 
(19)  Limitations on Minor Subdivisions. 
1.  Purpose. Minor subdivisions provide certain advantages, such as a shorter application process and less public scrutiny, that tend to favor their use over the filing of major subdivision applications. Given these advantages, the prospect exists that subdividers may seek to divide a parcel via consecutive and/or contiguous minor subdivisions instead of filing for a major subdivision. It is the intent of the Mayor and City Council to prohibit the practice of "chain" subdivisions where the same land owner subdivides land and then files minor subdivision applications on common contiguous parcels, which collectively total more than four (4) lots. It is also the intent of the Mayor and City Council to prohibit minor subdivisions adjacent to each other within a three-year time period, in cases where part of an original tract of land is now owned by another person or entity and was transferred or sold to another owner with the apparent intent to circumvent the major subdivision process. 
2.  Common Contiquous Parcels Shown on Minor Subdivision Plats. Contiguous common parcels, as defined by this ordinance, shall be referenced on all applications for minor subdivisions, and contiguous common parcels shall be considered part of any application for minor subdivision, for purposes of determining whether or not the division of land proposed is a major subdivision or a minor subdivision. Common contiguous parcels shall not be counted as lots in the case of a minor subdivision. 
3.  Limitations. Land within a minor subdivision, including all contiguous parcels owned by the subdivider, shall not be further divided for a period of three (3) years unless a preliminary plat application is filed and approved as a major subdivision pursuant to the requirements of this ordinance. If property proposed to be subdivided was part of an original tract, and if the property proposed to be subdivided abuts land that has been divided as a minor subdivision in the last three (3) years, then minor subdivision of said property shall be prohibited. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the approval of two (2) contiguous minor subdivisions under separate ownership; however, this provision is intended to be construed so that one property owner does not develop a minor subdivision on part of an original tract and transfer or sell another part of the original tract for the purposes of minor subdivision within a three-year period. It is the intent that land abutting a minor subdivision that was owned by the subdivider of the abutting minor subdivision shall not be subdivided as a minor subdivision for a period of three (3) years, regardless of ownership. 
(20)  Standards for Configuring New Streets. 
1.  Purpose and Intent. The entire community enjoys the benefits of an interconnected network of streets and roads. It is the intention of the City that new street alignments in new developments reflect the traditional style exhibited throughout older, established neighborhoods. Interconnected streets afford easier, safer access for emergency vehicles, school buses, and sanitation trucks while distributing traffic more evenly and avoiding excess traffic on certain central residential streets. Street patterns that result in isolated pockets of development with relatively little interconnectivity are strongly discouraged. Wherever cul-de-sacs or hammerhead turnarounds are unavoidable (typically for topographic reasons) they must always be provided with bicycle or pedestrian linkages to other nearby streets or to a neighborhood trail system. Wherever possible, cul-de-sacs should be designed to include a central island preserving existing greenery or, alternatively, planted with approved trees, shrubs, and plants. 
2.  Street Alignment, Intersections and Jogs. Streets shall be aligned to join with planned or existing streets. Under normal conditions, streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles (ninety (90) degrees), but in no case shall such a street intersection be less than seventy-five (75) degrees. Where street offsets or jogs cannot be avoided, offset "T" intersections shall be separated by a minimum centerline offset of one hundred fifty (150) feet in urban areas and three hundred (300) feet in rural areas. (See Figure). 

3.  Continuation of Existing Streets and Connections. Existing streets, and their rights-of-way, shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. The Planning Commission may require that a major subdivision provide one or more future connections to adjoining subdivisions or unsubdivided tracts. 
4.  Street Plans for Future Phases of the Tract. Where the plat or site plan proposed to be subdivided or developed includes only part of the tract owned or intended for subdivision or development by the subdivider or land developer, a tentative plan of a future street system for the portion not slated for immediate subdivision consideration shall be required by the Building Official and shall be prepared and submitted by the subdivider or land developer. 
5.  Dead-End Streets and Cul-De-Sacs. Streets that dead-end shall terminate in a cul-de-sac. The maximum length of such streets shall be six hundred (600) feet in urban areas and twelve hundred (1,200) feet in rural areas. Streets that are planned to continue at some future date shall provide a temporary cul-de-sac as required by the Building Official. 
6.  Marginal Access Streets. Whenever a major subdivision is proposed abutting the right-of-way of a U.S. or State highway, a marginal access street approximately parallel and adjacent to such right-of-way may be required by the Planning Commission at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of land between such marginal access street and highway right-of-way. The Planning Commission may also require a twenty-foot no-access easement and planting strip along the major arterial street to ensure that lots fronting on said street do not have access thereto. (See Figure). 

7.  Alleys and Service Access. Alleys may be provided. If they are provided, they must at least be graveled. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible; but if unavoidable, they shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities. Service access shall be provided to commercial and industrial developments for off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(21)  Requirements for Streets. 
1.  Bridges. Bridges on public rights-of-way shall meet current American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials standards. 
2.  Grading and Stabilization of street Rights-of-Ways. When a new public street is proposed, all trees, brush, stumps, rocks, or other debris shall be cleared from the street right-of-way, except in cases where trees are required to be preserved by the Building Official. All streets shall be graded to lines, grades and cross sections approved on plans. All unsurfaced, disturbed portions of street rights-of-way shall be stabilized by seeding, fertilizing, and mulching or by another equally effective method. 
3.  Radius at Street Intersections. The right-of-way radius at street intersections shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet, with larger radii for streets serving nonresidential development, as approved by the Building Official. The minimum pavement (curb) radius at street intersections shall be twenty-five (25) feet. 
4.  Street Grades. No street grade shall be less than one percent. No street grade for an arterial or collector street shall exceed eight (8) percent. No other local street grade shall exceed twelve (12) percent, unless the Building Official finds that due to topographic conditions, a steeper grade is necessary, in which case the street grade shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent. Grades between twelve (12) percent and fifteen (15) percent shall not exceed a length of one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
5.  Minimum Street Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths. Street right-of-way and pavement widths shall at minimum meet the following: 
Street Type Minimum Right-Of-Way Width (Feet) Minimum Pavement Width (Feet) Major arterial street Per thoroughfare plan Per thoroughfare plan Collector street 60 36 Local street with curb and gutter 40 24(back of curb to back of curb) Local street without curb and gutter 50 24 Cul-de-sac turn around radius 50 42(back of curb) Alley 20 16  

Residential Street with Curb and Gutter 
(Cross Section Detail) 

  

Cul-de-Sac Detail 
6.  Street Horizontal Alignment and Reverse Curves. Street horizontal alignments and reverse curves shall at minimum meet the following: 
Street Type Minimum Horizontal Radii Of Center Line Curvature (Feet) Minimum Tangents Between Reverse Curves (Feet) Major arterial street 1,250 250 Collector street 500 100 Local street with curb and gutter 100 50 Local street without curb and gutter 100 50 Dead-end street 100 50  
(22)  Curb Cuts and Access Specifications. 
1.  Entrance Improvement Specifications. Roadway entrances and improvements, including necessary acceleration and/or deceleration lane(s) and right/left turn lanes, shall be designed, installed, and maintained as approved by the State Department of Transportation, as applicable, or the Building Official, in accordance with applicable State or City specifications. All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any state highway shall be approved by the State Department of Transportation and the Building Official prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. All entrances or exits of any street or driveway, public or private, from or to any City street shall be approved by the Building Official prior to the construction of such entrances or exits and prior to the issuance of any land use permit or building permit for any improvement to be served by such entrances or exits. 
2.  Curb Cut Specifications. No curb cut or access driveway shall be permitted to be located closer than fifty (50) feet to the nearest existing or proposed right-of-way of an intersecting roadway. Curb cuts or access driveways shall be no narrower than twenty (20) feet from back of curb to back of curb. Strict adherence to these requirements may not be practical in all instances as determined by the Building Official. The Building Official may limit the maximum width of a curb cut and/or the number of curb cuts to a parcel as necessary when it is deemed to be of benefit to the safety and welfare of the public. 
The following factors may be considered during the review and approval of a specific location of an entrance: the location of existing or planned median breaks; separation requirements between the entrance and major intersections; separation requirements between other entrances; the need to provide shared access with other sites; the need to align with previously approved or constructed access points on the opposite side of the street; and the minimum number of entrances needed to move traffic onto and off the site safely and efficiently. 
3.  Access Along and Near Divided Highways. Where a divided highway exists or is planned, the following access standards shall be met: Minimum separation of intersecting roads and driveways shall be determined during the review of the proposed plan. Part of the determining factor will be the traffic congestion that is being created. 
4.  Interparcel Connections. New development that contains or is intended to contain more than one (1) building or use on site shall provide connections so that automobile trips between and among such buildings or uses can be accomplished without using the highway or major street. Where possible and practical, new developments and substantial improvements to existing developments shall provide for pedestrian and automobile access connections between adjacent properties under different ownership when the uses of the properties are of such compatibility that patrons may frequent both buildings or uses in the same vehicle trip. 
(23)  Street Lighting. Street lights may be provided in accordance with City specifications by the developers of a subdivision prior to the approval of a final plat. Fixtures and standards/poles installed or used shall be approved by the City and by the utility company that will be responsible for the maintenance of the facilities. The fixtures shall be mounted no more than thirty (30) feet above the ground and shall have appropriate arm length or power to place light over the street. Post top luminaries may be permitted when approved by the Public Works Director. Fixtures shall be located no more than five hundred (500) feet apart, unless approved by the Public Works Director, and, when provided, at least one (1) light shall be located at each public or private street intersection within the subdivision or land development. 
The developer shall pay all costs for poles, fixtures and any other related items or materials necessary for the installation of street lights. All electric utilities will be installed and approved by the Electrical Department and will be accepted as part of the City's electrical system upon completion. Maintenance and operation costs of street lights will be assumed by the City no earlier than one year after lights have been installed. 
(24)  Street Signs. Signs for street names, directions of travel, traffic control, and hazards shall be provided as directed by the Public Works Department. Street signs on exterior/boundary streets shall be installed by the City with the developer paying a proportionate share determined by the City. Street signs for interior streets of a subdivision or land development shall be installed at the subdivider or developer's expense by the subdivider or developer, subject to the approval of the Public Works Department. 
Unless otherwise provided in standards and specifications adopted by the City, street signs shall meet the following specifications as hereinafter set forth. Signs shall be constructed of aluminum sheets with reflective backgrounds. Information on the street name signs shall be readable from both sides of the sign. Signs shall be installed on a steel post. The vertical distance from the road elevation to the bottom of the sign face shall be seven (7) feet with a minimum burial depth of three (3) feet. 
(25)  Curbs and Gutters. Curbs and gutters shall be installed if required by the Public Works Department in accordance with standards and specifications of the City. All residential, commercial and industrial subdivisions and land developments must have curbs and gutters, regardless of the size of the lots. When property fronting on an existing City street is subdivided or developed, and the subdivision or land development uses said existing street for access, then curb and gutter shall be required along said street along the entire property frontage of said street. Extruded concrete and asphalt curbs may be allowed if approved during the review process. 
Curbs shall be concrete which shall be class A 3000 psi strength at twenty-eight (28) days. The typical curb minimum section shall be six (6) inches by twenty-four (24) inches by twelve (12) inches (see Figure). 

Vertical Curb Detail 
All streets and roads not required to include curbs and gutters shall be graded, paved, and drained to meet all construction and drainage standards for ditches, slopes, and grassing according to specifications established by the City. 
(26)  Sidewalks. 
1.  When Required. Sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan, unless the Building Official determines that no public need exists for sidewalks in a certain location. Sidewalks shall be required when land developments and subdivisions are located within one-mile of a public school. Sidewalks are required to be installed along one side of the street internal to a major subdivision and in minor subdivisions when adjacent areas have sidewalks, except in cases where the median lot size of the major subdivision is two (2) acres or more. 
2.  Location. Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated nonpayment right-of-way of roads and shall parallel the street pavement as much as possible; provided, however, the Building Official may permit sidewalks to be designed and constructed so that they meander around permanent obstructions or deviate from a linear pattern for design purposes. 
3.  Specifications. Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four (4) feet wide. A median strip of grassed or landscaped areas at least two (2) feet wide (could vary as per building official) shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs in residential areas. 
(27)  Private Streets. 
1.  Private Streets are NOT Permitted. 
2.  Construction Plans Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to construct a new private street or alter an existing private street or to cause the same to be done without first obtaining approval of construction plans from the Building Official and a development permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(28)  Drainage and Stormwater Management. 
1.  General Requirements. An adequate drainage system, separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and including any necessary ditches, pipes, culverts, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water for all subdivisions and land developments. Sizing and location of all drainage structures shall be the responsibility of a registered professional engineer or land surveyor. The City shall require the use of on-site control methods such as retention or detention to mitigate the stormwater and drainage impacts of the proposed subdivisions and land developments. The Planning Commission shall not approve any preliminary plat of subdivision that does not make adequate provision for storm and flood water runoff channels or basins as determined by the Building Official. No building permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or development permit issued for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate system of drainage and storm water management that meets all federal, state and local requirements. 
2.  Method of Design and Capacity. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed by the Rational Method, or other methods as approved by the City, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with required plans. Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area within the site and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. Capacity for a ten-year storm or rain shall be provided for all street drainage structures such as catch basin, inlets cross drains, etc. Capacity for a one hundred-year frequency storm event shall be provided for all main drainage structures such as retention basins, principal storm sewers, and all types of flood protection works. 
3.  Location. Drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications of the City. Catch basins shall be located at low points of streets. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual, unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in width for drainage facilities shall be provided across property outside the road right-of-way and with satisfactory access to the road. 
4.  Discharge. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot or land development site to adjacent lots, land development sites, or vacant properties. Storm water shall not be discharged directly to perennial streams. It shall be directed toward natural drainages. If water must be discharged to a stream, the water quality flowing into the stream must meet or exceed the water quality in the receiving waters. The water quantity flowing into the stream must be evaluated to ensure the stream channel can accommodate the increased flows and not disrupt or degrade the ecology of the water body. 
5.  Grading and Site Drainage. Lots or land development sites shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and drainage for individual lots or land development sites shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Buildings and parking lots shall be appropriately drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties or public streets. All disturbed or graded ground areas of a building site not used for buildings or open storage areas shall be appropriately stabilized and grassed or covered with plants or landscaping materials. 
6.  Cross-Drainpipes. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure, the design of which shall be approved by the City. Cross-drains shall be provided to accommodate all natural waterflow, and shall be of sufficient length to permit full-width roadways and the required slopes. Cross drainpipes shall have head walls of an approved type on inlet and outlet ends of the pipe. Pipe installed within the right-of-way shall be reinforced concrete pipe. All storm drainpipes shall be minimum eighteen (18) inches in diameter. Storm sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater than one (1) percent. 
7.  Drop Inlets. Drop inlets shall be generally three-foot by three-foot boxes with two-foot by three-foot grates unless otherwise specified by the City. 
8.  Easements. Where an irrigation ditch or channel, natural creek, stream or other drainage way crosses a subdivision or land development, the subdivider or developer shall provide an easement sufficient for drainage and maintenance. Easements shall be provided for all drainage facilities as approved by the City. When a subdivision or land development is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or intermittent stream, a stormwater or drainage easement of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided. 
(29)  Water. 
1.  Generally. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. The determination of whether the City's existing water system is adequate to serve any new construction shall be made by the City's Water Department and their Engineering Consultant. Providing water for any development must be done while continuing to meet state requirements for the rest of the water system that is affected. No permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate water supply. 
2.  Water Main Requirements. When a public water main is accessible, the developer shall install adequate water facilities, including fire hydrants, according to City specifications and as approved by the City and the State of Georgia. All water mains shall normally be at least six (6) inches in diameter except that pipe of lesser size may be used if properly looped and adequate water pressure is maintained in accordance with standards established by the Southeastern Fire Underwriters Association. Pipe of less than four (4) inches shall not be used except in unusual cases. Water lines shall be installed at least thirty (30) inches below grade where practical. Water mains within subdivisions and land developments must be provided with connections to each lot in the subdivision or land development, except as otherwise specifically provided. 
3.  Wells. Private wells are not allowed as a potable water source within the City of LaFayette. 
4.  Community Water System. Community water systems are not allowed within the City of LaFayette. 
5.  Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all nonresidential land developments and all subdivisions within the city limits of LaFayette. Fire hydrants with appropriate water pressure at appropriate intervals throughout the subdivision or land development shall be provided by the subdivider or land developer as required by the City Fire Department. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart and within five hundred (500) feet of any principal dwelling. Hydrants, fittings, valves and fire department connections shall be approved by the LaFayette Fire Department. Fire department connections shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches or more than thirty-six (36) inches above the level of the adjoining ground or paving. The thread of such connections shall be uniform with that used by the Fire Department. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves, and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street within the right-of-way shared by such underground utilities. 
(30)  Sewer. 
1.  Generally. All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. Each subdivision and land development shall be served by adequate sewage disposal facilities. No permit shall be issued for any building within a subdivision or for the development of land, if there is not present throughout the subdivision or to the land development an adequate system of wastewater collection and treatment. 
2.  Connection to Public Sewerage System. All developments within the City limits must connect to the City sewerage system. Any development outside the City limits wanting to connect to our sewer system must at their request be annexed into the City. The subdivider or land developer shall extend the City sewers within his development and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision or to each land development. With the accessability of public sanitary sewer, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system. Sanitary sewers shall be located within street or alley rights-of-way unless topography dictates otherwise. No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter. Manholes shall be installed in sanitary sewers with a maximum distance between two (2) manholes of four hundred (400) feet, unless otherwise specified by standards of the City. Sanitary sewer slopes shall be equal to or greater than 0.7 percent for eight-inch lines. All sewer lines shall be designed with slopes to obtain a minimum velocity of two (2) feet per second. Minimum twenty-foot wide easements shall be provided for all sanitary sewer lines. 
(31)  Utilities. All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, and cable television, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision or land development. Whenever existing utility facilities (other than major distribution lines) are located above ground, except when existing with public roads rights-of-ways, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utilities shall be placed within street right of ways if possible. Utilities may be installed along lot lines if necessary, but must be within designated "Utility" easements being at least fifteen (15) feet in width. These easements must be recorded as part of the final plat. 
(32)  Oversizing of Improvements and Utilities. The subdivider or land developer shall construct such oversized improvements and utilities that the City determines are necessary, provided that the subdivider or land developer shall not be obligated for the additional cost of improvements and utilities that are not uniquely required for that development, and provided the subdivider agrees to a proposal by the City to share in the cost arrangements for over-sizing improvements and utilities. A formula may be developed by the City to provide for a sharing of the cost of other improvements needed to serve the subdivision or land development when certain of the improvements are necessary to serve future subdivisions or developments in the vicinity. 
(33)  Administration. 
1.  Fees. The fees for various applications required by this Ordinance are listed below. These Fees are established at a level that fully or at least partially offset the costs of administration. 
Fees: Preliminary Plat: $100.00 plus $5.00 per lot. Final Plat: $100.00 plus $5.00 per lot, plus $8.00 per page recorded. Development Plan: $100.00 includes soil erosion control inspection fees. Variance: $100.00 Administrative Appeal: $100.00  
2.  Additional Specifications. The Building Official is hereby authorized to prepare and recommend standard drawings and constructions specifications for private and public improvements not specified in this ordinance. Upon their adoption by the local governing body, they shall become mandatory. 
3.  Variances. Upon application, a variance to the terms of this ordinance may be granted, subject to the requirements of Zoning Article VIII. 
4.  Inspections. The Building Official shall be authorized to inspect premises proposed for subdivision or land development, including any improvements within such subdivision or land development, to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and other laws and regulations of City. No person shall refuse entry or access to any person authorized to conduct inspections who presents appropriate credentials for same, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such person while in the process of carrying out his official duties. The Building Official is authorized to establish procedures for inspection of land development activity at various intervals in the development process, including without limitation inspection procedures for erosion control, the initiating of grading or land-disturbing activity, installation of on-site sewage disposal systems or sanitary sewer, installation of storm drainage pipe, detention, or other storm water facilities, and installation of street curbing and gutter, road sub-grade, base, or paving. 
5.  Enforcement, Violations, Remedies, and Penalties. Enforcement, violations, remedies and penalties shall be as specified in Zoning Article VII. 
6.  Amendment. The Mayor and City Council may amend this ordinance in a manner consistent with Georgia law. Before enacting such amendment to this ordinance, the Planning Commission shall provide a recommendation on the proposed amendment. The Mayor and City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least fifteen (15) days prior to such hearing in the city's legal organ or a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(34)  Repealer. All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this section are hereby repealed. 
Cross reference- Post-development stormwater management for new development and redevelopment, Ch. 6, Art. XII. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 29-40. - Nonconforming uses. 
    The lawful use of any building or structure or land existing at the time of the enactment of or subsequent amendment to this Chapter may be continued subject to the restrictions contained in this Chapter even though such use does not conform with the provisions of this Chapter except that the nonconforming structure or use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Torn down and rebuilt as a nonconforming use; 
(3)  Extended or enlarged except in conformity with this Chapter; 
(4)  Reestablished after vacancy or discontinuance of use continually for one year, whether or not such vacancy or discontinuance commenced prior to the enactment of this Chapter; 
(5)  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired, except in conformity with this Chapter, after damage exceeding 50 percent of the fair market value of the improvement as determined from the tax records of the City of LaFayette; provided, however, this provision (5) shall not apply to owner-occupied dwellings. 
Section 29-41. - Discontinuance of nonconforming uses. 
    All nonconforming uses of land shall be discontinued or made to conform with the use provisions of this Chapter within the following periods of time from the date of adoption of this Chapter or subsequent amendments effecting the nonconforming use: 
(1)  Nonconforming outdoor advertising signs and automobile junkyards-two years; 
(2)  A nonconforming use of land involving no buildings other than accessory buildings-two years. 
Section 29-42. - Offstreet parking and storage. 
(1)  Offstreet parking required. Offstreet vehicular parking spaces shall be provided on every lot on which any building, structure, or use is hereafter established in all use districts, except as otherwise specifically exempted by this chapter. Required parking spaces shall be available for the parking of operable passenger vehicles for residents, customers, patrons, and employees, as appropriate given the subject use. 
(2)  Location of offstreet parking areas. All parking spaces required by this article shall be provided on the same lot with the main building or use that it serves. Upon demonstration that the parking spaces required are not available and cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot as the building, structure or use it serves, the building official may permit the required parking spaces to be provided on any lot, of which a substantial portion is within five hundred (500) feet of such building, structure, or use. This provision shall require submittal of evidence of ownership or valid agreement to lease the parking area offsite that is intended to be used to comply with this section. 
(3)  Parking plan required. Before any building or land use permit is issued, the proposed parking lot layout and area must be found by the building official to be in compliance with all requirements of this chapter. A parking plan, for all but detached single-family uses, shall be submitted for approval by the building official. Occupancy of the land or use of a building shall not occur until the building official determines that parking facilities are available in accordance with the approved plan. 
(4)  Minimum number of parking spaces required. On each lot where a building, structure, or use exists, offstreet parking shall be provided according to Table 3. No existing facility used for offstreet parking shall be reduced in capacity to less than the minimum required number of spaces, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards. 
Table 3 
Minimum Number of Offstreet Parking Spaces Required 
Use Parking Spaces Required 
(Per Gross Floor Area Devoted to the Use, or Per Employee on Largest Shift, Except as Otherwise Specified) Commercial Uses Art gallery One per 400 square feet Auto parts store One per 400 square feet plus one per employee Automobile sales One per employee, plus one per 150 square feet of repair space, plus one per 600 square feet of showroom Automobile service and repair Two per service bay Bank, credit union, savings and loan One per 300 square feet (also see stacking requirements for drive-through facilities) Barber shop or beauty parlor One and one-half per operator's chair, plus one per employee Bed and breakfast inn Two for the owner-operator plus one per guest bedroom Billiard hall/amusement arcade One per 200 square feet Bowling alley Two for each alley, plus one per each employee Convenience store One per 250 square feet plus one per employee Dance hall or school One space per 150 square feet Funeral home or mortuary One per four seats, plus one per two employees, plus one for each hearse, ambulance, or company vehicle Furniture, carpet, appliance and home furnishing store One per 1,000 square feet plus one per employee and one per delivery truck Grocery or food store One per 200 square feet Hardware store One per 400 square feet plus one per employee Health or fitness club Ten plus one per each 250 square feet over 1,000 square feet Hotel or motel One per guest room, plus one per employee, plus one per specified requirements for restaurants and meeting rooms as applicable Kennel One per 400 square feet, plus one per employee Laundromat One per each two washer/dryer combinations Nursery or greenhouse One per 1,000 square feet devoted to sales Office One per 300 square feet Photographic studio One per 400 square feet Restaurant, bar, or tavern One per 100 square feet Self storage facility (mini-warehouse) One per facility manager, plus one per each forty storage units, with two spaces total minimum Service station One per two employees plus three for each service bay Shopping center Four and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet Theater, cinema One per three fixed seats Veterinarian, animal hospital Four per practitioner Industrial Uses Manufacturing, processing, assembling Two per three employees Warehouse One per two employees or one per 1,500 square feet, whichever is greater Wholesale merchandise One per 2,000 square feet Institutional Uses Church, temple, synagogue and place of worship One per four seats in room with greatest seating capacity Day care center One per employee, plus one per eight children, plus one space for each vehicle associated with facility Government office One per 300 square feet Hospital One per four beds, plus one per two employees Library or museum One per 300 square feet Nursing home One per three patient beds Post office One per 200 square feet School - elementary One per employee plus one additional per ten employees School - middle One per ten students or one per five seats in auditorium or main assembly area, whichever is greater Residential Uses Apartment, one bedroom One per unit Apartment, two bedroom One and one-half per unit Apartment, three bedroom Two per unit Boarding or rooming house One space for each two guest rooms, plus one additional space for the owners, if resident on the premises Residence within building containing a nonresidential use One per unit Single-family detached or attached (including manufactured home) Two per unit Two family dwelling Two per unit Recreational Uses Amusement park Per parking generation study funded by applicant and approved by the Land Use Officer Assembly hall or auditorium One per four fixed seats, or one per 150 square feet of seating area, whichever is less Basketball court Five per court Billiard hall Two per table Community center One per 250 square feet Country club One per 400 square feet of gross floor area. Plus one and one-half per hole for golf course, two per tennis court, and one per 100 square feet of surface for swimming pools Golf course Three per hole Golf driving range, principal use One for every tee Miniature golf Two per hole Skating rink One per 250 square feet Stadium or sport arena One per 12 feet of bench seating Swimming pool - subdivision amenity One per 150 square feet of surface water areas Swimming pool - public One per 100 square feet of surface water area Tennis or racquet ball court Three spaces per court  
(5)  Interpretations of parking requirements. Where a fractional space results during the calculation of required parking, the required number of parking spaces shall be construed to be the next highest whole number. Where the parking requirement for a particular use is not described in this article, and where no similar use is listed, the building official shall determine the number of spaces to be provided based on requirements for similar uses, location of the proposed use, the number of employees on the largest shift, the total square footage, potential customer use, and other expected demand and traffic generated by the proposed use. 
(6)  Reduction of required parking for mixed or joint use of parking spaces. When more than one (1) use is provided on a lot, and such uses operate more or less simultaneously, the total requirements for offstreet parking spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. The building official may authorize a reduction in the total number of required offstreet parking spaces for two (2) or more uses jointly providing parking facilities when their respective hours of need of maximum parking do not normally overlap, provided that the developer submits sufficient data to demonstrate that the hours of maximum demand for parking at the respective uses do not normally overlap. The required spaces assigned to one (1) use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half (1/2) of the parking spaces required for churches, theaters or assembly halls whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
(Ord. No. 03-12, § 1, 10-13-2003; Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 10-13-2008) 
Section 29-43. - Loading. 
(1)  Offstreet loading areas required for specified uses. On the same lot with every building, structure or part thereof, erected or occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehouse, truck freight terminal, department store, wholesale store, market, hotel, hospital, mortuary, dry cleaning plant, retail business, or other uses similarly involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles, materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for the standing, loading and unloading of such materials to avoid undue interference with public use of streets, alleys, and parking areas. 
(2)  Loading area specifications. Unless otherwise approved by the building official, loading and unloading spaces shall be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet wide, forty (40) feet long, with fourteen (14) feet of height clearance. Said loading area shall be located to the rear of the building unless site design precludes a rear location, in which case loading will be to the side of a building. 
(3)  Minimum number of offstreet loading/unloading spaces required. One (1) offstreet loading/unloading space shall be provided for the first ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for light industrial use and one (1) offstreet loading/unloading space for the first five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other nonindustrial use for which a loading/unloading space is required. One (1) additional space shall be required for each additional twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of gross floor area or fractional part hereof for light industrial use and for each additional ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross floor area or fractional part thereof for retail or other nonindustrial use. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, § 1, 10-13-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-12, adopted Oct. 13, 2008 changed the title of § 29-43 from offstreet loading and unloading spaces to loading. 
Section 29-44. - Space requirements. 
(1)  Retail Business: one space 10 feet by 25 feet for each 3,000 square feet of floor area, or part thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and Industrial: one space 10 feet by 50 feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor area, or part thereof. 
Section 29-45. - Required buffers. 
    An adequate buffer strip consisting of a durable masonry wall, fence or hedge, or other natural planting of comparable opacity shall be required between commercial, industrial, R-3 residential uses, and R-2 or R-1 residential uses. Such buffers shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of the industrial, commercial or R-3 residential property. The buffers shall be designed to be compatible with the residential character of adjoining properties, and shall be provided along the side and/or rear lines of any lot zoned or used for commercial, industrial, and R-3 residential purposes. If a durable masonry wall or fence is used, it shall be 6 feet in height along the side and/or rear yards of the adjoining lot zones or used for residential 1 or 2 [R-1 or R-2] purposes. A masonry wall, ventilated redwood or rough sewn cedar fence would be appropriate screen materials. 
    If a hedge or other natural planting of comparable opacity is used, it shall consist of [a] planted strip at least 10 feet in width and containing a mixture of deciduous and evergreen trees spaced in a staggered triangular pattern not more than 10 feet apart and containing not less than 2 rows of dense plant materials. The same shall be planted at an initial height of at least 4 feet and shall be of such variety that an average height of 8 feet can be expected by normal growth within 4 years from the time of initial planting. All plant materials shall be planted at least 3 feet from the side or rear lot line of the adjoining lot in a residential 1 or 2 [R-1 or R-2] zone. 
    It is the further intent of this section to promote an overall homogeneity within the buffer strip. Therefore, where a type of buffer is agreed upon whether it be fence, wall or planting this type shall be continued by adjacent property owners along the block or property between two parallel streets. A cross street will be deemed an adequate point for change of materials in a buffer strip. 
Section 29-46. - Inspection and maintenance of required buffers. 
    The durable masonry wall or fence and/or the plant materials required by this Chapter will be subject to periodic inspections by the building inspector who shall determine that the property owner and/or occupant of the premises has maintained the buffer strip in neat order. The plant material shall be periodically trimmed or pruned at a height not less than 6 feet and diseased or dead plant materials shall be removed and replaced. Failure to maintain the buffer zone in an acceptable standard shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter. 
Section 29-47. - Fences and walls. 
    The following regulations shall apply to the construction of fences and walls. 
    LOCATION 
(a)  Fences and walls shall not be located outside or beyond the property or lot lines of the lot upon which said improvement is located. 
(b)  No fence or wall shall constitute an obstruction to the vision of or create a hazard to vehicular traffic. 
    HEIGHT 
(a)  After the effective date of this Ordinance, no fence or wall shall be constructed that exceeds eight (8) feet in height without a variance having first been obtained from the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
(b)  A variance from the terms of this section shall not be granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless and until 
(1)  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that: 
(i)  No diminution in value of the surrounding properties would be suffered; 
(ii)  The granting of the variance would be of benefit to the public interest; 
(iii)  The fence or wall proposed to be built if the variance is granted will not constitute an obstruction to the vision or create a hazard to vehicular traffic or other safety hazard; 
(iv)  By granting the variance substantial justice would be done; and 
(v)  The use would not be contrary to the spirit of this Chapter. 
(2)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall make findings that the requirements set forth in this section have been met; that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance; and that the granting of such variance is in harmony with the spirit of this Chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood. 
(c)  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall proceed on such written application in accordance with Section 29-85 of the LaFayette City Code and the right to appeal an adverse decision by the Board of Appeals shall proceed as found in 29-86 of the LaFayette City Code. 
    DESIGN AND TYPE 
(a)  All fences and walls shall be constructed: (1) with the finished side exposed to the outside of the enclosed area; (2) the support posts shall be placed on the inside of the enclosed area; and (3) in a manner which serves to enhance the aesthetic appearance of the neighborhood or surrounding area. 
(b)  Fences and walls shall only be constructed of woven wire (i.e., chain link), brick, stone, wood, stucco, wrought iron, or split rail. Barbed wire fences or barbed wire assemblies or addition atop fences and walls shall be prohibited in all residential zoned districts. Barbed wire fences or barbed wire assemblies atop fences and walls are permitted in business and industrial zoned districts. 
(c)  Fences and walls shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. Fences and walls shall be free from loose or rotting materials to the extent that they have become unsafe and an eyesore and shall have braces and supports attached or fastened from the inside of the enclosed areas in accordance with common building practices. 
(Ord. No. 02-13, § 1, 10-14-2002) 
ARTICLE V. - SCHEDULE OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 29-50. - Use, Area, Yard, and Height Requirements. 
MINIMUM LOT SIZE LOT 
COV- 
ERAGE MAX- 
IMUM 
BUILDING 
HEIGHT MINIMUM YARD 
DIMENSIONS DISTRICTS PERMITTED 
USES CONDITIONAL 
USE Area 
(Sq. Ft.) Width 
(Feet) % of 
Total 
(Lot) (Stories) Front 
(Feet) Side 
(Feet) Rear 
(Feet) Single-Family Residence 12,000 90 25 21/2 35 12 40 Elementary School 3 acres 50 20 50 29-50.1 
R-1 High School 5 acres 50 20 50 Governmental Building (excluding garage & storage) 12,000 90 40 35 12 40 Accessory Sign Accessory Uses Minimum of three feet from property line Public Utility Stations Churches Group Housing Projects 1 acre 3 75 (See Note 2) 75 75 Single-Family Dwelling All Other R-1 Conditional Uses 8,000 75 25 21/2 30 10 35 All Other R-1 Uses Same as R-1 above Small Lot Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.2 
R-2 Residential Two-Family Dwelling 12,000 90 25 21/2 30 10 35 Nursery School or Kindergarten Churches 1 acre 3 75 75 75 Fee Simple Townhouses 1,815/unit 16 (except as modified by Section 29-63) 2 30 20 35 Barber Shop and Beauty Parlor Single-Family Dwelling Personal Care Home 8,000 75 25 21/2 30 10 35 All Other R-1 and R-2 Uses All Other R-1 and R-2 Conditional Uses Same as R-1 above Small Lot Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.3 
R-3 Residential Two-Family Dwelling 9,000 75 25 21/2 30 10 35 Multifamily Dwelling 7,500 75 40 3 30 10 35 Churches 1 acre 3 75 75 75 Telephone Exchange (including office space and equipment storage) Medical Buildings 9,000 75 25 30 8 15 Home Occupation Nursery School/Kindergarten Personal Care Home Automobile Sales Retail Bakery Shop 
Bank, Office, Studio 
Hotel No minimum yard or lot areas shall be required in the B-1 District except 
as follows: 
a. When existing buildings located on each side of a proposed new building 
have established a building line, then the new building shall conform to 
that line. 
b. When lots in this District are adjacent to and adjoining a Residential 
District, those lots shall have a minimum yard of 10 feet on the side or 
sides adjacent to the Residential District. Small Lot Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.4 
B-1 Commercial Amusement Centers Public Building 
Wholesale (excluding warehousing) 
Radio Stations (excluding transmission facilities) 
Newspaper Office and Print Shop 
Mortuary 
Restaurant, Cafe 
Parking Lot & Parking Garage 
Taxicab and Bus Station No minimum yard or lot areas shall be required in the B-1 
District except as follows: 
a. When existing buildings located on each side of a proposed new 
building have established a building line, then the new building 
shall conform to that line. 
b. When lots in this District are adjacent to and adjoining a Resi- 
dential District, those lots shall have a minimum yard of 10 feet 
on the side or sides adjacent to the Residential District. Telephone Exchange 
Other Retail Uses 
Business Sign Advertising Sign Rooming House B-1 Uses 30 10 25 Cold Storage Plants 30 10 25 Milk and Soft Drink Bottling and Distribution Plant 30 10 25 Building Materials 30 10 25 Dwelling, Upstairs One bedroom efficiency Min. Sq. Ft. 600; Max No. Occupants-2; Max No. Vehicles-2 Two bedroom unit Min. Sq. Ft. 800; Max No. Occupants-4; Max No. Vehicles-3 Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.5 
B-2 Commercial Food Processing (except meat, fish or fowl) Warehouse 30 10 25 Tourist Court or Motel 30 10 25 Feed Store 30 20 25 Multiple-Dwelling Units See Note 1 See Note 1 40 3 30 10 25 Auto Repair and Garage (except auto storage) 30 10 25 Planned Shopping Center 3 acres 50 20 50 Mobile Home Park Churches Filling Station 30 10 25 Fuel Storage 30 20 25 Rooming House Advertising Sign Nursery School/Kindergarten Automobile Sales and Service Single Family Dwelling-Home Occupation Borrow pit Single-Family Residence (provided the currently existing structure was used as a single-family residence at the time of the passage of the Zoning Ordinance of LaFayette, Georgia, on October 14, 1974) Dwelling, Upstairs One bedroom efficiency Min. Sq. Ft. 600; Max No. Occupants-2; Max No. Vehicles-2 Two bedroom unit Min. Sq. Ft. 800; Max No. Occupants-4; Max No. Vehicles-3 Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.6 
I-1 Industrial Food Manufacturing 
Bottling Plant 
Building Material Yard 
Equipment Storage 
Warehousing 
Service Station 
Ice Plant 
Storage Yard (except junkyard) 
Nursery and Greenhouse Adult Entertainment Establishment No minimum yard or lot areas shall be required in the I-1 District except 
as follows: 
a. All uses shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet; 
b. When lots in this District are adjacent to and adjoining a Residential 
District, those lots shall have a minimum yard of 25 feet on the side or 
sides adjacent to the Residential District. 
c. The minimum area of a Mobile Home Park shall be 5 acres. Restaurant 
Print Shop 
Truck Terminal 
Pet Shop, Kennel and Veterinarian Hospital 
Places of Amusement Customary Accessory Uses Office Trailer (Accessory Building) Outdoor Advertising Sign Borrow pit I-1 Permitted Uses Asphalt Products No minimum yard or lot areas shall be required in the I-2 District except 
as follows: Tattoo Studio Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.7 
I-2 Industrial Blacksmith and Machine Shops 
Textile Products 
Lumber and Wood Products 
Grain Mill Products 
Chemical Plants 
Cement Products 
Structural Clay Products Adult Entertainment Establishment a. All uses shall have a minimum front yard or 30 feet. 
b. When lots in this District are adjacent to and adjoining a Residential 
District, those lots shall have a minimum yard of 25 feet on the side or 
sides adjacent to the Residential District. Office Trailer (Accessory Building) Meat and Dairy Processing 
Junkyards 
Borrow pit Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.8 Any type open space which is customarily accessory or incidental to uses in the adjoining district, such as parking lots, used car lots, storage of movable equipment, loading and unloading areas, gardens, public and private open-type recreation areas, etc. Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-50.9 
F-2 Floodway (An Overlapping district) Accessory uses 
Accessory buildings Uses permitted in the F-1 District, plus landfills and structures with first floor elevations above that subject to flood. Where portions of other districts also fall in this District, all uses, other than those listed as permitted in this section, become conditional. (See Section 29-60.) Accessory Structure-Solar collection device 29-51 
O-1 Personnel Placement Offices Churches Personal care homes Accessory Structure-Solar collection device  
Note- 1: Minimum lot size area requirements shall be a minimum of 7,500 sq. ft. for the first dwelling unit, an additional 1,000 sq. ft. for the second unit, and 2,000 sq. ft. for any and all additional units. 
Minimum lot size width requirements shall be increased by ten feet for each added dwelling unit. 
Note- 2: Where the property line is a street line, the front yard setback established for the district shall apply. 
(Ord. of 4-14-86, § B; Ord. of 2-9-87; Ord. No. 1-88, §§ A, B, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 98-5, § 1, 11-9-98; Ord. No. 99-9, § 2, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 99-10, § 1, 10-11-99; Ord. No. 00-4, § 1, 2-14-2000; Ord. No. 00-10, §§ 2, 3, 7-10-2000; Ord. No. 02-01, 1-14-2002; Ord. No. 03-13, § 1, 12-8-2003; Ord. No. 04-15, §§ 1, 2, 11-8-2004; Ord. No. 06/01, §§ 1, 2, 5-8-2006; Ord. No. 06/02, § 1, 5-8-2006; Ord. No. 08-7, §§ 2, 3, 4-14-2008; Ord. No. 09-08, § 1, 12-14-2009; Ord. No. 17-02, § 1, 2-13-2017; Ord. No. 18-07, § 1, 4-9-2018; Ord. No. 18-09, § 2, 6-11-2018) 
Section 29-51. - O-1 District designated. 
    To add to this article a new section designated as Section 18-21-10 to be known as O-1 District-Office. 
    The permitted uses of said District shall be as follows: Offices of health service practitioners including physicians, surgeons, dentists, dental surgeons, osteopathic physicians, chiropractors, and other licensed health service practitioners; attorneys' offices; accounting, auditing and bookkeeping offices; engineering and architectural offices; banking, financial institutions, real estate and insurance offices; cosmetologists, single-family residence; governmental building (excluding garage and storage); business sign and incidental or accessory sign as defined in the ordinance from which this section was derived. 
    Said district shall have the following conditional uses: (1) Personal care homes; (2) public utility stations; and (3) veterinary clinics for small pet animals with no outdoor kennels permitted. 
    These regulations shall apply to property within the O-1 District. There shall be no outward change to a primary structure unless expanded using the same period architectural design as the existing structure. If the primary structure is damaged or destroyed, it must be rebuilt to a similar exterior architectural design as the pre-existing structure or the building structure removed and the lot cleaned up within ninety (90) days. Primary structures within this District may not exist in disrepair for more than ninety (90) days. The exterior architectural design of any structure built on a lot that has been vacant for more than twelve (12) months shall be similar to the exterior residential architectural design of other primary structures located in the O-1 District. 
    The front yard setback area must remain a yard (i.e., no parking lot or accessory uses). All existing trees of trunk size eight (8) inches (measured at five (5) feet height from ground level) and larger shall be protected and shall not be removed unless approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals unless the tree is determined to be dead or dying by the Building Official. 
    Pylon or monument business signs are the only types of signage allowed and only one (1) sign is permitted per lot. The sign shall be a maximum of forty (40) square feet in size with a maximum height of six (6) feet including the frame. The sign must cover all businesses located on the lot. The sign may be internally lit or have spot/flood lighting directed at the sign only. There shall be no signs with flashing lights, blinking lights, rotating lights, scrolling lights or any other lights. Additionally, there shall be no portable signs. All signs shall be maintained in good condition by the owner of the property. All other signs are prohibited. All signs must be approved and permitted by the City. No signs may obstruct the vision of street traffic as determined by the City law enforcement or code enforcement personnel. 
    Accessory uses or buildings are allowed only in the side and rear yards and no combustible structure shall be located within ten (10) feet of the primary structure, and shall be at least three (3) feet from the property line. 
    The lot criteria for the O-1 District are as follows: 
(a)  Area square feet-8,000. 
(b)  Width-75 feet. 
(c)  The maximum lot coverage as a percent of total lot shall be forty (40) percent for all purposes except single-family dwellings, with single-family dwellings to be twenty-five (25) percent maximum. The maximum building height (stories) shall be two and one-half (21/2) stories. 
    The minimum yard dimensions are as follows: 
(a)  Front yard-35 feet along each street frontage. 
(b)  Side yard-10 feet. 
(c)  Rear yard-35 feet. 
    The hereinafter described property is hereby rezoned from R-1 District to O-1 District, to-wit: 
    Those portions of the lots presently zoned R-1, which are outlined in red on the map which is attached hereto, which front on each side of North Main Street located between Hendrix Street and an extension of the same in a westerly direction on the north and Park Street and an extension of same in an easterly direction on the south, the same being outlined in red on a copy of the zoning map which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
    The hereinafter described property is hereby rezoned from R-2 District to O-1 District and the official zoning map of said city shall be changed accordingly, to-wit: 
    Those portions of the lots presently zoned R-2, which are outlined in green on the map which is attached, hereto which front on each side of North Main Street which lie north of Hammond Street and South of Hendrix Street and an extension of same in a westerly direction, said property being outlined in green on a copy of the zoning map which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. of 2-11-86(2), §§ B-D; Ord. No. 95-6, 4-10-95; Ord. No. 11-01, § 1, 1-8-2011; Ord. No. 13-1, § 1, 9-9-2013) 
Editor's note- The zoning map referred to in this section is not printed in this appendix but is on file in the city clerk's office. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to such additions or modifications as herein provided by the following supplementing regulations: 

Section 29-60. - Conditional uses. 
    Conditional uses are subject to the approval of the Board of Appeals. A plan of the proposed use will be submitted to the Planning Commission for their review. The Planning Commission shall then submit the plan and recommendations to the Board of Appeals for review and action. Action by the Board of Appeals may follow a public hearing. If a public hearing is held, at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be given the owner of the proposed conditional use and surrounding property owners. 
(a)  In reviewing the proposal, the Board of Appeals shall be guided by a number of factors which shall include the following: 
(1)  The adequacy of access to the site; 
(2)  Adequacy of parking provisions; 
(3)  The character of the area in which the use is proposed to be located; 
(4)  Whether the use will be offensive to surrounding uses; 
(5)  Adequacy of fences and other buffers; 
(6)  Any other considerations deemed pertinent by the Planning Commission and/or Board of Appeals. 
(b)  In addition to the factors listed in paragraph (a), the following supplemental regulations are established for the conditional uses listed in Article V. 
Individual Mobile Homes 
    A mobile home, as "mobile home" is defined in Chapter 6, Article VI, Mobile Homes, section 6-91 of this Code, shall not be permitted to locate on a lot within the City of LaFayette for use or occupancy as a dwelling, accessory dwelling, principal building, or structure in any zoning district, except that a mobile home may be used or occupied only as a single-family dwelling within the B-2 commercial district, but only if the mobile home is exclusively contained within a mobile home park as provided in this section and this Code. 
    A mobile home or homes shall be temporarily parked and used as a bona fide construction office, storage place or quarters of a night watchman at the construction site provided the intended parking and use of such mobile home or homes is made known to the Building Inspector. 
    A single camping trailer may be stored, but not occupied in any district, except that in residential districts such camping trailers shall be parked in the rear yards. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 2, 4-9-2018) 
Mobile Home Park 
    A mobile home park may locate in a B-2 district provided each such park meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Site shall front upon or the entrance shall be within one block of a State or Federal Numbered Highway. 
(2)  Minimum size of park site shall be five acres including land for accessory buildings, recreational and playground areas. 
(3)  Minimum size lot for each mobile home within the park shall be 3,000 square feet. 
(4)  Each lot within the park shall be served by and have appropriate connections to sewer line, water line, and electrical power line. 
(5)  A buffer strip not less than 15 feet in width shall be provided completely around the park except at access roads. Such strip shall contain a five-foot planted screen which grows to and is maintained at a minimum height of five (5) feet, and a ten-foot grass strip. 
(6)  The owner of a park may utilize the front part of the site for mobile home sales provided that said part is completely within a B-2 district and is not more than 15 percent of the total park area. 
(7)  A park shall not accept mobile homes unless and until such time as at least 20 lots have been completely developed with all utilities and all-weather surfaced access drives. 
(Ord. No. 18-07, § 3, 4-9-2018) 
Group Housing Projects 
    A group housing project is defined as two or more buildings which are located on a parcel of land not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout makes it impractical to apply the requirements of this Chapter to the individual building units which may be so oriented that the main entrance does not directly face the street. 
    Group housing projects may be permitted in any of the various districts in which residences are permitted in this Chapter. The purpose of group housing projects is to permit maximum flexibility of design by the developer. In all such cases, group housing projects shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  Lot Size: A group housing project shall be permitted only on a lot or plot of ground having an area of not less than 32,000 square feet. 
(2)  Street Access: Any building established in connection with such group housing project which cannot properly be served by emergency or service vehicles from an abutting street shall be made accessible to such vehicles by a paved driveway having a roadbed width of not less than twenty (20) feet, exclusive of parking spaces. 
(3)  Off-Street Parking Facilities: Off-street parking spaces shall be provided as required in Section 29-42 of this Chapter. 
(4)  Separation of Buildings: All buildings and structures established in connection with such projects shall be not less than twenty (20) feet apart. 
(5)  Setback Requirements: Unless otherwise provided by this Chapter, all buildings and structures established in connection with such development shall comply with the frontyard setbacks established for the district in which located and shall be set back not less than twenty-five (25) feet from any side or rear property line. 
(6)  Uses Prohibited: In no case shall a use be permitted in connection with such developments that is prohibited by this Chapter in the district in which such project is to be located. 
(7)  Lot Area per Dwelling Unit: A group housing project shall conform to the minimum lot area per dwelling unit for the district in which it is located. 
(8)  Position of Dwelling Structures: No dwelling structure established in connection with a group housing project shall be situated on a lot as to face the rear of another building or structure within the development or on adjoining properties. 
(9)  Sidewalks Required: Sidewalks not less than four (4) feet in width shall be installed in the project area leading from all front and rear doors to adjacent streets or alleyways. Sidewalks shall be required along all property abutting streets within the project. 
Office Trailer (Accessory Building) : 
    Office Trailers shall be permitted, as indicated, only as an accessory building (as "accessory building" is defined in this Ordinance) in connection with a permitted use upon application for a conditional use permit provided that the office trailer is in compliance with the following requirements, to-wit: 
(a)  Shall have been originally constructed as an office trailer. 
(b)  Shall not be constructed as a dwelling unit for the purposes of living and sleeping. 
(c)  Shall not contain bedrooms or a kitchen. 
(d)  Said office trailer shall be limited to the use as an office in connection with the permitted use only and for only so long as the property is being used for a permitted use; can only be used as an accessory building, as aforesaid. If the property, for sixty consecutive days, ceases to be used for the permitted use for which the property was being used when the conditional use was granted, the office trailer shall be removed from the property no later than 15 days from the end of the 60 consecutive day period (75 th consecutive day from the last day the property was used for the permitted use when the conditional use was granted). 
(e)  No office trailer shall be upon property that is not actively being used for a permitted use. 
(f)  Shall not be a trailer that was originally constructed as a mobile home or converted to a mobile home as "mobile home" is defined in this Ordinance. 
(g)  Any and all conditions and safeguards required by the Board of Appeals as are appropriate under this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, § 3, 11-8-2004) 
Planned Shopping Center 
    The primary purpose and application of the planned shopping center in LaFayette shall be for supplying convenience goods and performing services to meet the shopping needs of residential areas. Such proposed development shall be permitted in a B-2 district only on a single lot or plot of ground with a minimum area of three (3) acres and only on a State or Federal Numbered Highway. No proposed building or structure shall be less than fifty (50) feet from any property line, except where the property line is a street right-of-way line, in which case no building or structure shall be less than thirty (30) feet from the property line. Along any property line abutting a residential district, there shall be a heavily planted buffer strip of a minimum width of ten (10) feet, or solid masonry wall no less than six (6) feet in height or other suitable means, in such a way as to form a permanent screen which shall be designed to shield adjacent residential districts from parking lot illumination, headlights, and blowing papers and dust, and to reduce the visual encroachment of commercial architecture. 
    Provisions shall be made to provide adequate vehicular and pedestrian access and circulation, so as not to present problems of safety on site or unduly impede traffic movements on adjacent streets. Off-street parking shall be provided according to the regulations in this Chapter and no signs shall be erected within the front or side yard areas, except a sign or signs designating the name of the shopping center. 
    The uses permitted in the planned shopping center include the following: 
(1)  Any convenience business or service designed to serve surrounding residents such as: barber and beauty shops, shoe repair, supermarket, variety store, drugstore, gift shop, nut shop, and automatic laundry, laundry and drycleaning pickup establishments, hardware stores, branch banks, insurance offices, or other similar establishments. 
(2)  Automobile service stations. 
Public Utility Station 
    Public utility stations such as electrical transmission stations, gas regulator stations shall be permitted where allowed in Section 29-50 if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The installation is essential for the service of the immediate area. 
(2)  All structures shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
(3)  The structure shall be enclosed by a woven wire fence of a minimum height of seven (7) feet. 
(4)  There shall be no office space on the lot. 
(5)  There shall be no storage of equipment or vehicles on the premises. 
Nursery Schools and Kindergartens 
    Nursery schools shall be permitted as a conditional use provided they meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The lot on which such uses are established shall have access on a public street. 
(2)  There shall be not less than 30 square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment, and not less than 150 square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum enrollment. 
(3)  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than 3.5 feet and planted buffer at least 6 feet wide. 
(4)  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading. 
Roominghouse 
    Taking of roomers, boarders, and tourists shall be permitted provided that such use shall be conducted within an existing principal building by persons resident on the premises, off-street parking space as required in this Chapter is provided in the rear yard, and that the lot shall be screened in the rear and on both sides by a planted buffer strip at least three (3) feet in width and height, and consisting of plant material of such growth characteristics as will provide an obscuring screen. 
Advertising Signs 
    Freestanding outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted where indicated provided that the minimum size per sign shall not exceed fifty square feet and that the total area of signs shall not exceed two square feet per linear foot of the face of the building, or for open air business uses, one square foot per three hundred square feet of land in such use. 
Business Signs 
    Business signs shall be permitted where indicated except that they shall be attached to a structure and the maximum size shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet and the total area of signs per building shall not exceed two (2) square feet per linear foot of the face of the building. 
Meat and Dairy Processing 
    Animal slaughterhouses and stockyards shall be permitted in I-2 Districts provided that adequate and permanent measures are designed into the operation to minimize objectionable emission of dust, gas, smoke, noise, fumes and odors. These measures shall be presented in writing when application is made to the Board of Appeals for the conditional use permit. 
Junkyards 
    Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards shall be permitted in the I-2 Districts when wholly enclosed by a solid wall, planted screen or similar opaque partition, not less than seven (7) feet in height, and shall comply with all yard requirements for this district. All dismantling, storage or repair work shall take place within the screened area, and no material shall be piled or stacked to a height in excess of twelve (12) feet above ground level. 
Uses Within The Floodway 
    In reviewing a proposal for construction of any building or any use within the floodway district, the Board of Appeals shall be guided by the following standards, keeping in mind that the purpose of the district is to prevent encroachment into the floodway which will unduly increase flood heights and endanger life and property. 
(1)  Any uses permitted shall be of a type not appreciably damaged by floodwaters and which will not pose a threat to health, safety or property during periods of flooding; 
(2)  Filling of land will be permitted for construction of roads only; 
(3)  Any structure permitted shall not be used for human habitation and shall be designed, constructed, and placed so as to offer minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation, thus threatening to further restrict bridge openings and other restricted areas in the stream. 
Home Occupation 
(1)  The occupation or profession shall be carried on wholly within the principal building or within a building or other structure accessory thereto. 
(2)  Not more than one (1) person outside the family shall be employed in the home occupation. 
(3)  There shall be no exterior display nor any exterior sign (except nameplate), no exterior storage of materials and no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation from the residential character of the principal building. 
(4)  No offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat or glare shall be produced. 
    A home occupation includes, but is not limited to art studio; real estate office; insurance office; dressmaking; barber shop or beauty parlor; professional office of a physician, dentist, lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant; or musical instruction limited to a single pupil at a time. (Ord. of 2-9-87) 
Personal Care Home 
    A personal care home must meet all of the following special conditions: 
(a)  The home must be approved and licensed by the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources, if the same is required by said department; 
(b)  The outward appearance of the home is that of a single-family residence; 
(c)  The home shall not alter the residential character of the neighborhood, create an institutional setting nor exceed the capacities of existing community recreational and social service facilities; 
(d)  No personal care home shall be located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of another personal care home; 
(e)  At the time of application for permission for conditional use, each personal care home owner must submit to the City of LaFayette a statement of the exact nature of the home, the qualifications of the home operator, the type and number of personnel and the number of residents; 
(f)  Each personal care home must conform to the zoning requirements of the residential district; 
(g)  Off-street parking must be provided so as not to give the appearance of a multi-family use; 
(h)  Each personal care home shall not house or provide other services for more than fifteen (15) persons; and 
(i)  Each personal care home application must be submitted to the Lafayette Planning Commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall then submit their recommendation to the board of appeals for review and action. 
    Any personal care home which is hereinafter authorized and/or approved under this zoning ordinance and which is approved as a conditional use by the board of appeals must comply with all of the rules and regulations which are then in effect under the laws of the State of Georgia and under the rules of any regulatory agency or department of said state government which has any jurisdiction over the same and further must comply with any and all other city regulations, ordinances and codes, and must comply with all public health and sanitation rules and regulations of the state, the city and any other governmental body having jurisdiction over the same. 
(Ord. No. 1-88, § C, 1-11-88) 
Barber Shop and Beauty Parlor 
APPEARANCE. Must maintain the appearance of a residence and the building shall not be used for any other purpose. 
OFF STREET PARKING. A minimum of two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each work station. 
SIGNS. No Advertising Sign shall be allowed. A Business Sign shall be allowed to be displayed in only one glazed area and shall not exceed 24" by 24" in size nor shall it cover more than 50% of the glazed area. The Business Sign shall be displayed on the inside surface of the glazed area and shall not be illuminated. 
FLOOR AREA AND FACILITIES. The maximum work stations allowed shall be two (2) and shall not exceed 25% of the total floor area. All floor area and facilities, to be used by the general public, shall be accessible to the Physically Challenged and shall comply with The Georgia Accessibility Standards. 
PROTECTION OF POTABLE WATER SUPPLY. An approved Backflow or Back-Siphoning device and/or devices shall be installed and maintained in good working condition as required by the City of LaFayette Cross Connection Control Program and approved by the Codes-Enforcement Officer. Additional requirements may be necessary and will be addressed on an individual basis dependent on the degree of hazard. 
HOURS OF OPERATION. The hours of operation shall be limited to 9:00 a. m. through 8:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 02-01, 1-14-2002) 
Small Lot 
    For a small lot as defined in this section, the zoning appeals board is empowered, in addition to hearing the conditional use application, to hear the request for a request of a minimum variance for minimum yard dimensions for the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 06/02, § 3, 5-8-2006) 
    Tattoo studio. A tattoo studio may locate in an 1-1 District as a conditional use. A tattoo studio must meet all of the following special conditions, to-wit: 
(a)  The operator of a tattoo studio must have at all times a valid permit for such tattoo studio from the Walker County Board of Health or its duly authorized representative, all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 31-40-2, as amended; 
(b)  Each tattoo studio must conform to the zoning requirements of the I-1 District; 
(c)  Each tattoo studio must at all times comply with all of the rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Community Health and the Walker County Board of Health regarding tattoo studios; 
(d)  No tattoo studio shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land which is used for residential uses or purposes; any parcel of land upon which is a church, school, governmental building, library, city recreational department activity or facility; or any parcel of land upon which another tattoo studio is located (for the purposes of this subsection, distance shall be by airline measurement from any door of the tattoo studio to the closest property lines of the parcel of lands involved, and the term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit); and 
(e)  Each tattoo studio must comply with any and all conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this Ordinance as required by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 
Any tattoo studio which is hereinafter authorized under this Ordinance and which is approved under this Ordinance must comply with all of the rules and regulations which are then in effect under the laws of the State of Georgia and under the rules of any regulatory agency or department of said state government which has any jurisdiction over the same and further must comply with any and all other city regulations, ordinances and codes, and must comply with all public health and sanitation rules and regulations of the state, the county, the city and any other governmental body having jurisdiction over the same. 
"Tattoo Studio" shall be defined as defined by O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 09-08, § 2, 12-14-2009) 
    Warehouse. A warehouse may be located in a B-2 Commercial District as a conditional use. Provided, however, that the warehousing of materials that are flammable, explosive, or that otherwise create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions must meet all federal, state, and local requirements for storage. 
Warehouses must meet all the following special conditions, to-wit: 
(a)  Must be located on at a lot with at least fifteen (15) acres therein; 
(b)  Must maintain a buffer on any side adjacent to a residential district or existing residence and on the rear and sides of property to prevent parking lot illumination, headlights, noise, and visual encroachment of commercial architecture. The buffer shall consist of landscaping and approved fencing. No activities on site shall create any noise or light pollution to the detriment of surrounding properties. 
(c)  No more than ten (10) trailers shall be allowed on the property at any time; 
(d)  Any shipping containers must be mounted on trailers and no shipping containers shall be allowed on the ground of the property; 
(e)  No trash shall be stored outside the building except in approved trash receptacles; 
(f)  The property must have access frontage to a state highway; 
(g)  There shall be one (1) principal building upon the property; 
(h)  The maximum square footing of any warehouse on the property shall be one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet; 
(i)  No other activity shall be allowed on the lot other than warehousing; 
(j)  No manufacturing, assembling or other like processes of any type associated with industrial zones and activities shall be allowed; 
(k)  The location of the building on the lot shall have set back requirements of fifty (50) feet for front, sides and rear; 
(l)  The building must have all required and current code requirements and fire protection systems and meet all other building code requirements; 
(m)  Ingress and egress routes to and from the property must be from or onto a state highway and meet all requirements of the state including, but not limited to, acceleration and deceleration; 
(n)  The building must meet all current building codes; 
(o)  The property must meet all current state and local storm water runoff requirements; and 
(p)  There shall be no outside paging systems. 
(Ord. No. 18-09, § 3, 6-11-2018) 
Section 29-61. - Lots without city sewers. 
    Any lot on which is hereafter constructed a residential, commercial or other type of building, which is not served by a city sewer line and which must depend upon a septic tank and tile field for sewerage disposal shall have a sufficient land area and soil conditions to support minimum percolation requirements of the Georgia State Health Department, as administered by the County Health Officer, for the type use. In addition, a lot for a single-family dwelling shall have minimum area of 15,000 square feet. 
Section 29-62. - Corner visibility. 
    On a corner lot in any residential district no fence, wall, hedge, structure, or planting, or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half feet and fifteen feet above street level shall be erected, placed, or maintained within the triangular area, formed by the intersection of street lines and a straight line joining said street lines at points which are thirty feet distant from the point of intersection measured along said street lines. 
Section 29-63. - Developmental standard for townhouses. 
A.  General provisions 
(1)  Separation requirements: No portion of a townhouse or accessory structure in or related to one group of contiguous townhouses shall be closer than 20 feet to any portion of a townhouse or accessory structure related to another group, or to any building outside the townhouse area. 
(2)  Open space between units and buildings: The front or rear face of a dwelling unit shall be not less than 50 feet from the front or rear face of another dwelling unit. The unattached side of a building shall be not less than 20 feet from the side face of another such building and not less than 40 feet from the front or rear face of another such building or unit. 
(3)  Alignment: No dwelling unit shall be situated so as to face the rear of another dwelling unit unless terrain differences or vegetation will provide effective visual separation. 
(4)  Parking: At least two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit off the public right-of-way. 
(5)  Preservation of common areas: If common areas are provided for in a development, the developer or homeowner's association created by the developer, by recorded covenants and restrictions running with the land, shall preserve and maintain for the owners and occupants of the units the lands set aside for open space, parks, recreation use, or common off-street parking places. 
(6)  Buffer areas: There shall be a buffer area with a minimum depth of 12 feet consisting of a mixture of trees (evergreen) and shrubs. A buffer is required on all sides of the property except that side abutting a public street. 
(7)  Accessory uses: A planned development shall be allowed accessory uses as defined in this Ordinance; however, accessory uses are prohibited per individual townhouse lot. 
B.  Specific standards for townhouses 
(1)  The development of townhouses involves a subdivision of land and all applicable rules of any subdivision regulations of the City of LaFayette shall apply. 
(2)  Not more than eight contiguous townhouses nor fewer than three shall be built in a single building. 
(3)  The minimum width for the portion of the lot on which the townhouse to be constructed shall be 16 feet, but the minimum average width of a single unit in a contiguous group of three (3) or more units shall be 20 feet. 
C.  Procedures for approval of townhouses 
(1)  Application for approval; site plan required: A site plan of the proposed development drawn to scale shall be submitted to the Board of Appeals as provided in Section 29-60 of this Ordinance. Each site plan shall be drawn at an appropriate scale and shall show the following: 
a.  Name: Name(s) of the proposed development. Name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) and the designer(s) of the site plan. 
b.  Date: Date, approximate north arrow and scale. 
c.  Boundaries: The boundary line of the tract to be developed drawn accurately to scale and with accurate linear and angular dimensions. 
d.  Location map: A map to an appropriate scale showing the location of the development. 
e.  Contours: Contours with a minimum vertical interval of five (5) feet referred to sea level datum shall be provided for both existing and proposed topography. (This provision may be waived if topography is substantially level and/or contours are not necessary for the provision of water and sewer.) 
f.  Existing features: The location and dimensions of existing and platted property lines, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges, water mains, sewers, culverts, drain pipe, and public utility easements, both on the land to be developed and on the portion of the land immediately adjoining which abuts the land to be developed, and any other pertinent characteristics of the land; the names of adjoining subdivision or the names of record owners of adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land; and the zoning of the property. 
g.  Proposed improvements: The names, where appropriate, and locations and dimensions of proposed streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, buildings, parking, recreation areas and facilities, yards and other open spaces. 
h.  Utility and drainage plans: Utility and drainage plans shall be provided including all information required by the Health Department, Mayor and Council, and other City authorities to determine that water, sewer, sanitary disposal, and storm drainage improvements will be made and located in accordance with City requirements. 
i.  Buffer areas: Location, dimensions and treatment of all required buffer, landscaped or planted areas including fences. 
j.  Proposed protective covenants: A preliminary outline of proposed protective covenants, including provisions for the organization and financing of a landowner's association where appropriate. 
(Ord. of 4-14-86, § C) 
Section 29-64. - Telecommunications towers. 
    Telecommunication towers may be located in I-1 and I-2 as a conditional use provided such telecommunications towers meet the following requirements: 
I.  Definitions. As used in this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
A.  "Alternative tower structure" means any clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, manmade trees (without accessory buildings/structures), and similar natural or manmade alternative design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
B.  "Antenna" means any exterior apparatus designed for the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves for telephonic, radio, television, or personal wireless services. For the purposes of this ordinance the term "antenna" does not include any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, any device designed for over-the-air reception of radio or television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service, or any cable television headend or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
C.  "Co-location" means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
D.  "Director" means the chairman of the City of LaFayette Planning Commission or his/her designee. 
E.  "Governing body" means the City Council for the City of LaFayette. 
F.  "Monopole tower" means a telecommunications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
G.  "Telecommunications facilities" refers to antennae and towers, either individually or together. 
H.  "Tower" means a structure, such as a lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennae intended for transmitting or receiving analog, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, personal wireless service or similar forms of electronic communication. The term includes microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular telephone towers. 
II.  Exclusions. The following shall be exempt from this ordinance: 
A.  Any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height which is owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission; 
B.  Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution service or direct broadcast satellite service; or 
C.  Any telecommunications facilities located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City of LaFayette provided a license or lease authorizing the telecommunications facility has been approved by the Governing Body. 
D.  Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennae used solely for cable television services. 
III.  Co-location; availability of suitable existing structures. No new tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission and the Board of Appeals that no existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or alternative tower structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: 
A.  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
B.  That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
C.  That existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment. 
D.  That the applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures, or the antenna(s) on the existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures would cause such interference with the applicant's proposed antenna(s). 
E.  That the cost or contractual provisions required by the existing tower or suitable alternative tower structure owner to share an existing tower or suitable alternative tower structure or to adapt an existing tower or suitable alternative tower structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
F.  That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures unsuitable. 
IV.  Requirements for telecommunications facilities. 
A.  General requirements for all telecommunications facilities: The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance. 
1.  Building codes and safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of telecommunications facilities, the owner of a telecommunications facility shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for such telecommunications facilities, as amended from time to time. Owners of telecommunications facilities shall conduct periodic inspections of such facilities at least once every year to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a qualified, independent engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the Director. 
2.  Regulatory compliance. 
a.  All telecommunications facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of the telecommunications facilities governed by this ordinance shall bring such telecommunications facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within the date established by the agency promulgating the standards or regulations. 
b.  Owners of telecommunications facilities shall provide documentation showing that each telecommunications facility is in compliance with all applicable federal and state requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every 12 months. 
3.  Security. All telecommunications facilities shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device to prevent unauthorized access to the telecommunications facility. 
4.  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on telecommunications facilities unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction or unless necessary for air traffic safety. If lighting is required or necessary, the Director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
5.  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on telecommunication facilities. However, a whip antenna may be allowed on any legally permitted permanent billboard or outdoor advertising sign as long as the other requirements of this ordinance are met. 
6.  Visual impact. 
a.  Telecommunications facilities shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color or painted and/or textured to match the existing structure so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
b.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and associated electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. Roof-mounted antennas shall be made visually unobtrusive by screening to match existing air conditioning units, stairs, elevator towers or other background. 
c.  Where feasible, telecommunications facilities should be placed directly above, below or incorporated with vertical design elements of a building to help in camouflaging. 
d.  Telecommunications facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the Governing Body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
e.  Any equipment shelter or cabinet that supports telecommunications facilities must be concealed from public view or made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
7.  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the telecommunications facility from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property. 
b.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
c.  The Board of Appeals may waive or modify the landscaping requirement where lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes, for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms or where an antenna is placed on an existing structure. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be modified or waived by the Board of Appeals. 
8.  Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street. 
9.  Principal, accessory and joint uses. 
a.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicles storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a telecommunications facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the telecommunications facility. 
b.  Telecommunications facilities may be located on sites containing another principal use in the same buildable area. 
10.  Lot size and setbacks. 
a.  The following setback requirements shall apply to all telecommunications facilities, provided however, that the Board of Appeals may reduce the standard setback requirements of this section if the goals of this ordinance would be better served thereby. 
i.  Telecommunications towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
ii.  Towers, guy wires and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
iii.  Telecommunications facilities must be setback from any property line a sufficient distance to protect adjoining property from the potential impact of telecommunications facility failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in Section V. 
b.  For antennas attached to the roof or a supporting structure on a rooftop, a 1:1 setback ratio (example: ten foot (10') high antenna and supporting structure requires ten foot (10') setback from edge of roof) shall be maintained unless an alternative placement is shown to reduce visual impact. 
B.  Additional requirements for towers: 
1.  Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the surrounding buildings and land uses and the zone district as much as possible. Personal wireless telecommunication towers shall be integrated through location and design to blend in with existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. 
2.  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography shall be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site to the surrounding area. 
3.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower and related facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
4.  Towers shall not be located any closer than 1500 feet from an existing tower unless technologically required or visually preferable. 
5.  When a tower is adjacent to a residential use, it must be set back from the nearest residential lot line a distance at least equal to its total height. 
6.  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard, back yard or side yard in a residential district. 
7.  Towers shall not be sited where they will negatively affect historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the Governing Body or any state or federal law or agency or where they will create visual clutter. 
8.  Towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six (6) feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device or other similar protective device designed to prevent tower access. 
9.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted, provided all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible, provided tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
V.  Application procedures. 
A.  General application requirements for all building and conditional use permits. In addition to all other requirements of this section, the following information shall be submitted when applying for any building permit, conditional use permit or other permit or variance included in this ordinance and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
1.  Basic information. 
a.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. 
b.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in Section IV(A)(7). 
c.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
d.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
e.  Report from a qualified, independent engineer licensed in the State of Georgia, documenting the following: 
i.  Telecommunications facility height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
ii.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including number and types of antennae which can be accommodated; 
iii.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setback are of adequate size to contain debris. 
f.  A definition of the area of service to be served by the antenna or tower and whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity. 
g.  Information showing the proposed facility would provide the needed coverage or capacity. 
h.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility. Include name, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address, if applicable. 
i.  Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network. 
j.  Statement of the unavailability of existing towers or existing alternative tower structures as provided in Section III, above. 
2.  Five-year plan and site inventory. Each application shall include a five-year facilities plan and site inventory including the following: 
a.  A list of all existing, existing to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed telecommunications facility sites within the City limits and within one mile of the City limits and a map showing these sites. The list must include the following information for each site: 
i.  Street address; 
ii.  Assessor's Block and Lot or other applicable ad valorem tax identification number; 
iii.  Zoning district; 
iv.  Type of building (commercial, residential, mixed use) and number of stories; 
v.  The number of antennas and base transceiver stations per site and the location and type of antenna installation (stand alone rooftop, building facade, etc.) and location of the base transceiver station installation(s); 
vi.  The height from grade to the top of the antenna installation; and 
vii.  The radio frequency range in megahertz, the wattage output of the equipment and effective radiated power. 
b.  If the applicant does not know specific future tower and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the Assessor's Blocks contained within the anticipated geographic service area and identify each geographic service area within a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
3.  Additional information requirements for towers: 
a.  Applicants must identify all existing towers for which there are applicants currently on file with the Board of Appeals. Applicants must provide evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna. If co-location on any such towers would result in less visual impact than the visual impact of the proposed tower, applicants must justify why such collocation is not being proposed. If co-location on any such tower would increase negative visual impact, then the applicant must so state and demonstrate. The Board of Appeals will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The Board of Appeals shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
b.  In all zones, applicants must demonstrate that they cannot provide personal wireless communication service without the use of a telecommunications tower. 
c.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennae. The applicant shall provide a drawing for each tower showing existing and proposed antennae locations. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chose to be incorporated. The Board of Appeals may approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means. 
d.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site. 
4.  [ Additional information: ] The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the Planning Commission or the Board of Appeals to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact a proposed telecommunications facility. 
B.  Conditional use permits. In granting a conditional use permit, the Board of Appeals may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
VI.  Future co-location. Applicant and owner shall allow other future personal wireless service companies, including public and quasi-public agencies, using functionally equivalent personal wireless technology to co-locate antennae, equipment and facilities on a telecommunications facility unless specific technical constraints prohibit said co-location. Applicant and other personal wireless carriers shall provide a mechanism for the construction and maintenance of shared facilities and infrastructure and shall provide for equitable sharing cost in accordance with industry standards. 
VII.  Nuisances. Telecommunications facilities, including, without limitation, power source, ventilation and cooling, shall be operated at all times within the limits of the City of LaFayette Noises Ordinance, shall not be operated so as to cause the generation of heat that adversely affects a building occupant and shall not be maintained or operated in such a manner as to be nuisance. 
VIII.  Removal of antennae and towers. All telecommunications facilities shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such facilities. If upon inspection by the Director any such telecommunications facility is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the facility and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such facility into compliance. In the event such telecommunications facility is not brought into compliance within (30) days the City may provide notice to the owners requiring the telecommunications facility to be removed. In the event such telecommunications facility is not removed within (30) days of receipt of such notice, the City may remove such facility and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City's right to take action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
IX.  Abandoned towers. 
A.  Any telecommunications facility that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of it or any part of it. The owner of a telecommunications facility and the owner of the property where the facility is located shall be under a duty to remove the abandoned telecommunications facility. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the City notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the City may remove such tower and/or antennae and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned telecommunications facilities are removed. Delay by the City in taking action shall not in any way waive the City's right to take action. The City may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that telecommunications facilities not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute a danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The City may seek to have the telecommunications facility removed regardless of the owner's operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
B.  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this ordinance as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
X.  Preexisting towers/nonconforming uses. 
A.  All telecommunications facilities operative on February 8, 1999, shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use and shall be treated as a nonconforming use in accordance with Section 18-20.1 of the Municipal Code. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower or antenna of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing telecommunications facilities. New construction other than routine maintenance shall comply with requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  A telecommunications facility that has received City approval as of February 8, 1999, in form of either a building permit or conditional use exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation shall be considered an existing telecommunications facility so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
C.  Placement of an antenna on a nonconforming structure shall not be considered an expansion of the nonconforming structure. 
XI.  Penalty for violation of ordinance. 
A.  Any person who attempts to erect or erects a telecommunications facility covered by this ordinance without having first obtained the necessary building permit, conditional use permit or variance in the manner provided in this ordinance shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the city and shall be punished either by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 60 days or both. The court shall have the power and authority to place any person guilty of violation of this ordinance on probation and to suspend or modify any fine or sentence. As a condition of such suspension, the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment allowed by law. 
B.  If any structure is erected, constructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained in violation of this ordinance or without obtaining that required permits, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this article, the City, in addition to any other remedies, may institute proceedings to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use or to correct or abate such violations. Each and every day such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, maintenance or use continues may be deemed a separate offense. 
XII.  Coordination with federal law. Whenever the Governing Authority finds that the application of this ordinance would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services or prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, a conditional use permit waiving any or all of the provisions of this ordinance may be granted. 
(Ord. No. 99-3, §§ I-XII, 2-8-99) 
Section 29-65. - Building materials and design requirements. 
(a)  Multiple-Family Dwellings. The following provisions govern the use of building materials and design requirements for all new constructions, remodeling, repairs to fifty (50) percent or more, and renovations of multi-family dwellings within R-3 and B-2 Districts. 
Exterior façade materials: Exterior building materials for all sides visible from a street shall be composed of: 
(1)  A combination of at least fifty (50) percent brick masonry or stone masonry and fifty (50) percent fiber cement siding for each side; or 
(2)  Architectural designs with combinations of three (3) exterior materials such as brick, stone masonry and fiber cement siding in minimum percentages of thirty (30) percent for each side. 
Horizontal patterned fiber cement siding must be in the upper section of the structure. Architectural accent siding is allowable but must also be placed in the upper section of the structure. 
Architectural treatments shall be consistent on all sides of the building. 
Permitted materials shall be brick, stone, natural wood, or cement-based material siding having the appearance of wood, such as Hardi-Plank/Board. 
Prohibited Materials: Generally metal siding, vinyl siding, smooth-faced concrete block, split-face block masonry, textured concrete units, stone veneer, fiber cement, stucco, tilt-up concrete panels, prefabricated steel panels, standing-seam or corrugated metal walls, including aluminum, sheet metal or any other metal substance, standard concrete block, Masonite, T111 and all other forms of plywood, chipboard and particle board are all prohibited as external finish materials. 
Exceptions: Vinyl siding, split face block masonry or textured concrete units are allowable on any side not visible from a street. Split face block masonry is allowable at ground level up to four (4) blocks high on any side not visible from the street. 
Façade Articulation: Buildings designed with completely flat façades and monotone color schemes are not permitted. All buildings are required to have horizontal and vertical façade variations such as pop-outs, bays, recesses, arches, banding, columns, or similar features and modulation such to break up roof lines. Such features are required at least every ten (10) feet along all exterior wall planes and shall be of sufficient width and depth to clearly differentiate each feature from those next to and around. All exterior walls facing a public street or parking area should be articulated by a change in material or depth of material and by fenestration (the design and disposition of windows and other exterior openings). Building elements such as porches, bays or projections should be used to break up the appearance of a long wall. 
Roof materials: All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, clay tiles, slate or standing seam metal. Metal or tin roofs are not permitted except for standing seam metal, and then only if they have a reflectance similar to (or less than) that of the siding material. 
Pitched Roofs: All structures shall have a minimum roof pitch of 5:12. 
Flat Roofs: No flat roofs are permitted. 

(b)  Commercial buildings: The following provisions govern the use of building materials and design requirements for all new constructions, remodeling, repairs to fifty (50) percent or more, and renovations of commercial buildings within B-1 and B-2 Districts. 
Exterior façade materials: Exterior building materials for all sides visible from a street shall be composed of: 
(1)  A combination of at least fifty (50) percent brick masonry, stone masonry, split face block masonry or textured concrete units and fifty (50) percent fiber cement siding for each side; or 
(2)  Architectural designs with combinations of three (3) exterior materials such as brick, stone masonry, split face block masonry, textured concrete units and fiber cement siding shall in minimum percentages of thirty (30) percent for each side. 
Horizontal patterned fiber cement siding must be in the upper section of the structure. Architectural accent siding is allowable but must also be placed in the upper section of the structure. 
Architectural treatments shall be consistent on all sides of the building. 
EIFS systems are not preferred but are permitted provided it consists of no more than thrity (30) percent of each exterior side and is installed in the upper half of the structure. 

Façade Articulation: Buildings designed with completely flat façades and monotone color schemes are not permitted. All buildings are required to have horizontal and vertical façade variations such as pop-outs, bays, recesses, arches, banding, columns, or similar features and modulation such to break up roof lines. Such features are required at least every thirty (30) feet along all exterior wall planes and shall be of sufficient width and depth to clearly differentiate each feature from those next to and around. All exterior walls facing a public street or parking area should be articulated by a change in material or depth of material and by fenestration (the design and disposition of windows and other exterior openings). Building elements such as canopies, porches, bays or projections should be used to break up the appearance of a long wall. 

Prohibited Materials: Metal siding, vinyl siding, smooth-faced concrete block, stucco, tilt-up concrete panels, prefabricated steel panels, standing-seam or corrugated metal walls, including aluminum, sheet metal or any other metal substance, standard concrete block, Masonite, T111 and all other forms of plywood, chipboard and particle board are all prohibited as external finish materials. 
Roof materials: All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, clay tiles, slate or standing seam metal. Metal or tin roofs are not permitted except for standing seam metal, and then only if they have a reflectance similar to (or less than) that of the siding material. 
Pitched Roofs: All structures shall have a minimum roof pitch of 5:12. 
Flat Roofs: No flat roofs are permitted without façade and roof design sufficient enough to create modulation and screening of HVAC other types of equipment that are non-architectural treatments. 
(Ord. No. 18-08, § 2, 5-14-2018) 
Sections 29-66-29-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Section 29-70. - Enforcement officer. 
    The provisions of this Chapter shall be administered and enforced by the Building Inspector. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections of buildings on premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this Chapter. 
    If the Building Inspector shall find that any of the provisions of this Chapter area [are] being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures; removal of illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this Chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
Section 29-71. - Building permits. 
    It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or other structure, or to store building materials or erect temporary field offices, or to commence the moving, alteration, or repair (except repairs consisting only of painting or wallpapering) of a principal building until the Building Inspector has issued for such work a building permit including a statement that the plans and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provisions of this Chapter. Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building Inspector on forms provided for that purpose. 
Section 29-72. - Application for building permits. 
    It shall be unlawful for the Building Inspector to issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected the required information on such excavation or construction. The applicant shall submit two copies of a dimensioned sketch or scale plan signed by the owner or his authorized agent indicating the shape, size, and location of the lot to be built upon, the shape, size, use and location of the buildings to be erected, demolished, altered, or moved, and of any existing buildings on the lot, the number of dwelling units the buildings [building] is designed to accommodate, if any, setback lines of the buildings on adjoining lots, and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this Chapter are being observed. 
Section 29-73. - Time limitations for building permits. 
    Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six (6) months of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one (1) year. 
Section 29-74. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
    No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in its use shall be used or occupied until stating that such land or building or part thereof is found to be in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter. 
    Within three (3) days after the owner of [or] his agent has notified the Building Inspector that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a Certificate of Occupancy if the building and premises are found to conform with the provisions of this Chapter; or if such certificate is refused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause. 
Section 29-75. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished for each offense according to law. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 29-76. - Remedies. 
    In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this Chapter, the Building Inspector or any other appropriate city authority or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute an injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each such building or use of land. 
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section 29-80. - Board of appeals established. 
    A Board of Appeals is hereby established. Said Board shall consist of five members, appointed by the Mayor and City Council. The members shall serve for overlapping terms of three years or until succeeded. The initial individual appointment shall be two members for terms of one year, one member for two years, and two members for the regular term. None of the members shall hold any other public office or position, except that one member shall also be a member of the Planning Commission. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the Mayor and City Council upon written charges and after public hearing. 
Section 29-81. - Proceedings. 
    The Board shall elect its Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and Secretary, each of whom shall serve for one year, or until he is reelected, or his successor is elected. The Board shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs, and in keeping with the provisions of this Chapter. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chairman and at such other times as the Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence the Vice-Chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. 
    The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the Board and shall be public record. 
Section 29-82. - Hearings, appeals, and notices. 
    Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, or Council of the City affected by any decision of the Building Official regarding this Chapter. Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the Board of Appeals, by filing with the Building Inspector and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the ground thereof. The Building Inspector shall transmit forthwith to the Board all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken. 
    The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice of at least fifteen days in the local newspaper, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(Ord. No. 99-10, § 2, 10-11-99) 
Section 29-83. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board of Appeals after the notice shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate of stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board of Appeals or by a court of record on application, on notice to the Building Inspector and on due cause shown. 
Section 29-84. - Powers and duties. 
    The Board of Appeals shall have the following powers and duties: 
Administrative Review. 
    To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirements, decision or determination made by the Building Inspector in the enforcement of this Chapter. 
Conditional Uses. 
    To hear and decide only such conditional uses as the Board of Appeals is specifically authorized to pass on by Article VI of this Chapter; to decide such questions as are involved in determining whether conditional uses should be granted; and to grant conditional uses with such conditions and safeguards as are appropriate under this Chapter; or to deny conditional uses when not in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Chapter. 
    A conditional use shall not be granted by the Board of Appeals unless and until: 
a.  A written application for a conditional use is submitted indicating the section of this Chapter under which the conditional use is sought and stating the ground on which it is requested. 
b.  Appropriate notice is given by mail to the owner of the property for which conditional use is sought or his attorney. 
c.  The proposed use has been reviewed by the Planning Commission. 
d.  The Board of Appeals shall make a finding that it is empowered under the section of this Chapter described in the application to grant the conditional use and that the granting of the conditional use will not adversely affect the public interest. 
    When acting upon such application for a conditional use, the Board of Appeals shall give consideration to the following factors, where applicable: 
a.  The proposed design and location of the particular development. 
b.  The possible traffic-generating characteristics of the proposed development. 
c.  The effects the proposed development will have on the present or intended character of the area in which it proposes to locate. 
d.  The availability of public utilities, facilities and services. 
    In granting the conditional use, the Board of Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this Chapter. Violation of such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms under which the conditional use is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this Chapter and punishable under Article VII of this Chapter. 
Variances. 
    To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this Chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the Chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this Chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. A variance from the terms of this Chapter shall not be granted by the Board of Appeals unless and until: 
a.  A written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating that: 
(1)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
(2)  The application of the Chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(3)  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular land, building, or structure involved, and not applicable to any other existing situation in the same District; 
(4)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Chapter, provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this Chapter; 
(5)  A literal interpretation of this Chapter would deprive the applicant of any right that others in the same District are allowed; 
(6)  The special circumstances are not a result of the action of the applicant; 
(7)  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this Chapter to other lands, structures, or buildings in this District; 
(8)  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the land, building, or structure. 
b.  The Board shall make findings that the requirements set forth in this section have been met; that the reasons set forth in the application justify the granting of the variance; and that the granting of such variance is in harmony with the spirit of this Chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood. 
Section 29-85. - Decisions of the board of appeals. 
    In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of this Chapter, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the Building Inspector. 
    The concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of any Building Inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the Board is required to pass under this Chapter, or to effect any variation in this Chapter. 
(Ord. of 4-8-91, § 1) 
Section 29-86. - Appeals from the board of appeals. 
    Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Appeals may seek review by a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE IX. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 29-90. - Authority. 
    The City Council may from time to time on its own motion or on petition, after public notice and hearing as provided by law, amend, supplement, or change, modify, or repeal the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently established, after submitting the same to the City Planning Commission for its recommendations and report. 
    The City Council in exercising its zoning power and the City Planning Commission in investigating and making a recommendation to a zoning proposal shall consider the following standards, to wit: 
(1)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(4)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(5)  Whether there are existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal; 
(6)  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
(7)  Extent to which property values are diminished, if any, by the existing zoning; 
(8)  The suitability of the property involved in the zoning proposal for the currently zoned purposes; 
(9)  If vacant, the length of time the property has been vacant as currently zoned, considered in the context of land development of adjacent and nearby property; and 
(10)  Any special characteristics of the property involved in the zoning proposal. 
    In addition to the above standards, the City Council may consider other criteria and factors which it finds relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality or general welfare against the right of the unrestricted use of property. 
(Ord. of 4-8-91, § 2) 
Section 29-91. - Procedure-Public notice. 
    Before enacting an amendment to this Chapter, the City Council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of such public hearing shall be published in the local newspaper which provides circulation within the City. The applicant for a change in zoning to a parcel of land shall place a sign with a minimum size of 24 × 36 inches on the parcel subject to change in a location where the sign is visible from an adjacent street. Such sign shall give notice of the requested zoning change, citing the existing and requested zoning, the time, date and place of the public hearing, and shall be placed on such property fifteen (15) days prior to said hearing and shall remain there continuously until after the public hearing. 
Section 29-92. - Official zoning map, changes. 
    Any amendment to the Zoning Chapter requiring a change in district boundaries shall be shown on the Official Zoning Map on the date the amendment becomes effective. Such changes shall be noted, dated, and signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Manager. 
Section 29-93. - Periodic review of zoning chapter. 
    At intervals of not less than five (5) years, the Planning Commission shall reexamine the provisions of this Chapter and the location of district boundary lines and shall submit a report to the Mayor and City Council, recommending such changes or amendments, if any, which may be desirable in the interest of public safety, health, convenience, necessity, or the general welfare. 
Section 29-94. - Procedure-Publication of public notice for rezoning of property. 
    If a zoning decision of the City of LaFayette is for the rezoning of property then the notice of public hearing published in the local newspaper which provides circulation within the City shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property and the proposed zoning classification of the property. 
(Ord. No. 96-18, § 1, 9-9-96) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 96-18, §§ 1-4, adopted Sept. 9, 1996 amended the Code by adding new §§ 18-25.5-18-25.8. In order to keep related material together, said sections have been redesignated as §§ 29-94-29-97 at the discretion of the editor. 
Section 29-95. - Same-Governing the conducting of public hearings on a proposed action resulting in a zoning decision. 
    Each speaker shall be allowed five (5) minutes to address the City Council concerning the zoning application then under consideration, unless the City Council, prior to or at the time of the reading of the proposed application, votes to allow additional time in which to address the council on said proposed zoning decision or application. The speaker may initially use all the time allotted to the speaker to speak or the speaker may speak and reserve a portion of the allotted time for rebuttal. Provided, however, that the proponents and opponents of each proposed zoning application shall have an equal minimum time period of no less than ten (10) minutes per side for presentation of data, evidence and opinion. A designated timekeeper shall record the time expended by each speaker. 
(Ord. No. 96-18, § 2, 9-9-96) 
Note- See editor's note at § 29-94. 
Section 29-96. - Same-Defeated amendments. 
    If the zoning decision of the City of LaFayette is for the rezoning of property and the amendment to the zoning ordinance to accomplish the rezoning is defeated by the City of LaFayette, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the City of LaFayette. 
Note- See editor's note at § 29-94. 
Section 29-97. - Standards for considering zoning decisions. 
    The City of LaFayette will use the following standards for amending the Zoning Ordinance: 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values of the owner promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the property owner; 
(5)  The suitability for the subject property for the zoned purposes; 
(6)  The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
(7)  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent or nearby property; 
(8)  Whether the zoning will adversely affect the existing use or useability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(9)  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(10)  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools; 
(11)  If the city has adopted a land use plan, whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy an intent of the land use plan; and 
(12)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
Note- See editor's note at § 29-94. 
ARTICLE X. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 29-100. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever the regulations of this Chapter require a greater width or size of yards or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute, the requirements of these regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this Chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Section 29-101. - Separability. 
    Should any section or provision of this Chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect any other portion or provision of this Chapter. 
Section 29-102. - Repeal of previous chapters. 
    This revised Ordinance repeals all previous City of LaFayette Zoning Ordinances and amendments thereto. 
Section 29-103. - Effective date. 
    This Chapter is adopted by the Mayor and City Council of LaFayette, Georgia, and becomes effective this 14th day of October, 1974. The regulations of this chapter shall be in effect except where a building permit has been granted prior to the effective date of this chapter, and the same remains valid under the Zoning Ordinance in effect immediately prior to the effective date hereof, and such building authorized by such permit shall continue to be governed by said Ordinance until the building is completed or the building permit becomes invalid. 
Sections 29-104-29-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, adopted July 10, 2000, set out provisions for use as § 18-22,7 of the zoning ordinance. To preserve the numbering of the zoning ordinance of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. XI, §§ 29-121-29-153. 

Section 29-121. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, these provisions represent a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(b)  Findings. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, City of Carrollton, City of LaGrange, City of Dalton, City of Rome, Whitfield County, Richmond County, DeKalb County, Fulton County, and City of Augusta, which experience, we believe are relevant to the problems faced by the City of LaFayette, Georgia, the mayor and council take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our state. Moreover, it is the findings of the mayor and council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity is disorderly conduct, assault, batteries, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity is depression of the surrounding property and the absence of new businesses coming into the area surrounding the establishments, and a deterioration in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein above described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, these provisions are adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. These provisions are designed to combat undesirable secondary effects, to combat a decline in surrounding property, and to combat an increase in crime. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-122. - Adult entertainment establishments defined. 
    Under these provisions, the term adult entertainment establishment shall include, without limitation, the following types of establishments, which shall be defined as follows: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five (5) percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business, other than those expressly specified in these provisions, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of twenty-five (25) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than twenty-five (25) persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five (5) percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five (5) percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort bureau; introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-123. - Definitions. 
    The following terms, as used in these provisions, shall have the meanings indicated below: 
    Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order united under one (1) form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; organization for religious purposes. 
    Good moral character. A person is of good moral character according to these provisions if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
    Minor means, for the purposes of these provisions, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-124. - Regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to these provisions. 
(b)  No later than March first of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two (2) years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of eighteen (18) years or a person not licensed pursuant to these provisions. 
(e)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by these provisions. 
(h)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two (2) feet from the level of the floor. 
(i)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron. 
(j)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(k)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(l)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(m)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths (3 5/10 ) foot candles per square foot. 
(n)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section of these provisions or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-125. - Certain activities prohibited. 
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-126. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any adult entertainment establishment without a license so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the State of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-127. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under these provisions, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-128. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-129. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-130. - Location. 
    No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which any other adult entertainment establishment is located; 
(5)  Within any zoning category other than the following categories: 
a.  General light industrial (I-1); 
b.  General industrial (I-2). 
(6)  On less than three (3) acres of land containing at least one hundred (100) feet of road frontage. 
For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from any door of the establishment to the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-131. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in these provisions. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five (5) years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular City of LaFayette or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after hearing may be appealed to the LaFayette Mayor and Council which may issue such order as is required. An investigation fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of any of these provisions, the ordinances of the City of LaFayette, laws and regulations of the State of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of these provisions, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-132. - Application for license. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the mayor and council, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by these provisions. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application for license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-133. - Application contents. 
    Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five (5) years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two (2) photographs of the applicant at least two (2) inches by two (2) inches taken within the last six (6) months prior to the date of the application; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five (5) percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five (5) percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one (1) or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporation shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under these provisions, but only one (1) application fee shall be charged; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five (5) percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five (5) percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five (5) years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual, applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three (3) character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five (5) years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the State of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-134. - Applicant to appear. 
    The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the city clerk and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee has been paid; that the application containing the aforementioned and described information has been presented to the city clerk; and that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-135. - Application; investigation. 
    The city clerk shall have forty-five (45) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may upon two (2) readings, grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to these provisions; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders owning more than five (5) percent of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one (1) or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five (5) years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of these provisions or any other ordinance or regulation of the City of LaFayette, State of Georgia or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of LaFayette or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-136. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided for by these provisions shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five (5) percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five (5) percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who in not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the State of Georgia or the City of LaFayette. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-137. - License-Refusal; appeal. 
    If the city clerk, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in these provisions, he shall notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-138. - Same-Renewal. 
    Licenses for adult entertainment establishments, may be renewed by the city clerk on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in these provisions. The renewal fees for the adult entertain establishment licenses shall be established by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-139. - Same-Nontransferable. 
    No adult entertainment establishment license maybe sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one (1) or more of the partners should die, one (1) or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-140. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the mayor and council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city clerk. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the Code have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an, adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-141. - Appeal-Procedure. 
    The licensee shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination by the city clerk, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and council, and the name and address of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular mayor and council meeting occurring not loss than five (5) nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt, of the application for mayor's and council's action. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-142. - Same-Mayor and council determine procedure. 
    When an appeal is placed on the mayor and council's agenda, the mayor and council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-143. - Mayor and council hearing. 
    Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before, the mayor and council, at the time and date set therefore, the mayor and council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-144. - Powers of hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in these provisions may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-145. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
    The mayor and council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under these provisions. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-146. - Hearing officer-Report. 
    The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date a hearing before the hearing officer is terminated, submit a written report to the mayor and council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished the city manager and director of public safety. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the mayor and council occurring not less than ten (10) days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-147. - Same-Action by mayor and council. 
    The mayor and council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the mayor and council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in these provisions; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-148. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of these provisions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of these provisions shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-149. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of these provisions shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of these provisions. In addition, violation of the provisions of these provisions shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-150. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
    Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination, shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-151. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
    The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-152. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his finding of a violation of these provisions resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four (24) hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
Section 29-153. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 00-10, § 1, 7-10-2000) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1975 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, as updated through August, 1975, which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1975 Code 
Section Section 
this Code 2-10-2-20 5-1-5-11 2-30 5-12 3-10-3-23 5-21-5-34 3-30 5-35 4-10-4-13 6-16-6-19 5-10, 5-11 6-36, 6-37 6-10, 6-11 6-51, 6-52 7-10-7-19 6-71-6-80 8-10, 8-11 13-1, 13-2 9-11, 9-12 13-52, 13-53 10-11-10-15 13-72-13-76 11-10 22-1 11-20-11-23 22-2-22-5 11-30-11-36 22-6-22-12 12-10-12-18 13-91-13-99 13-10-13-15 7-1-7-6 14-10-14-14 16-1-16-5 15-10-15-14 13-16-13-20 15-20, 15-21 13-21, 13-22 15A-10, 15A-11 20-16, 20-17 16-10-16-12 2-16-2-18 16-20-16-22 2-36-2-38 17-10-17-13 2-46-2-49 17-20-17-25 2-66-2-71 18-10-18-16 2-81-2-87 20-10, 20-11 10-16 20-12-20-18 10-17-10-23 21-10-21-14 10-24-10-28 21-20 10-41 22-10, 22-11 18-1, 18-2 23-10 18-3 24-10-24-17 8-1-8-8 25-10-25-13 17-16-17-19 25-20, 25-21 17-20, 17-21 26-10-26-14 17-36-17-40 27-10, 27-11 17-56, 17-57 28-10-28-12 17-71-17-73 30-10, 30-11 14-1 30-20-30-24 14-51-14-55 30-30-30-32 14-71-14-73 30-33-30-39 14-75-14-81 30-39.2 14-82 30-50 14-34, 14-35 30-51, 30-52 14-31, 14-32 30-60-30-69 14-2-14-11 30-70-30-76 14-106-14-112 30-80-30-84 14-113-14-117 30-86 14-118 31-11 9-4 32-10-32-14 15-1-15-5 32-16 15-6 32-19.1-32-19.5 15-7-15-11 32-20-32-25 3-1-3-6 33-10 9-1 34-10-34-13 12-16-12-19 35-10-35-19 12-36-12-45 36-10-36-12 12-61-12-63 37-10-37-13 12-1-12-4 37-20-37-26 12-5-12-11 38-10-38-16 19-1-19-7 38-20-38-29 19-21-19-30 38-30-38-34 19-46-19-50 38-40-38-47 19-66-19-73 40-10-40-14 21-1-21-5 40-20-40-22 21-6-21-8 40-30-40-37 21-9-21-16 40-38 21-19 40-39 21-18 40-39.1 21-19  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code, as updated through August, 1975, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1975 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance Date Section Section this Code 2-9-76 14-34 14-36 11-8-76 14-74 3-14-77(Mo.) 7-2 7-18-77 1 11-1-11-4 2 11-5, 11-6 3 11-7-11-12 4 11-31-11-35 5 11-51-11-53 9-11-78 21-25 10-9-78 1 4-51 1.2-1.5 4-52-4-55 1.7-1.16 4-57-4-66 2.1-2.6 4-81-4-86 3.2-3.24 4-17-4-39 4.1 4-40 11-13-78 9.1-9.3 12-11-78 I 21-23 II 21-24 3-24-79 20-1 9-22-79 14-1 14-33 12-10-79 1-8 6-91-6-98 10-13-80 1 21-20 2, 3 21-21 4, 5 21-22 3-9-81 1 16-6 7-13-81(1) 4-16 12-14-81 I-III 2-1 8-8-83 1-10 21-61-21-70 11-14-83 8(a), 8(b) 21-86, 21-87 8(c) 21-87.1 8(d)-8(f) 21-88-21-90 8(g)-8(j) 21-91 8(k)-8(o) 21-92-21-96 9-14 21-97-21-102 11-14-83(1) 1 13-36 13-38 2 13-37 4-7 13-39-13-42 11-14-83(2) Art. 1-Art. 4 21-121-21-124 Art. 5 21-125, 21-126 Art. 6, Art. 7 21-127, 21-128 1-25-84(1-19) 1 13-151-13-169 10-1-85 5-6 1-13-86 41-10-41-17 21-36-21-43 2-11-86(1) 1 13-36 3 13-38 2-11-86(2) A App. A, § 29-20 B-D App. A, § 29-51 2-11-86(3) 4-56 4-14-86 A App. A, § 29-12 C App. A, § 29-63 2-9-87 Arts. 1, 2 11-1, 11-2 Art. 3, §§ A-H 11-3-11-10 Art. 4, §§ A-D 11-16-11-19 Art. 5, §§ A-E 11-26-11-30 2-9-87 App. A, §§ 29-12(22.5), 29-50.5, 29-60 8-10-87 1-7 6-121-6-127 8 Rpld 6-16, 6-17, 6-36, 6-37, 6-51, 6-52, 6-71-6-80  
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 1-88 1-11-88 A App. A, § 29-50.2 B App. A, § 29-50.3 C App. A, §§ 29-12(30.5), 29-60 3-88 2-8-88 1-9 13-111-13-119 4-88 12-14-87 1, 2 15-7.1 5-88 6-13-88 Adopting ord., p. ix 6-88 6-17-88 1-4 21-141-21-144 5, 6(d) 21-145 7-88 8-15-88 1, 2 14-34 3 14-35 4, 5 14-36 8-88 9-12-88 14-35 9-88 9-12-88 1-16 13.5-1-13.5-16 10-88 11-14-88 1 6-121 2, 3 6-128, 6-129  5-12-89 1-3 13-131-13-133 4 13-137 5, 6 13-139, 13-140 7 13-138 8 13-136 9, 10 13-134, 13-135 11 13-132 12 13-141  7- 9-90 1-3 14-6  7- 9-90 14-35  3-11-91 1-6 6-20  4- 8-91 1 29-85 2 2-90  6-10-91 21-125(d)(3), (f)       Rpld 21-125(g)  8-12-91 1, 2 14-1 10-14-91 1, 2 6-121(a)  1-31-92 1, 2 14-35(15)  9-10-92 14-74.1 93-1  4-12-93 1 7-2 93-4  5-19-93 1-17(a)  
Ordinance 
Date Section  Section 
this Code 11-14-94 1-7 13-36-13-42  1- 9-95 1       Rpld 13-151-13-169       Added 13-151-13-168  2-13-95 1-4       Added 2-39  6-12-95 I-VIII       Added 18.5-1-18.5-8  9-11-95 1 18.5-5(3)  4- 8-96 1, 2 21-87, 21-88 3 21-91(a) 4       Added 21-96.1 5-7 21-121 8-10 21-125 11 21-128(b)(2)  
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 95-6  4-10-95 29-51 96-14  8-12-96 1       Added 6-130 96-18  9- 9-96 1-4       Added 29-94-29-97 1.1  4-13-98 1(1.1-1.4) 21-111-21-114 2(2.1-2.9) 21-115-21-123 3(3.1-3.4) 21-124-21-127 4(4.1-4.7) 21-128-21-134 5(5.1-5.7) 21-135-21-140.1 6(6.1-6.11) 21-140.2-21-140.12 7(7.1, 7.2) 21-140.13, 21-140.14 8 21-140.15 9 21-140.16 10(10.1-10.9) 21-140.17-21-140.25 11(11.1-11.4) 21-140.26-21-140.29 12(12.1, 12.2) 21-140.30, 21-140.31 13(13.1-13.3) 21-140.32-21-140.34 14(14.1-14.3) 21-140.35-21-140.37 98-1  6- 8-98 1       Rpld 13-151-13-168       Added 13-151-13-167 98-2  6- 8-98 1 App. A, § 29-51 98-5 11- 9-98 1 App. A, § 29-50 99-3  2- 8-99 I-XII       Added App. A, § 29-64 99-4  4-12-99 1-3       Added 21-26 99-6  8- 9-99 1 12-36(8)-(10) 2 12-38 3 12-39 4 12-40 5 12-41 6 12-42 7 12-43 99-7  9-13-99 1 1-2 2 6-121(b) 3 6-128(b) 4 13-1 99-9 10-11-99 1 App. A, § 29-12(5.5) 2 App. A, § 29-50 99-10 10-11-99 1 App. A, § 29-50 2 App. A, § 29-82 99-11 12-13-99 1 4-19(a) 99-12 12-13-99 1       Added 13-120-13-122 99-13 12-13-99 1 2-1(c) 00-4  2-14-2000 1 29-50, 29-51 00-5  4-10-2000 1 21-1 2 21-2 3 21-8 4 21-10 00-9  7-10-2000 1       Added 12-12 00-10  7-10-2000 1       Added 29-121-29-152 2, 3       Added 29-50 00-11  8-14-2000 1       Added 20-18 00/13 10- 9-2000 1 7-2 01-1  1- 8-2001 I-VI 6-151-6-156 01-2  1- 8-2001 1 21-141-21-145 01-3  1- 8-2001 1-7 15-31-15-37 2001-04  3-12-2001 I-VI 6-181-6-186 2001-05  3-12-2001 I-VII 6-211-6-217 01-6  6-11-2001 I 6-152 2001-08  6-11-2001 I-IX 18.5-1-18.5-9 01-09  9-10-2001 1.1 20.5-1 2.1-2.8 20.5-21-20.5-28 3.1-3.3 20.5-31-20.5-33 02-01  1-14-2002 App. A, §§ 29-50, 29-60 02-02  3-11-2002 1(a)(b) 22-8(a)(b) 02-03  3-11-2002 1(a) 22-12(a) 1(b) 22-12(c) 1(c) 22-12(d) 02/05  7-19-2002 1-7 5-61-5-67 02-06  7- 8-2002 1(a)-1(d) 18.5-3 02-07  7- 8-2002 1 13-151 02-08  7- 8-2002 1 8-1-8-8 02-09  7- 8-2002 1       Added 8-4(c) 02-13 10-14-2002 1       Added App. A, § 29-47 02-15 11-18-2002 1 4-19(a) 02-16 11-18-2002 1(1-3) 4-16(2)-(4) 02-17 12- 9-2002 1       Added 6-218 02-18 12- 9-2002 1       Added 6-219 03-03  3-11-2003 1       Added 14-35(16)(17) 03-06  6- 9-2003 1 21-5 03-07  7-14-2003 1 21-9 03-08  7-14-2003 1 21-11 03-09  7-14-2003 1 21-17 03-10  9- 8-2003 1 3-3 03-11  9- 8-2003 1 3-4 03-12 10-13-2003 1 App. A, § 29-42 03-13 12- 8-2003 1 App. A, § 29-50 04/7  3- 8-2004 I       Added 21-27-21-30 04/08  4-12-2004 I 21-28, 21-29       Added 21-31 04-12  8- 9-2004 1 App. A, § 29-34 04-15 11- 8-2004 1, 2 App. A, § 29-50 05-01  4-11-2005 1       Added 13.5-2(d) 2 13.5-9 3 13.5-12 05-02  6-13-2005 1 21-37 2 21-40(b) 3 21-41(a) 4 21-42 5 21-43 3 App. A, § 29-60 06/01  5- 8-2006 1, 2       Rnbd App. A, Table; § 29-50.5       As App. A, Table; § 29-50.1 2 App. A, Table; § 29-50.5 06/02  5- 8-2006 1 App. A, § 29-50.1 App. A, § 29-50.2 App. A, § 29-50.3 2 App. A, § 29-12 (26.1) 3 App. A, § 29-60 06/09 12-14-2006 1-11       Added 2-101-2-111 07/4  7- 9-2007 1 6-128 07-5  7-11-2007 1       Added 9-5 07/6  8-14-2007 Art. 1, §§ A-D 11-1 Art. 6 11-2 Art. 2, § A 11-3 Art. 2, § B 11-4 Art. 2, § C 11-5 Art. 2, § D 11-6 Art. 2, § E 11-7 Art. 2, § F 11-8 Art. 2, § G 11-9 Art. 2, § H 11-10 Art. 3, § A 11-16 Art. 3, § B 11-17 Art. 3, § C 11-18 Art. 4, § A 11-26 Art. 4, § B 11-27 Art. 4, § C 11-28 Art. 4, § D 11-29 Art. 4, § E 11-30 Art. 4, § F 11-31 Art. 5 11-45 07/8  9-17-2007 1       Dltd 5-7 2 5-21 3       Dltd 5-33 4       Rnbd Art. III 4       as Art. IV 5 5-43-5-51 07/9 10- 8-2007 1 5-44(5) 2007/12 12-10-2007 1 21-120 08/2  1-14-2008 1 6-128 08-3  2-11-2008 1       Added 20-31 08-7  4-14-2008 1       Added 29-12(16)a 2 29-50.4 3 29-50.5 08-08  5-12-2008 1       Added ch. 18.2, 18.2-1-18.2-21 08-09  5-12-2008 1       Added 20-32 2       Added 20-33 3       Added 20-34 08-10  5-12-2008 1 9-1(b) 2 9-1(c) 08-11  7-14-2008       Rpld 20-32 1 20-33 2       Rpld 20-34       Added 20-34 08-12 10-13-2008 1 App. A, 
§§ 29-42, 29-43 08-14 10-13-2008 Charter, App. I 08-15 10-23-2008 1 21-32 2 21-33 08-16 10-23-2008 1 4-24 08-17 12- 8-2008 1       Added 20.5-34 2       Added 20.5-35 09-02  3- 9-2009 1       Added App. A, § 29-36 09/04  6- 8-2009 1 2-102 2 2-104(d)(7) 3 2-106(o)(8) 09/05  9-14-2009 1       Added 14-38 09-08 12-14-2009 1 App. A, § 29-50.6 2 App. A, § 29-60 2010-02  7-12-2010 1-33       Added 4-101-4-133 10-03  8- 9-2010       Added 6-230-6-237 11-01  1- 8-2011 1 29-51 11-03  2-14-2011 1       Added 21-146, 21-147 12-01  1-18-2012 13-133 12-02  4- 9-2012 A       Added 2-141-2-150 12-03  9-10-2012 1       Rpld 15-9       Added 15-9 12-04  9-10-2012 1 4-58(a)(1) 2       Rpld 4-58(a)(5) 3 4-108(b) 12-05 10- 8-2012 1       Rpld 4-22       Added 4-22 13-1  9- 9-2013 1 29-51 13-2 10-14-2013 1       Rpld 15-9       Added 15-9 13-3 10-14-2013 1       Added 21-34 14-1  1-13-2014 1, 2       Added 2-72 14-2  1-13-2014 13.5-1-13.5-11 15-01  2- 9-2015       Rpld 13.5-1-13.5-11       Added 13.5-1-13.5-11 15-02  3- 2-2015 1 2-16 15-03  5-11-2015 1       Added 14-39 2 14-34 3 14-35 16-01  2- 8-2016 1 4-103(2), (9) 17-02  2-13-2017 1 29-50 2       Added 29-12(36.1) 17-03  4-10-2017 1       Rpld 4-24       Added 4-24 17-04  7-18-2017 1       Rpld 6-121       Added 6-121 2       Rpld 6-122       Added 6-122 3       Rpld 6-123       Added 6-123 4       Rpld 6-124       Added 6-124 5 6-125(b) 6 6-128(1) 7       Rpld 6-130       Added 6-130 17-05 10- 9-2017 1       Added 15-12 17-06 11-13-2017 1 12-36 2 12-37 3       12-33 4 12-39 5       Rpld 12-40-12-60 18-01  1- 8-2018 1 5-46(a) 18-02  2-12-2018 1       Added 6-21 18-03  2-12-2018 1-11 6-218-6-228 18-04  2-12-2018 1       Added 19-80-19-84 18-05  2-12-2018 1 5-44(1) 2 5-44(4) 3 5-46(a) 18-06  4- 9-2018 1       Rpld 12-1-12-12       Added 12-1-12-6 3       Rpld 12-16-12-19 18-07  4- 9-2018 1 App. A, § 29-50 2, 3 App. A, § 29-60 18-08  5-14-2018 1       Added App. A, § 29-65 18-09  6-11-2018 1       Added App. A, § 29-12(38.2) 2 App. A, § 29-50.5 3 App. A, § 29-60(b) 18-10 12-10-2018 1 4-16 2 4-111 3       Added 4-150-4-167 19-01  1-14-2019 1       Added 19-90-19-98, 19-100-19-107 19-03  3-11-2019 15-12       Added 15-13 19-04  3-11-2019 1(15-13)       Added 15-14  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
Ga. 
Constitution 
Article Section Paragraph  Section 
this Code VI I I Ch. 9 IX Ch. 2 II III Ch. 16 III(a)(1) Ch. 10 Ch. 18 III(a)(3) Ch. 5 III(a)(4) Ch. 19 III(a)(6) Ch. 21, Art. V IV Ch. 17 Ch. 20  
OCGA 
Section Section  
this Code 1-3-1 1-4 1-3-1(d)(3) 1-2 1-3-2 1-2 1-3-3 1-2 18.5-3 21-146 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 13-156 tit. 3 Ch. 4 tit. 3, ch. 5 4-51 tit. 3, ch. 6 4-81 3-1-2 4-24 3-3-2 4-39 3-5-1-3-6-76 Ch. 4, Art. II 3-5-40 4-52 3-5-60 4-61 3-6-60 4-86 3-8-2 4-24 tit. 4 Ch. 5 tit. 4, ch. 8 Ch. 5, Art. II 5-2-21(3) 6-121 5-2-25(b) 6-121 tit. 5, ch. 4 21-31 5-3-29 6-219 5-4-1 11-45 7-1-4 19-83 7-2-23 6-122 tit. 8 Ch. 6 tit. 8, ch. 2 6-219 8-2-1 et seq. 21-145 8-2-21 6-122 8-2-25(a) 6-121 8-2-26(d) 6-130 8-2-96 6-130 9-11-6 1-2 10-1-622 13-151 12-2-8 18.5-4 12-4-72 18.5-3 tit. 12, ch. 5, 
art. 3, Pt. 5 21-37 12-5-20 18.5-2 12-5-30 18.5-4 12-5-440 et seq. 18.5-2 12-6-24 19-83 12-7-6 18.5-3 18.5-3 12-7-7(d) 18.5-6 12-7-7.1 18.5-3 12-7-8(a) 18.5-6 15-6-67 App. A, § 29-36 16-7-48 15-12 16-7-51(6) 15-12 tit. 16, ch. 13 13-139 tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2       6-219 16-13-21 13-139 16-13-25-16-13-29       13-139 21-27 16-13-71 13-139 16-13-90 13-139 tit. 16 Ch. 15 16-7-29(a) 15-7.1 16-7-29(c) 15-7.1 16-11-34 15-4 tit. 21 Char., Ch. VI Char., § 6-24 tit. 25 Ch. 10 tit. 25, ch. 2 6-219 tit. 25, ch. 3 Ch. 10, Art. II 25-3-4 Tit. 10, Art. III 25-9-3(3) 19-90 19-93 25-9-6 19-93 31-3-5.2 21-146 31-19-1 et seq. 5-23 tit. 31, ch. 21 Ch. 7 31-40-2 App. A, § 29-60 tit. 32 6-82 6-93 32-1-3 6-91 32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 19 32-4-92 19-90 32-6-24 6-92 6-95 32-6-25 6-95 32-6-151 App. A, § 29-36 33-3-5 13-36 33-8-4 13-39 13-40 33-8-8.1 13-39 33-8-8.2 20-20 33-8-8.2(a) 20-20 tit. 35 Ch. 18 tit. 36 Ch. 2 tit. 36, chs. 30-59       Ch. 2 tit. 36, ch. 32 Ch. 9 tit. 36, chs. 60-79       Ch. 2 tit. 36, ch. 61 Ch. 17 tit. 36, ch. 64 Ch. 16 tit. 36, chs. 80-84       Ch. 2 36-34-3 Ch. 16 Ch. 19 36-34-5 Ch. 21, Art. V 36-36-1 2-1 36-36-2 2-1 36-37-4 Ch. 7 36-37-5 Ch. 7 36-60-4 Ch. 12, Art. III 36-202 Char., § 5-14 tit. 38, ch. 3 Ch. 8 tit. 40 Ch. 14 40-5-1(15) 18.2-1 40-5-1 20-32 40-6-1-40-6-395 14-1 40-6-183 14-31 40-6-371 Ch. 14 40-6-371(a)(1) Ch. 14, Art. II, 
Div. 3 40-6-371(a)(10) 14-31 40-6-371(a)(18) 14-6 40-6-372-40-6-376       14-1 40-8-50-40-8-54       6-94 40-8-76 9-5 40-8-76.1 9-5 40-11-9 12-39 tit. 41, ch. 39A 6-219 41-2-7 6-218 6-219 41-2-8 6-219 41-2-9(a) 6-218 41-2-9-41-2-17 6-219 41-2-12 6-219 tit. 43, ch. 8 13-131 43-8-1 13-132 tit. 43, ch. 32 Ch. 13, Art. IV 43-17-1 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. V tit. 43, ch. 34 13-151 tit. 43, ch. 39A 6-223 44-3-130 et seq. Ch. 7 44-10-1 et seq. 2-103 44-12-136 Ch. 13, Art. VI tit. 46, ch. 3 13-156 46-5-1 20.5-35 46-5-1(b)(8), (9) 20.5-34 46-7-15 13-156 tit. 48 Ch. 20 48-2-40 13-162 48-2-41 13.5-6 48-2-43 13.5-6 48-3-9 6-219 48-4-76 et seq. 20-18 48-4-78 6-219 48-5-7.4 App. A, § 29-36 48-5-350 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 48-5-354 13-151 48-5-355 13-156 48-5-356 13-156 48-5-380 13.5-7 48-6-93 13-156 48-13-1 et seq. Ch. 13 Ch. 13, Art. II Ch. 13, Art. III 48-13-7 13-154 48-13-9(C)(1)-(20)       13-151 48-13-50 et seq. 13.5-1 48-13-51(b)(2) 13.5-1 48-17-1 13-151 48-17-9 13-151 Tit. 50, Ch. 18, Art. 4       13-160 50-18-90 et seq. 2-39 50-18-102 1-15 58-18-70 et seq. 19-101 58-18-71 19-101 58-18-72 19-101  
