METTER MUNICIPAL CODE 1997 
  
A Codification of the General Ordinances 
of the City of Metter, Georgia 
Beginning with Supp. No. 6, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF METTER, GEORGIA 
MAYOR 
Edwin O. Boyd 
Council Members 
Amy Harrelson 
Brandon Sikes 
Chyrileen Kilcrease 
Paul MacGregor 
Rashida Daniel 
City Manager     City Clerk 
Mandi Cody       Angie Conner 
City Attorney     Chief of Police 
Brent Carter       Robert Shore 
Fire Chief     Building Inspector 
Jason Douglas       Cliff Hendrix 
PREFACE 
    The Metter Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1997, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Wanda Leverett, City Administrator. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 6, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.010 is Section .010, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by a prior code cross-reference table, which sets out the location of individual sections of the prior code, and an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification. 
    A subject matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual sections numbers. 
    This supplement brings the code up to date through an ordinance passed January 14, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Municipal Code will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ordinance No. Date 
Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 11 Ord. of 3-12-12 Included 13-01 9-9-13 Included Supp. No. 12 Ord. of 10-15-13 Included Ord. of 12- 9-13 Included Ord. of 1-21-14(1) Included Ord. of 1-21-14(2) Included Ord. of 5-11-15(1) Included Ord. of 5-11-15(2) Included Ord. of 7-13-15 Included Supp. No. 13 Ord. of  1-19-16 Included Ord. of  3-14-16 Included Ord. of 12-12-16 Included Supp. No. 14 2017-01  3-13-17 Included Ord. of  4-10-17 Included Ord. of  5- 8-17 Included Ord. of  9-21-17 Included Supp. No. 15 Ord. of  4- 9-18(1) Included Ord. of  4- 9-18(2) Included Ord. of 12-10-18(1) Included Ord. of 12-10-18(2) Included Ord. of  1-14-19 Included  
I. HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a code of ordinances; Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) This note will be updated by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. as each section is amended, with the most recent amendment added to the beginning. The notation "(part)" is used when the code section contains only part of the ordinance (or section of the ordinance) specified; this indicates that there are other areas of the code affected by the same ordinance (or section of the ordinance). If the code section was derived from an earlier codification, the last entry in the note indicates the old or "prior code" section number. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." This table will be updated as prior code sections are renumbered or repealed. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." When an ordinance is repealed, the disposition will be changed by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc. to "(Repealed by Ord.)" with the appropriate ordinance number. Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Index. 
    If you're not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Insertion Guide. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Insertion Guide. This guide will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, this code was numbered with consecutive page numbers. As it is amended, new material may require the insertion of new pages that are numbered with hyphens. (Example: 31, 32, 32-1.) Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) are left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
CHARTER FOR THE CITY OF METTER, GEORGIA[] 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND POWERS 1.10. Name ..... C-4 1.11. Corporate boundaries ..... C-4 1.12. Powers and construction ..... C-4 1.13. Exercise of powers ..... C-8 ARTICLE II. GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 2.10. City council creation; number; election ..... C-9 2.10A. Wards ..... C-9 2.11. City council ..... C-9 2.12. Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions ..... C-9 2.13. Compensation and expenses ..... C-10 2.14. Conflict of interest ..... C-10 2.15. Inquiries and investigations ..... C-10 2.16. General power and authority of the city council ..... C-10 2.17. Eminent domain ..... C-10 2.18. Organizational meetings ..... C-10 2.19. Regular and special meetings ..... C-11 2.20. Rules of procedure ..... C-11 2.21. Quorum; voting ..... C-11 2.22. Ordinance form; procedures ..... C-11 2.23. Action requiring an ordinance ..... C-12 2.24. Emergencies ..... C-12 2.25. Codes of technical regulations ..... C-12 2.26. Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing ..... C-12 2.27. Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation ..... C-13 2.28. Chief executive officer ..... C-13 2.29. Powers and duties of mayor ..... C-13 2.30. Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power ..... C-14 2.31. Mayor pro tempore; selection; duties ..... C-14 2.32. Form of government ..... C-14 ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 3.10. Administrative and service departments ..... C-14 3.11. Boards, commissions and authorities ..... C-15 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 3.12. City attorney ..... C-15 3.12A. Reserved ..... C-16 3.13. City manager ..... C-16 3.14. City clerk ..... C-16 3.15. City treasurer ..... C-16 3.16. City accountant ..... C-17 3.17. Chief of police ..... C-17 PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 3.18. Position classification and pay plans ..... C-17 3.19. Personnel policies ..... C-17 ARTICLE IV. JUDICIAL BRANCH 4.10. Creation; name ..... C-18 4.11. Chief judge; associate judge ..... C-18 4.12. Convening ..... C-18 4.13. Jurisdiction; powers ..... C-18 4.14. Rules for court ..... C-19 ARTICLE V. ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 5.10. Applicability of general law ..... C-19 5.11. Nonpartisan elections ..... C-20 5.12. Election by majority ..... C-20 5.13. Special elections; vacancies ..... C-20 5.14. Other provisions ..... C-20 5.15. Removal of officers ..... C-20 ARTICLE VI. FINANCE 6.10. Property tax ..... C-21 6.11. Millage rate; due dates; payment methods ..... C-21 6.12. Occupation and business taxes ..... C-21 6.13. Licenses; permits; fees ..... C-21 6.14. Franchises ..... C-22 6.15. Service charges ..... C-22 6.16. Special assessments ..... C-22 6.17. Other taxes ..... C-22 6.18. Collection of delinquent taxes and fees ..... C-22 6.19. General obligation bonds ..... C-23 6.20. Revenue bonds ..... C-23 6.21. Short-term loans ..... C-23 6.22. Fiscal year ..... C-23 6.23. Preparation of budgets ..... C-23 6.24. Submission of operating budget to city council ..... C-23 6.25. Action by city council on budget ..... C-23 6.26. Tax levies ..... C-24 6.27. Changes in appropriations ..... C-24 6.28. Capital improvements budgets ..... C-24 6.29. Independent audit ..... C-25 6.30. Contracting procedures ..... C-25 6.31. Centralized purchasing ..... C-25 6.32. Sale of city property ..... C-25 ARTICLE VII. GENERAL PROVISIONS 7.10. Bonds for officials ..... C-26 7.11. Prior ordinances ..... C-26 7.12. Pending matters ..... C-26 7.13. Definitions and construction ..... C-26 7.14. Submission to United States Attorney General ..... C-26 7.15. Severability ..... C-27 7.16. Specific repealer ..... C-27 7.17. Effective date ..... C-27 7.18. General repealer ..... C-27  
Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
* Editor's Note: The city's Charter is derived from Act Number 376 of Georgia Laws of 1997, which was approved April 21, 1997. The act is set out herein as enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia and as amended by subsequent acts. The amendments are indicated by notes following affected sections, where applicable. The title and the enacting clauses of the Charter are omitted. 

ARTICLE I - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 

SECTION 1.10. - Name. 
    This city and the inhabitants thereof are constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style Metter, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession. 
SECTION 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the corporate limits of the City of Metter, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)  The mayor, city administrator, and city clerk may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
SECTION 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future Constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
(c)  The powers of the government of the City of Metter to be exercised by the mayor and city council shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this charter; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection, construction, and demolition of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke or suspend such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes, fees, or violations of city ordinances; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which such utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Ordinances, rules, and regulations. To make, establish, and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning; and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are now or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights of way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish, or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under, or across any city property or the right of way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; end to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights of way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage systems and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(36)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit to the extent permitted by state law professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(37)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs of any public improvements; 
(38)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(39)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
SECTION 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
ARTICLE II - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

SECTION 2.10. - City council creation; number; election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and five councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this charter. 
SECTION 2.10A. - Wards. 
    The City of Metter shall be divided into two districts as set forth in the description of districts attached hereto and made a part hereof and further identified as "metterpropl-Tiger2010-map." 
(Amendment dated 6-28-11) 
SECTION 2.11. - City council. 
    Pursuant to Code Sections 21-3-51 and 21-3-63 of the O.C.G.A., the mayor and members of the city council shall be elected for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. The mayor shall be elected by the voters of the city at large. Five councilmembers shall be elected as follows: 
(1)  Seats 1, 2, and 3 shall be elected at large from District 1; and 
(2)  Seats 4 and 5 shall be elected at large from District 2. 
    The mayor shall be elected to a four-year term at the 2001 general municipal election and every four years thereafter. Seats 1, 3, and 5 shall be elected to a four-year term at the general municipal election in 1999 and every four years thereafter. Seats 2 and 4 shall be elected to a four-year term at the general municipal election in 2001 and every four years thereafter. Terms shall begin on the first day of January following the election. The mayor and councilmembers whose terms begin on the effective date of this charter shall continue to hold office until the terms for which they were elected expire, but the city council may change the nomenclature of the description of such office to conform to the terms used in this charter. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of mayor or councilmember unless he or she is 21 years of age, a qualified elector of the City of Metter, and a resident of the City of Metter for a period of one year immediately preceding the election. 
SECTION 2.12. - Vacancy, filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies-The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
(b)  Suspension-Upon the suspension from office of the mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the city council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this charter. 
SECTION 2.13. - Compensation and expenses. 
    The mayor and councilmembers shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
SECTION 2.14. - Conflict of interest. 
    The city council shall enact by ordinance a conflict of interest code applicable to elected and appointed city officers and officials. 
SECTION 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the city council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
SECTION 2.16. - General power and authority of the city council. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by Article I of this charter. 
SECTION 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
    The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities and any other public improvements inside or outside the city and to regulate the use thereof and, for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
SECTION 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
    The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear) (affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and the United States of America." 
SECTION 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The city council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or three members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible 24 hours prior to such meetings. 
SECTION 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
    The city council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
SECTION 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Three councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote or show of hands and the vote shall be recorded in the minutes, but any member of the city council shall have the right to request a roll-call vote and such vote shall be recorded in the minutes. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the affirmative vote of three councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. In case of a tie, the mayor may vote. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the city council. A vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
SECTION 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Metter, Georgia, hereby ordains ..." and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the city council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, except for emergency ordinances provided for in Section 2.24 of this charter. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the city council may designate. 
SECTION 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    Acts of the city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
SECTION 2.24. - Emergencies. 
    To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 90 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
SECTION 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: (1) the requirements of subsection (b) of Section 2.22 of this charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and (2) a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk pursuant to Section 2.26 of this charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
SECTION 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The clerk shall authenticate by the clerk's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the city council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Metter, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first code under this charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the code. 
SECTION 2.27. - Election of mayor; forfeiture; compensation. 
    The mayor shall be elected and serve for a term of four years and until the mayor's successor is elected and qualified. No person is eligible to hold the office of mayor unless such person is 21 years old, is a qualified elector of the City of Metter, and shall have resided in the City of Metter for a period of one year immediately preceding such person's election. The mayor shall continue to reside in this city during the period of the mayor's service. The mayor shall forfeit that office on the same grounds and under the same procedure as for councilmembers. The compensation of the mayor shall be established in the same manner as for councilmembers, as set by ordinance. 
SECTION 2.28. - Chief executive officer. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive of this city. The mayor shall possess all of the executive powers granted to the city under the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and all the executive powers contained in this charter. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 2.29. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall serve as the city's spokesperson and representative, the presiding officer of the city council, and the organization's chief policy advocate. The mayor shall sign all deeds and contracts, except deeds made for property sold under execution at public sale, which shall be signed by the marshal or chief of police, and be clothed with veto power as hereinafter set out. The mayor shall keep the council advised from time to time of the general condition of the city and shall recommend such measures as the mayor may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city. The mayor shall preside over the meetings of the city council and may call the council together at any time when deemed necessary by the mayor and shall also devote all the time necessary to the discharge of the duties of mayor of the city. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 2.30. - Submission of ordinances to the mayor; veto power. 
    Every ordinance and resolution passed by the city council shall be subject to veto by the mayor in the following manner: the mayor shall within ten days write out the mayor's objections to such ordinance or resolution, and the city council shall, at the next regular meeting at which a quorum shall be present, order said objections entered on the minutes and take a vote on the question as to whether said ordinance, resolution, or other action shall become adopted over said veto. Should as many as three councilmembers vote in the affirmative, said resolution or ordinance shall stand affirmed and become effective without the approval of the mayor; otherwise it shall not become effective. The ayes and nays shall in all cases be entered on the minutes. 
SECTION 2.31. - Mayor pro tempore; selection; duties. 
    At the first regular meeting in January of each year, the city council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore by a majority vote. Upon the mayor's disability or absence, the mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the city council and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor. In the event of the mayor's disability or absence, the mayor pro tempore shall be compensated at the same rate as the mayor. The city council by a majority vote shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all councilmembers. 
SECTION 2.32. - Form of government. 
    The city of Metter shall operate under the council-manager form of government, the details of which shall be set forth by ordinance. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
ARTICLE III - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

SECTION 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the supervisors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers, directors, and supervisors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There may be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of that director's department. In the case where a director is not appointed, the supervisors will be responsible for that department. 
(e)  The city manager, city clerk, chief of police, fire chief, supervisors, directors, and all other employees other than volunteers will be appointed in accordance with the city's personnel policies as adopted by ordinance, except where the city council may have approved alternative employment terms by resolution. Appeals and grievance procedures will be followed as set forth in said ordinance or resolution. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this charter for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(e)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until that person has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating that person to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of that person's office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(f)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(g)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 
SECTION 3.12. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may associate other counsel with the approval of the mayor and council; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the city council as directed; shall advise the city council and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of the city attorney by virtue of such person's position as city attorney. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 3.12A. - Reserved.(Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 3.13. - City manager. 
    The city council shall appoint a city manager in accordance with the terms and provisions of a council-manager ordinance and other provisions of this charter. The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible for implementing the directives of the mayor and council, for providing overall guidance of all departments, coordinating special projects as needed, and performing such other duties as may be stipulated by the council. The city manager shall be bonded in an appropriate amount to be fixed by the mayor and council for the faithful performance of the duties of city manager and shall take an oath before the mayor and council that such city manager will, to the best of his or her abilities, faithfully perform the duties of the office of city manager without favor or partiality. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 3.14. - City clerk. 
    The city council shall appoint a city clerk in accordance with the city's personnel policy who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain city council's records required by this charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council and will be subject to the city's personnel policy. The city clerk shall be bonded in an appropriate amount to be fixed by the mayor and council for the faithful performance of the duties of city clerk. The city clerk shall take and subscribe an oath before the mayor and council that the city clerk will to the best of his or her ability faithfully perform the duties of the office of city clerk without favor or partiality. 
SECTION 3.15. - City treasurer. 
    The city council may appoint a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other moneys belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer. This position shall normally be filled by the city clerk, but, at the election of the mayor and council, may be filled by the city manager or other appointed designee. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 3.16. - City accountant. 
    The city council may appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
SECTION 3.17. - Chief of police. 
    The city manager shall appoint a chief of police, who shall not be a councilmember, in accordance with the city's personnel policy and Section 3.10 of this charter. The chief of police is responsible for being the chief law enforcement officer of the City of Metter. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to prosecute all offenders against the laws of the state committed within the corporate limits of the City of Metter. In case any crime is committed in the presence of the chief of police or comes to his or her knowledge, it shall be his or her duty to prosecute the same. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to levy and collect all executions for taxes, fines, licenses, permits, or other money due the city; to advertise and conduct all sales of property under execution or other process, execute deeds, or other conveyances used in such cases; and perform such other service as the city manager shall require and as outlined in the city's personnel policy. Before entering upon the duties of the office, the chief of police shall take and subscribe an oath before the mayor and council that such chief of police will to the best of his or her ability faithfully perform the duties of the office of chief of police without favor or partiality. The chief of police will be bonded at an appropriate amount as fixed by the city manager. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 
SECTION 3.18. - Position classification and pay plans. 
    The city manager shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan which shall be submitted to the city council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 3.19. - Personnel policies. 
    The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
ARTICLE IV - JUDICIAL BRANCH 

SECTION 4.10. - Creation; name. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Metter. 
SECTION 4.11. - Chief judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless that person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the judge's office to the best of the judge's ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered in the minutes of the city council journal required in Section 2.20 of this charter. 
SECTION 4.12. - Convening. 
    The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
SECTION 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing, as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The mayor and city council shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operations and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before such court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for that person's appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, that person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and the defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served and executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to mayor's, recorder's, and police courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
SECTION 4.14. - Rules for court. 
    With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filled with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 

SECTION 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
    All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
SECTION 5.11. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designations. 
SECTION 5.12. - Election by majority. 
    The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. In the event that no candidate receives a majority of the votes, a run-off election shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
SECTION 5.13. - Special elections; vacancies. 
    In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the mayor or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, the city council or those members remaining shall appoint a successor for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended. 
SECTION 5.14. - Other provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such rules and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options and duties under Chapter 3 of Title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." 
SECTION 5.15. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by the vote of three councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision. 
ARTICLE VI - FINANCE 

SECTION 6.10. - Property tax. 
    The city council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
SECTION 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
    The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
SECTION 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
SECTION 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city for regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
SECTION 6.14. - Franchises. 
    The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council may provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
SECTION 6.15. - Service charges. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
SECTION 6.16. - Special assessments. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in Section 6.18 of this charter. 
SECTION 6.17. - Other taxes. 
    This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
SECTION 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under Sections 6.10 through 6.17 of this charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
SECTION 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
    The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time such issue is undertaken. 
SECTION 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
SECTION 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
    The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided by law. 
SECTION 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
    The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
SECTION 6.23. - Preparation of budgets. 
    The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs. 
SECTION 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor, administrator, or other person so designated shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the city manager may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget provided for in this charter, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 6.25. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year. The total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council shall by ordinance adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the fifteenth day of the last month of the current fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6.23 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. 
SECTION 6.26. - Tax levies. 
    Following adoption of the operating budget, the city council shall levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
SECTION 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purposes, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
SECTION 6.28. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council, but no later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor, city manager, or other person so designated shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements budget with such person's recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have the power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in Section 2.24 of this charter. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the fifteenth day of September of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the mayor or city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by such mayor's or city manager's recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. (Act 638 (H.B. 1828) (part), approved 5-17-2004) 
SECTION 6.29. - Independent audit. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. The city may require independent auditors to bid every three years. 
SECTION 6.30. - Contracting procedures. 
    No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is: 
(1)  In writing; and 
(2)  Made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the city council journal of proceedings pursuant to Section 2.20 of this charter. 
SECTION 6.31. - Centralized purchasing. 
    The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city. 
SECTION 6.32. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The city council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
ARTICLE VII - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

SECTION 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
    The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law. 
SECTION 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the city council. 
SECTION 7.12. - Pending matters. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the city council. 
SECTION 7.13. - Definitions and construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this charter are informative only and shall not be considered as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
SECTION 7.14. - Submission to United States Attorney General. 
    It shall be the duty of the governing authority of the City of Metter to require the attorney therefor to submit this Act, pursuant to Section 5 of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965, as amended, to the United States Attorney General for approval. 
SECTION 7.15. - Severability. 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
SECTION 7.16. - Specific repealer. 
    An Act to provide a new charter for the City of Metter, approved August 16, 1920 (Ga. L. 1920, p. 1278), as amended, is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. 
SECTION 7.17. - Effective date. 
    This Act shall become effective on January 1, 1998. 
SECTION 7.18. - General repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
1.01 Code Adoption 1.04 General Provisions 1.08 Corporate Limits 1.12 General Penalty 1.16 Schedule of Fines  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
    There is adopted the Metter Municipal Code, as compiled edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 1) 
1.01.020 - Title-Citation- Reference. 
    This code shall be known as the Metter Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the Metter Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Metter Municipal Code. References may be to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Metter Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 2) 
1.01.030 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
    Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Metter Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Metter, Georgia, codification herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 3) 
1.01.040 - Title, chapter and section heading. 
    Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 4) 
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
    The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 5) 
1.01.060 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
    The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 97-7, passed June 9, 1997. 
    The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 97-7, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 97-8, adopted August 11, 1997; 97-9, adopted August 6, 1997; 97-10, adopted September 8, 1997; and 97-11, adopted October 13, 1997. 
    The following ordinances have been amended prior to adoption of this code: 
    Prior code Section 13-16, Nuisances, amended on July 14, 1997. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 6) 
1.01.070 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
    The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 7) 
1.01.080 - Constitutionality. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 8) 
1.01.090 - References to prior code. 
    References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 97-10 § 9) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - How code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Metter, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Prior code § 1-1) 
1.04.020 - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the sections and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the sections, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Prior code § 1-2) 
1.04.030 - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this code and for all ordinances and resolutions passed by the mayor and council, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council: 
    Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
    Charter. The word "charter" means the Charter of the City of Metter, being Act Number 376 of the 1997 Acts of the Georgia General Assembly, as amended. 
    City. The words "city" or "this city" mean the city of Metter in the county of Candler and state of Georgia. 
    City Clerk, Chief of Police or other city officers. The words "city clerk," "chief of police" or other city officers or departments mean the city clerk, chief of police or such other municipal officers or departments, respectively, of the city of Metter, Georgia. 
    Code. Whenever the term "code" or "this code" is referred to without further qualification, it means the "Code of Ordinances, City of Metter, Georgia," as designated in Section 1.04.010. 
    Computation of Time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
    County. The term "county" or "this county" means the county of Candler, Georgia. 
    Delegation of Authority. Whenever a provision of this code requires or authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the provision specifically provide otherwise. 
    Easement. The term "easement" means a right, liberty, privilege or advantage without profit which the owner of one parcel of land may have in the lands of another; a right in the owner of one parcel of land, by reason of such ownership, to use the land of another for a special purpose not inconsistent with a general property right in the owner. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations as well as to males. 
    In the City. The words "in the city" or "within the city" mean any territory, jurisdiction of which, for the exercise of its regulatory power, has been conferred on the city by law. 
    Joint Authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    May. The word "may" is permissive. 
    Mayor and Council or Council. Whenever the term "mayor and council" or "council" is used in this code, it means the mayor and council of the city of Metter, Georgia. 
    Month. The word "month" means a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" means and includes an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Occupant or Tenant. The word "occupant" or "tenant," applied to a building or land, means any person who holds a written or oral lease of or who actually occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Official Time Standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code they mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the city. 
    Or, And. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, means and includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as individuals. 
    Preceding, Following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" means real, personal or mixed property. 
    Public Grounds. The words "public grounds" mean the parks and all public lands owned by the city, and those parts of public places which do not form travelled parts of streets, as defined in this section. 
    Shall. The word "shall" is mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" means and includes a mark when a person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" to mean the state of Georgia. 
    Street. The term "street" means and includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written or In Writing. The words "written" or "in writing" mean and include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" means a calendar year. 
(Prior code § 1-3) 
1.04.040 - Altering code prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Prior code § 1-4) 
1.04.050 - Construction of ordinances. 
    The same rules shall be applied in construing ordinances of this city as are applied in construing the statutes of this state, which rules are found in Sections 102-102 through 102-104, Georgia Code Annotated, and the same meanings are to be given words found in the ordinances as are given similar words found in the statutes of this state. 
(Prior code § 1-7) 
1.04.060 - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
A.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
B.  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or cause of action arising under the ordinance repealed. 
(Prior code § 1-8) 
1.04.070 - Severability of ordinances. 
    Unless an ordinance shall expressly provide to the contrary, if any portion of an ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be found to be invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portions or applications of the ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, provided such remaining portions or applications are not determined by the court to be inoperable, and to this end ordinances are declared to be severable. 
(Prior code § 2-38) 
1.04.080 - Severability of parts of code. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable and, if any phrases, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Prior code § 1-9) 
1.04.090 - Effect of amendments to code. 
    Any and all additions and amendments to this code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Metter, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Prior code § 1-26) 
1.04.100 - Manner of amendments to code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city council. 
(Prior code § 1-27) 
1.04.110 - Language of amendments to code. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Metter, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Prior code § 1-28) 
1.04.120 - New material. 
A.  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Metter, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article, chapter or other designation as the case may be), to be numbered ...., which reads as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
B.  In lieu of subsection A of this section, when the city council desires to enact an ordinance of general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in the code, which the council desires to incorporate into the code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the city council, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of Ordinances, City of Metter, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
(Prior code § 1-29) 
1.04.130 - Repeal of parts of code. 
    All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 1-30) 
1.04.140 - Supplementation of code. 
A.  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code, and shall also include all amendments to the charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
B.  In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
C.  When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
1.  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
2.  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
3.  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
4.  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "Sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the code); and 
5.  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code. 
(Prior code § 1-32) 
Chapter 1.08 - CORPORATE LIMITS 
Sections: 

1.08.010 - Official map of survey of city.* 
* Editor's Note: Ordinance 97-2 becomes effective January 1, 1998. 
A.  The official map of the city is the latest survey adopted by the city council. 
B.  The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on such map which shall be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk. Photographic, typed or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
C.  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map which it is designated to replace. 
D.  The city expressly accepts the dedication for public purpose of all public areas implied to be thus dedicated by all private indentures conveying land by reference to any previous map, survey or plat of the city adopted or used by the city. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - General penalty-Continuing violations. 
A.  Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the city jail for not more than six months, or work on the public streets or other public works for not more than six months, or by any one or more or these punishments, subject to all limitations contained in the Charter of the city. Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided in subsection A of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any ordinance shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by the city as provided by law, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 1-5) 
1.12.020 - Judgments and sentences to run consecutively. 
    All judgments and sentences imposed and ordered by the municipal court judge shall run consecutively unless otherwise specifically provided by the municipal court judge in such judgments and sentences. 
(Prior code § 1-6) 
1.12.030 - Violations subject to general penalty when. 
    In case of the amendment by the mayor and council of any section of this code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1.12.010 shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
(Prior code § 1-31) 
Chapter 1.16 - SCHEDULE OF FINES 
Sections: 

1.16.010 - Schedule of fines. 
SCHEDULE OF FINES 
Code Section or Ordinance Description of Charge New BASE Fine 40-2-7 Affixing License Plate with Intent to Misrepresent $130.00 16-11-32 Affray (Fighting) $235.00 40-6-397 Aggressive Driving $400.00 40-5-123 Allowing Unauthorized Minor to Drive $130.00 40-2-6 Altered Tag $130.00 16-11-129(G) Altering Pistol Permit $130.00 40-8-29 Auxiliary Light Violation $130.00 16-11-126 Carrying a Concealed Weapon $440.00 9.04.030 Carrying a Concealed Weapon $440.00 40-5-24 (b)(2)(A) Class D Between 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. $235.00 40-5-24 (b)(2)(B0(i) Class D Less Than 3 Occupants (Not Family) $235.00 16-12-1 Contributing to the Delinquency of a Minor $400.00 40-8-73 Cracked Windshield $130.00 9.12.010 Curfew Violation $235.00 40-8-7 (b) Defective Equipment $130.00 40-8-50 (b) Defective Equipment - Brakes $130.00 40-8-71 Defective Exhaust System $130.00 40-6-250 Device Impairs Hearing while Operating Motor Vehicle $120.00 9.04.020 Discharging a Firearm in City $235.00 40-6-20 Disobey Traffic Control Device $170.00 16-11-39 Disorderly Conduct $300.00 9.04.010(A)(1) Disorderly Conduct $300.00 9.04.010 (A)(20) Disorderly Conduct - Possession of Alcohol in Public $100.00 9.04.010(A)(8) Disorderly Conduct (Gaming) $255.00 16-11-44 Disorderly House $255.00 6.04.160 Dangerous Dog Control $235.00 6.04.090 Dogs Running at Large - 1st Offense $110.00 6.04.090 Dogs Running at Large - 2nd Offense $235.00 6.04.090 Dogs Running at Large - 3rd Offense $500.00 6.04.050 Dogs Without Tags - 1st Offense $110.0 6.04.050 Dogs Without Tags - 2nd Offense $190.00 40-5-33 Driver Must Apply for New License Within 60 Days of Name or Address Change $130.00 40-6-241 Driver to Use Due Care $500.0 40-5-146 Driving a Commercial Vehicle Without Commercial License $650.00 40-5-64 Driving in Violation of Conditions of Limited Permit $125.00 40-6-40 Driving on Wrong Side of Roadway $225.00 40-6-248 Driving Over Fire Hose $125.00 40-6-47 Driving the Wrong Way on One-Way Road $223.00 40-6-391 (a)(6) Driving Under the Influence/Drugs - 2nd Offense $1,000.00 40-6-391 (a)(6) Driving Under the Influence/Drugs - 3rd Offense $3,000.00 40-6-391 (a)(6) Driving Under the Influence/Drugs - 1st Offense $750.00 40-6-391 (a)(1) Driving Under the Influence/Less Safe Alcohol - 1st Offense $750.00 40-6-391 (a)(1) Driving Under the Influence/Less Safe Alcohol - 2nd Offense $1,000.00 40-6-391 (a)(1) Driving Under the Influence/Less Safe Alcohol - 3rd Offense $3,000.00 40-6-391 (a)(1) Driving Under the Influence/Less Safe Alcohol/Refusal - 3rd Offense $3,000.00 40-6-391 (i) Driving Under the Influence Commercial Vehicle/.04 grams or more $750.00 40-6-391 (a)(5) Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, .08 or More - 1st Offense $750.00 40-6-391 (a)(4) Driving Under the influence of Alcohol, .08 or More - 2nd Offense $1,000.00 40-6-391 (a)(5) Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, .08 or More - 3rd Offense $3,000.00 40-6-391 (a)(4) Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Drugs, or Toxic Vapors - 1st Offense $750.00 40-6-391 (a)(4) Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Drugs, or Toxic Vapors - 2nd Offense $1,000.00 40-6-391 (a)(4) Driving Under the Influence of Alcohol, Drugs, or Toxic Vapors - 3rd Offense $3,000.00 40-6-391 (k)(1) Driving Under the Influence Under 21 - 2nd Offense $1,000.00 40-6-391 (k)(1) Driving Under the Influence Under 21 - 3rd Offense $3,000.00 40-6-391 (k)(1) Driving Under the Influence Under 21/ Over .02 grams $750.00 40-5-121 Driving While License Suspended or Revoked - 1st Offense $650.00 40-5-121 Driving While License Suspended or Revoked - 2nd Offense $1,125.00 40-5-121 Driving While License Suspended or Revoked - 3rd Offense $1,825.00 40-5-29 Driving Without License on Person $120.00 40-5-20 Driving Without Valid License $450.00 40-6-16(c) Duty upon Driver of Motor Vehicle Approaching Emergency Vehicle - 1st $250.00 40-6-16(b) Duty upon Driver of Motor Vehicle Approaching Emergency Vehicle - 2nd $350.00 40-6-391 (I) Endangering Child Under 14 YOA While Driving Under the Influence $750.00 40-5-32A Expired Driver's License $130.00 40-2-8 Expired Registration $130.00 40-2-8 Expired Tag $130.00 FTA Failure to Appear in Court $150.00 40-8-31 Failure to Dim Headlights $130.00 15.28.060 Failure to Display Street Address $100.00 6.04.030 Failure to Inoculate $175.00 40-6-48 Failure to Maintain Lane $130.00 40-6-271 Failure to Notify Owner upon Striking Unattended Vehicle $200.00 40-6-23 Failure to Obey Flashing Signal $130.00 40-6-2 Failure to Obey Person Directing Traffic $130.00 40-2-20 (c) Failure to Register a Motor Vehicle $100.00 40-2-20 (c) Failure to Register a Trailer $100.00 40-6-123 Failure to Signal When Turning or Changing Lanes $130.00 40-6-72 (B) Failure to Stop at Stop Sign $130.00 40-6-72 (B) Failure to Yield After Stopping at Stop Sign $130.00 40-6-70 Failure to Yield at Intersection $130.00 40-6-72 (C) Failure to Yield at Yield Sign $130.00 40-6-74 (A) Failure to Yield Right of Way on Approach of Authorized Emergency Vehicle $1,000.00 40-6-76 Failure to Yield to a Funeral Procession $130.00 40-6-73 Failure to Yield When Entering a Roadway $130.00 40-6-71 Failure to Yield While Turning Left $130.00 16-9-5 False or Counterfeit Proof of Insurance $400.00 40-6-395 Fleeing or Attempting to Elude Police Officer - 1st Offense $700.00 40-6-395 Fleeing or Attempting to Elude Police Officer - 2nd Offense $1,000.00 40-6-395 Fleeing or Attempting to Elude Police Officer - 3rd Offense $2,500.00 40-6-49 Following Too Closely $130.00 3-3-23{a)(l) Furnishing Alcoholic Beverage to Person Under 21 $350.00 16-12-21 Gambling $150.00 40-6-255 Gas Drive Off Without Paying $130.00 16-10-25 Giving False Information to Police Officer $450.00 16-10-20 Giving False Statement to Police Officer $450.00 40-8-22 Headlight Requirements $130.00 40-8-20 Headlight When Required $130.00 5.08.710 Hours of Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 1st Offense $1,000.00 5.08.710 Hours of Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 2nd Offense (plus administrative suspension) $1,000.00 5.08.710 Hours of Sale of Alcoholic Beverages 3rd Offense (plus administrative suspension) $1,000.00 3-3-27 (A)(3) Illegally Manufactured Alcohol Sale $545.00 40-6-184 Impeding the Flow of Traffic $130.00 40-6-240 Improper Backing $130.00 40-2-41 Improper Display of License Plate $130.00 40-6-123 (A) Improper Lane Change $130.00 40-6-48 Improper Lane Usage $130.00 40-6-252 Improper Parking $130.00 10.12 Improper Parking Ordinance $130.00 40-6-46 (B) Improper Passing $130.00 40-6-43 (B) Improper Passing on Shoulder of Roadway $130.00 40-6-45 (A)(1) Improper Passing Within Intersection or Railroad Crossing or Crest of Grade or Curve $130.00 40-6-122 Improper Starting (movement) of Vehicle $130.00 40-6-123 (C) Improper stopping of vehicle $130.00 40-6-120 Improper Turn (Right or Left) $130.00 40-6-121 Improper U-Turn $130.00 40-2-6 Improperly Transferred or Mutilated Tag $130.00 40-5-24(A)(l) Instruction Permit, Provisional or Temporary License Violation $150.00 16-10-24.3 Interference with Emergency 911 Call $1,000.00 40-6-251 Laying Drags (Intentional operation of motor vehicle to create danger to persons or property) $300.00 40-6-270 Leaving the Scene of Accident - 1st Offense $500.00 40-6-270 Leaving the Scene of Accident - 2nd Offense $750.00 40-6-270 Leaving the Scene of Accident - 3rd Offense $1,000.00 8.08.030 Uttering Ordinance $130.00 40-6-249 Uttering; Vehicles with Unsecured Loads $130.00 6.08.010 Livestock Running at Large - 1st Offense $125.00 6.08.010 Livestock Running at Large - 2nd Offense $175.00 16-11-36 Loitering or Prowling - 1st Offense $235.00 16-11-36 Loitering or Prowling - 2nd Offense $350.00 16-11-36 Loitering or Prowling - 3rd Offense $500.00 9.04.110 Loitering Ordinance $235.00 16-7-27 Mailboxes (Injuring, Tearing Down or Destroying) $440.00 3-3-23(a)(5) Misrepresenting Age to Purchase Alcoholic Beverage $350.00 10.28.060 Motorized Carts-General Regulations $75.00 40-5-20 New Resident to Obtain Georgia License Within 30 Days $150.00 40-8-25 (c) No Brake or Turn Signals on Trailer $130.00 40-6-10 (b) No Insurance $425.00 40-6-10 (a) No Proof of Insurance $25.00 40-2-8.1 No Revalidation Decal on License Plate $25.00 8.12.020(b) Nuisance Violation Up to $1,000.00 10.08.020 Obedience to Traffic Control Devices $75.00 16-10-24 (A) Obstructing or Hindering Law Enforcement Officers $440.00 10.16.020 Open Container $223.00 40-6-253 Open Container $223.00 5.04.130 Operating Business Without a City License $500.00 40-6-15 Operating Motor Vehicle With Suspended, Cancelled or Revoked Registration - 1st Offense $525.00 40-6-15 Operating Motor Vehicle With Suspended, Cancelled or Revoked Registration - 2nd Offense $1,025.00 40-2-8 Operating Motor Vehicle Without Registration or Valid License Plate $100.00 40-6-315 (b) Operating or Riding on Motorcycle Without Eye Protection if No Windshield $150.00 40-6-315 (a) Operating or Riding on Motorcycle Without Protective Headgear $150.00 40-6-14 Operation of Radio at Level Audible at Distance of 100 Feet or More $300.00 40-2-8(c) Operation of Vehicle Without County Decal - 1st offense $25.00 40-2-8-(c) Operation of Vehicle Without County Decal - 2nd offense $100.00 32-6-22 Over-height Load $257.00 40-6-42(2) Overtaking a Vehicle on the Left $225.00 40-6-203 Parking in Fire Zone $250.00 40-6-226 Parking in Handicap Zone $250.00 40-6-46 Passing in No-Passing Zone $130.00 40-6-90 Pedestrian Failure to Obey Traffic Control Device $130.00 40-6-96 (B) Pedestrian on Highway $130.00 16-11-61 Peeping Tom $550.00 40-1-3 Permitting Unlawful Operation of a Vehicle $325.00 40-5-122 Permitting Unlicensed Person to Drive $325.00 16-11-102 Pointing Gun or Pistol at Another Person $523.00 16-13-32.2 Possession and Use of a Drug Related Object $500.00 3-3-23 (a)(2) Possession of Alcoholic Beverage by Persons Under 21 $350.00 12.12.120 Possession of Alcoholic Beverages in Public Park $130.00 16-13-30 Possession of Marijuana (Less than 1 Ounce) $1,000.00 12.12.130 Posting Signs on Public Lands or Highways Next to a Park $130.00 16-11-41 Public Drunkenness $150.00 16-6-8 Public Indecency $250.00 3-3-23(a)(l) Purchasing Alcoholic Beverages for Underage Persons $350.00 40-6-186 Racing on Highways and Streets $520.00 40-6-390 Reckless Driving $500.00 16-10-30 Refusal to Disperse $175.00 9.12.020 Responsibility of Adult for Minor After Hours $225.00 5.08.120 Sale of Alcohol Without Proper Permit $350.00 5.08.030 Sale of Alcohol/Violation of Operating Restrictions and Requirements $1,000.00 5.08.310 Sale of Alcoholic Beverage to Underage Person $500.00 40-8-76.1 Seat Belt Violation $15.00 40-8-76.1(e)(3) Seat Belt Violation Child 8 Years Old and Older $25.00 40-8-76(b)(l) Seat Belt Violation Child Under 8 Years Old - 2nd Offense $100.00 40-8-76(b)(l) Seat Belt Violation Child Under 8 Years Old - 1st Offense $50.00 40-6-40 Slower Vehicle Must Keep Right $130.00 5.20.010 Soliciting Without Permit $130.00 40-6-181 Speeding (65 mph Zone or less) 1-10 mph over $75.00 40-6-181 Speeding (65 mph Zone or less) 11-15 mph over $100.00 40-6-181 Speeding (65 mph Zone or less) 16-20 mph over $150.00 40-6-181 Speeding (65 mph Zone or less) 21-25 mph over $200.00 40-6-181 Speeding (65 mph Zone or less) 26-30 mph over $250.00 40-6-181 Speeding (65 MPH Zone or Less) 31-35 mph $350.00 40-6-181 Speeding (65 mph Zone or less) 35+ mph over $500.00 40-6-181 Speeding (70 mph Zone) 1-10 mph over $75.00 40-6-181 Speeding (70 mph Zone) 11-15 mph over $100.00 40-6-181 Speeding (70 mph Zone) 16-20 mph over $250.00 40-6-181 Speeding (70 mph Zone) 21-29 mph over $350.00 40-6-181 Speeding (70 mph Zone) 30+ mph over $1,000.00 40-6-160 Speeding by School Bus $250.00 40-6-202 Stopping, Standing or Parking Outside of Business or Residence Districts $130.00 40-6-203 Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited in Specified Places $130.00 13.08.180 Tampering With Water Meter $335.00 16-8-14 Theft By Shoplifting - 1st Offense $130.00 16-8-14 Theft By Shoplifting - 2nd Offense $500.00 16-8-14 Theft By Shoplifting - 3rd Offense $550.00 40-8-74 Tire Requirements $130.00 40-6-180 Too Fast for Conditions $150.00 3-3-23(a)(2) Underage Purchase of Alcoholic Beverage $350.00 9.08.020 Unlawful Removal of Advertising Matter $235.00 40-8-70(a) Unnecessary Horn Blowing $130.00 10.28.020 Unregistered Motorized Cart or Unlicensed Operator $75.00 40-6-254 Unsecure Load $130.00 40-8-90 Use of Flashing or Revolving Blue Lights $500.00 40-5-125 Use of Fraudulent Driver's License $130.00 40-2-5 Using License Plate to Conceal Identity of Vehicle $500.00 40-8-22 Violation of Headlight Requirements $130.00 40-5-30 Violation of Instructor Permit, Provisional Licenses and Temporary Licenses $130.00 40-7-4 Violation of Operating Restrictions for Off-Road Vehicles $100.00 40-8-23{d) Violation of Tag Light Requirement $130.00 40-8-23 Violation of Tail Light Requirement $130.00 11.07 Violation of Zoning Ordinance Up to $1,000.00 40-8-73.1(b) Window Tint Violation $130.00 8-Jan International Property Maintenance Code Violations Up to $1,000.00 8.060.030 Burning of Garbage $130.00 8.08.040 Sweeping Litter into Streets $130.00 9.92 Noise Control $300.00  
(Ord. of 4-10-17, § 1(Att. A); Ord. 2012-8-2, § 1; Ord. 2011-1, § 1: Ord. 2010-1, § 1: Ord. dated 3-14-05 § 2; Ord. 02-03: Ord. dated 7-17-95; Ord. dated 12-1-93: prior code § 12-2 (part)) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
2.04 Mayor and Council 2.08 Elections 2.12 City Clerk 2.16 Officers Generally 2.20 Departments Generally 2.24 Police Department 2.28 Municipal Court 2.30 Municipal Court Prosecutor 2.32 Planning Commission 2.36 Ethics Code 2.40 Records Management 2.44 City Property 2.48 Emergency Operations Plan 2.52 Civil Service System Personnel Policies 2.54 Purchasing Card Ordinance  
Chapter 2.04 - MAYOR AND COUNCIL* 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Mayor's powers and duties. 
A.  The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city, and shall have general supervision over its affairs. It shall be his duty to preside at and over meetings of the council, and when the mayor shall be absent the mayor pro tem shall preside in his stead; to see that all ordinances of the city are observed and enforced. The mayor shall have only such other powers as are specifically assigned to the mayor by the city charter. The approval of all claims for work done or material furnished and all bills and vouchers for the payment of money may be approved by the mayor only upon the specific submission of same to the mayor and council assembled and with the express approval by resolution of the mayor and council acting under the authority granted by the Charter of the city. The mayor shall also perform all other duties and be subject to all restrictions as provided by the Charter of the city. 
B.  The mayor shall advise the board of councilmen on a weekly basis of each and every expenditure of funds on an item basis and no check may be drawn nor invoice paid without a resolution of the mayor and council specifically authorizing same. A list of all expenditures made by the mayor and council as authorized by resolution of the mayor and council shall be published publicly on a weekly basis. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 2-56) 
2.04.020 - Execution of papers in name of city. 
A.  The mayor shall be empowered in the name of the city to execute all deeds, notes and contracts by and with the city, and every other paper in connection with the transaction of the city's business. 
B.  All deeds, notes, contracts and other papers executed in the name of the city by the mayor shall be attested by the city clerk or by the city administrator, and when so executed, shall have the full force and effect and become binding upon the city. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.030 - Mayor, mayor pro tem, city clerk and city administrator to sign checks. 
    The mayor, mayor pro tem, city clerk and city administrator are authorized to sign all checks on behalf of the city. Two signatures shall be required on all checks. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.040 - Time and place of council meetings. 
A.  The second Monday in each month at five-thirty p.m. shall be the date and time of regular council meetings. 
B.  Meetings of the city council shall be held in the city hall. However, the council may designate another place for regular or special meetings provided appropriate notice is given. 
(Ord. No. 2017-01, § 1, 3-13-17; Ord. 97-2 (part): prior code § 2-17) 
2.04.050 - Duty to attend meetings. 
    It shall be the duty of the mayor and each member of the city council to attend all regular and special meetings. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.060 - Presiding officer of council. 
    All meetings shall be presided over by the mayor except when the mayor is absent from the meeting, or refuses to preside according to these rules and order of business, in which event the mayor pro tem shall preside. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.070 - Appointment of mayor pro tem. 
    A mayor pro tem shall be elected by majority vote of council at the first regular meeting in January of each year. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.080 - Order of business at council meetings. 
    The order of business of regular meetings as designated on an agenda as prepared by the city administrator or city clerk shall be followed. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.090 - Applicability of Robert's Rules of Order. 
    "Robert's Rules of Order Revised for Deliberative Assemblies," is adopted as the standard order of rules governing the council of the city, and the rules of order of such body shall be governed by the same insofar as they are applicable to such body, and are not in conflict with the rules set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.100 - Certain affairs to be transacted by committees. 
    The ministerial and business affairs of the city shall be transacted by committees appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the council. The city administrator will serve as liaison between the committees and council. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.110 - Duties of committees. 
    Pursuant to Section 2-16 of the Charter of the city, all committees both standing and special shall be determined and defined and their duties fixed by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. Further, the mayor or any member of council may propose by motion or by resolution persons to serve as chairmen of or members of such committees and such committees shall be appointed after a vote of the mayor and council by specific resolution of the mayor and council and all such committees so appointed shall punctually perform all of the duties devolving upon them relative to such matters as may be placed by resolution of the mayor and council under their supervision and such committees shall make such reports and recommendations as they may deem proper for the best interest of the city. All such reports shall be made public and shall be available for inspection by any citizen of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-20) 
2.04.120 - Vote required to adjourn. 
    No meeting shall be adjourned except upon motion made, seconded, voted upon and carried by a majority of the members of the council. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.04.130 - Proposing legislation. 
    All ordinances or resolutions shall be proposed in writing. The mayor or mayor pro tem shall be allowed to propose ordinances and resolutions, as may any other member of the council. 
(Prior code § 2-35) 
2.04.140 - Approval and recording of ordinances. 
    All ordinances or resolutions shall be approved by the mayor, or mayor pro tem in the absence of the mayor, and shall be filed and recorded by the clerk. Ordinances and resolutions may be approved over the mayor's objection in accordance with Charter Section 2.30. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 2-36) 
2.04.150 - Effective date of ordinances. 
    Ordinances which do not provide for their taking effect at a different time, shall take effect thirty (30) days after the first reading. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part): prior code § 2-37) 
2.04.160 - Amendments to ordinances. 
    Any ordinance enacted by the mayor and council may be amended by ordinance only, unless otherwise specifically provided by law. Resolutions should be amended, if necessary, by resolution. 
(Prior code § 2-39) 
Chapter 2.08 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Qualifying fees. 
    Qualifying fees for candidates shall be three percent of the annual salary of the office being sought. 
(Amended during 1997 codification: prior code § 2-2) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY CLERK 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - Appointment. 
    The city clerk shall act as recorder-treasurer and shall also be ex officio tax collector. He shall be appointed as provided by Section 3.14 of the Charter; shall take the oath and give the bond as provided in Section 3.14 of the Charter; and shall receive such salary as the mayor and council may from time to time fix pursuant to Section 3.10(c) of the Charter. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 2-60) 
2.12.020 - General duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to perform all of the duties of city clerk, treasurer and tax collector; he shall receive and disburse all money of the city upon proper orders; shall keep a full and accurate itemized report of all such receipts and disbursements; and do every other act or acts required of him by the Charter, and perform all duties imposed upon him by the mayor and council. He shall attend all meetings of the mayor and council and record proceedings of such meetings in a book to be furnished at the expense of the city for that purpose. He shall from time to time furnish to the mayor and council, or any member of the council, or to any member of any committee appointed by the mayor, any information pertaining to the duties of his office or the records kept by him. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 2-61) 
2.12.030 - Duty to record ordinances. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to record ordinances which may be passed from time to time in an ordinance book to be furnished at the expense of the city, which ordinance book shall contain nothing but such ordinances, and in writing minutes of meetings he shall note the passage of any ordinance and give the page or pages of the ordinance book where same is recorded, and shall note the date of passage in the ordinance book and index the same. 
(Prior code § 2-62) 
Chapter 2.16 - OFFICERS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - Penalty for neglect of duty by officer. 
    Any officer who is guilty of neglect or failure to perform the duties prescribed or required of him by the provisions of this code or the mayor and council or who shall be guilty of any misconduct in office shall forfeit his right to hold such office and shall be immediately removed from office by the mayor and council if, after a public hearing of the charges against such of officer, such failure to perform duty, neglect of duty or misconduct in office is not justified under all of the circumstances of the case. This provision is cumulative and shall not bar any other punishment or penalty provided by this code, state law or city ordinance. 
(Prior code § 2-63) 
2.16.020 - Oath of office for board, committee or authority members. 
    The city council hereby ordains that an oath be established in accordance with the Charter of the City of Metter, Subsection 3.11(e). 
    The oath of office shall be administered by the mayor as follows: 
    "I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of my office on the (board, commission or authority) and will abide by (the Code Chapter and Section) and any other laws regulating the purpose and intent of said (board, commission or authority) and the duties of said office." 
(Ord. 03-01) 
Chapter 2.20 - DEPARTMENTS GENERALLY* 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Established-Enumerated. 
    Under the authority granted to the city council by Section 3.10 of the city charter, the following departments of the city are established. 
A.  Public works: street and lanes and sanitation department; 
B.  City maintenance shop; 
C.  Administration; 
D.  Public safety: police department and fire department; 
E.  Water and sewer department; 
F.  Other governmental. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.20.020 - Administrative control. 
    Each of the departments of the city shall be under the general administrative control of a person who shall be employed in strict accordance with the personnel plan of tile city. The city administrator will provide overall guidance to all departments and will serve as liaison between the departments and the mayor and council. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.20.030 - Titles of department heads. 
    The police department shall be under the direction and control of the police chief. The fire department shall be under the direction and control of the fire chief. All other city departments shall be under the direction and control of a supervisor. The job title of each supervisor shall be: supervisor, streets and lanes department; supervisor, water and sewer department; etc. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.20.040 - Authority of council-Responsibility of department heads. 
    Each person mentioned in Section 2.20.030 is responsible to the city council person chairing that department. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.20.050 - Functions and duties-Generally. 
    The broad functions and duties of the departments established in this chapter are as follows: 
A.  Public Works. 
1.  Street and Lanes Department. Effective administration, control and operation of parks, alleys and streets of the city, 
2.  Sanitation Department. Effective administration, control and operation of garbage and trash collection; 
B.  City Maintenance Shop. Effective administration, control and operation of the city garage; 
C.  Administration. Effective administration, control and operation of accounting, records and files, budget and fiscal affairs; 
D.  Water and Sewer Department. Effective administration, control and operation of the wastewater treatment plant, the water system and the sewer system; 
E.  Other Governmental. Effective administration, control and operation of the city's community development involving codes implementation and enforcement, planning, zoning, subdivision regulations, economic development, civic/cultural affairs, recreation, chamber of commerce, social programs, housing, grants, coordination with state and federal agencies and related functions. Also included in the administration department's responsibilities. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.20.060 - Functions and duties-Implementation. 
    The city administrator shall implement the broad functions and duties of the various departments through the various supervisors and chiefs, and in furtherance thereof shall assign in detail the functions and duties of such supervisors and chiefs required, as in their managerial judgment, so as to carry out the spirit and intent of this chapter upon approval of city council. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.20.070 - Organizational chart. 
    The broad organizational chart of the city, down to the departments created in this chapter, is on file in the city clerk's office where it is available for inspection and review. The city administrator is authorized to adopt further details of the city's administrative organization as in his judgment appears proper, provided that prior approval of the same is obtained from the city council with such approval recorded in the minutes of the council. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
2.20.080 - Departmental reorganization. 
    The city administrator is directed to recommend changes in the personnel plan to the city council from time to time so as to obtain prior council approval of departmental reorganizations, it being anticipated by the council that such will be needed to refine city operations toward the objectives of economical, effective, publicly acceptable city services to our citizens. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part)) 
Chapter 2.24 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Chief of police-Bond. 
    The chief of police shall give such bond as may be fixed by the mayor and council. The bond so given shall be approved by the mayor; shall be payable to the mayor and council and their successors in office; and shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties as chief of police and the proper accounting for and application of all funds of the city coming into his hands. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 18-1) 
2.24.020 - Chief of police-Oath. 
    Before entering upon the duties of his office the chief of police shall, in addition to the giving of the required bond, take and subscribe the following oath: "I do solemnly swear that I will faithfully and impartially perform the duties of the office of chief of police of the City of Metter, and account for and pay to the city treasurer all moneys belonging to the city that may come into my hands, and do all other acts required of me by the mayor and council of the City of Metter. So help me God." 
(Prior code § 18-2) 
2.24.030 - Chief of police-Powers and duties. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to perform all of the duties required of him by Section 3.16 of the Charter, and the various other sections thereof; also to preserve order and suppress all disorderly conduct in the city; to arrest all violators of any of the ordinances of the city, and all persons violating any of the penal laws of the state within the limits of the city; to confine all persons so arrested in the city or county jail, until they can be brought before the municipal court judge or some other judicial officer for trial, unless bond for their appearance approved by him shall be given; and in case of violation of the penal laws of this state within the city limits the chief of police shall immediately swear out a warrant before the municipal court judge or some other officer authorized to issue criminal warrants, giving the names of witnesses to be entered upon such warrant, and deliver such warrant to the sheriff of the county. Upon the failure of any person under bond for the violation of a city ordinance to appear as required by such bond, the chief of police shall forfeit same as provided by law, calling upon the principal to appear and calling upon the surety to produce his principal, and finally declaring the bond forfeited, after which it shall be collectible as provided by the laws of this state. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the chief of police to execute all processes, serve all subpoenas or writs which may be necessary for the enforcement of the ordinances of the city when placed in his hands by the mayor or councilmen, or at their instance or request, or as provided by the Charter or ordinances of the city; he may also summon to his assistance such number of citizens as may at any time be necessary for the enforcement of the city ordinances or the preservation of peace and order within the city limits, and shall report to the mayor all who refuse to obey such summons; he shall at least one time during each week make a careful inspection of all of the streets, sidewalks, bridges and alleys of the city, and promptly thereafter report any dangerous defect found therein to the mayor. 
C.  When instructed by the proper city official, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to collect all taxes due the city, where same are not paid to the city clerk, and he shall promptly deliver all funds to the city clerk. 
D.  The chief of police shall have such powers as are necessary for the performance of the duties imposed upon him, including the right to enter houses and enclosures, so far as the mayor and council have authority to grant to him the right. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code §§ 18-3-18-5) 
2.24.040 - Duties of officers. 
    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to acquire a full knowledge of and to enforce all of the ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein, to become familiar with the rules and regulations established by the police chief concerning the discipline, good order, proper conduct, care and management of the police department and to respect and obey all orders of the police chief not in conflict with the laws or ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 18-6) 
2.24.050 - Conduct of officers. 
    Every member of the police department shall conduct himself in a proper and lawabiding manner at all times and shall avoid the use of unnecessary force. Prohibited conduct shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
A.  Absence from regular hours of duty without permission; 
B.  Sleeping on duty; 
C.  Insubordination or disobedience of orders; 
D.  Drinking any malt or intoxicating beverage while on duty or in uniform; 
E.  Wilful maltreatment of any prisoner or other person; 
F.  Using profane language; 
G.  Giving out or releasing any information covering the affairs, business or operation of the police department without the consent of the police chief; 
H.  Receiving or accepting a reward from any person for any services rendered in the line of duty; 
I.  Accepting bribes of money, gifts or other articles of apparent or actual value, or accepting any fee, reward or gift of any kind from a person arrested or from any friend in his behalf while he is in custody or after his release or discharge; or 
J.  Active participation in any political campaign to the neglect of his official duty. 
(Prior code § 18-7) 
2.24.060 - Police operations manual. 
    The most recent edition of the police operations manual is on file in the office of the city clerk. (Added during 1997 codification) 
Chapter 2.28 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Record of cases. 
    A record of all cases heard in the municipal court for violation of this code or other municipal ordinances shall be kept in a suitable bound volume by the city clerk. Such record shall contain the name of the defendant, the nature of the offense charged, the final disposition of the case and the date of final disposition. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 19-1) 
2.28.020 - Service of summons. 
    Any person charged with violating any city ordinance shall receive notice by service of a summons as herein provided. Such summons may be issued by the city clerk, the building official or any police officer. The summons shall be directed to the accused and shall distinctly state the offense charged, the time and place, as far as practicable, of the offense charged and the day, hour and place of trial, requiring the accused to appear before the municipal court judge to answer the accusation made. Service of the summons shall be made by a police officer either by serving the accused personally or by leaving a copy at his place of abode, except that in the case of a summons issued for violation of laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles, such summons may be directed to an unknown person as owner of an automobile designated in the summons and may be served upon such person by leaving a copy in or attached to such automobile. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 19-2) 
2.28.030 - Subpoenas. 
    The city clerk may issue subpoenas for the appearance of witnesses necessary for the prosecution or for the defense in any case pending before the municipal court. All subpoenas shall be served in the same manner as a summons. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 19-3) 
2.28.040 - Failure to obey summons or subpoena. 
    Any person who fails to appear at the time and place set out in any summons or subpoena served upon him shall be guilty of contempt of court. 
(Prior code § 19-4) 
2.28.050 - Arrest and bond. 
    When a police officer has arrested any person for violation of any provision of this code or any other city ordinance and a trial cannot be had immediately, the officer may take a cash bond not exceeding the maximum fine for the offense-or a bond with a good security-for the appearance of such person before the municipal court judge. If such person fails or refuses to give a bond, the officer may confine him in the city jail until a trial can be held. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 19-5) 
2.28.060 - Forfeiture of bond. 
    Upon the failure of a person to appear in the municipal court at the time and place fixed by the summons, the municipal court judge shall enter a judgment of forfeiture on any cash bond, or, in the case of a security bond, shall pass a rule requiring the principal and surety on such bond to show cause on the date named therein-which date shall not be less than ten (10) days from the passage of such ruling-why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. If no sufficient cause is shown, the municipal court judge shall enter judgment against the principal and surety for the amount of the forfeited bond and shall direct the city clerk to issue execution thereon. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 19-6) 
2.28.070 - Malicious prosecution. 
    Whenever the municipal court judge, after a fair and full trial, is satisfied that any case was frivolously or maliciously prosecuted, he shall assess the prosecution with the court costs and such punitive damages as he deems appropriate. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 19-7) 
2.28.080 - Collection of fines. 
    When directed by the municipal court judge, the city clerk shall issue executions for fines imposed by him including the costs which executions may be levied upon any goods or chattels, lands or tenements of the person so fined. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 19-8) 
Chapter 2.30 - MUNICIPAL COURT PROSECUTOR 
Sections: 

2.30.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Court Prosecuting Attorney Ordinance." 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.020 - Findings and intent. 
    This chapter is adopted to address requirements made under Georgia law for the city to pass an ordinance or resolution creating the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the Prosecuting Attorneys' Council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within thirty (30) days of such appointment in order to maintain the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly Article 5, of Chapter 18, of Title 15 of the Official Code of Georgia, Annotated, and to enact this chapter. 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.030 - Establishment of office. 
    The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the city in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part time position. 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.040 - Qualifications. 
    Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court of the city shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.050 - Oath. 
    The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the city shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
'I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the City of Metter, Georgia.' 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.060 - Term of office. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the city, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office beginning on the date of his/her appointment until such time as they are removed from office or their successor is appointed. 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.070 - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
    The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the city shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city Charter and by state law, particularly as described in Official Code of Georgia, Section 15-18-96. 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.080 - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
    The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city council before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in the Official Code of Georgia, Section 15-18-22. 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
2.30.090 - Ratification. 
    This chapter shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and his council. 
(Ord. 2012-07) 
Chapter 2.32 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - Established. 
    In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the Metter planning commission, referred to in this chapter as the planning commission, is created and established, and such planning commission shall be organized and empowered as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 17-18) 
2.32.020 - Membership. 
    The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city, appointed by the mayor and council. The term of office of each member shall be for a period of five years, and until his successor is duly appointed and qualified, except that of the first appointees one member shall be appointed for one year, one member for two years, one member for three years, one member for four years, and the remaining member for five years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled, and members may be removed, as provided in Section 3.11 of the Charter. All members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 17-19) 
2.32.030 - Organization, rules, staff, finances. 
A.  The organization, meetings and rules of the planning commission shall be as established by city council. 
B.  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the Bureau of State Planning and Community Affairs and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 17-20) 
2.32.040 - Powers and duties. 
    From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, then such planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities as established by city council. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 17-21) 
Chapter 2.36 - ETHICS CODE 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Declaration of policy. 
    It is essential to the proper government and administration of the city that its mayor and council and the city-appointed officials covered by this chapter be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial, that public service not be used for private gain, and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the city government. Because the attainment of one or more of these ends is impaired whenever there exists in fact, or appears to exist, a conflict between the private interests and public responsibility of city officials, the public interest requires that the city protect against such conflicts of interest by establishing appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the officials covered by this chapter in situations where a conflict may exist. It is also essential to the efficient operation of the city that those persons best qualified be encouraged to serve in positions of public trust. Accordingly, the standards hereinafter set forth must be so interpreted and understood as to not unreasonably frustrate or impede the desire or inclination of those best qualified to seek and serve in public office. To that end, the officials herein noted should not, except as otherwise provided by law, be denied the opportunity available to all other citizens to acquire and maintain private, economic and other interests, except where a conflict of interest appears. The policy and purpose of this chapter, therefore, is to make clear those standards of ethical conduct that shall apply to the officials herein noted in the discharge of their official duties, to conform with the objective of protecting the integrity of city government, and to prescribe only such essential restrictions as will not impose barriers repugnant to conscientious public service. 
(Prior code § 2-25(1)) 
2.36.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    "Appointed official" means the city clerk and/or administrator, all department heads, the municipal court judge, the city attorney, any city employee under the jurisdiction of the mayor and council exempt from civil service system regulations, or any city-appointed member of any city commission or city board authority. 
    "Business" means a corporation, partnership, sole proprietor, or any other person or organization carrying on an enterprise for profit. 
    "Business relationship" means an agreement between parties designed to result in monetary profit to one or more of the parties. 
    "Censure" means an expression of severe criticism or reproach. 
    "Confidential information" means any information which, by law, is not available to the public. 
    "Contract" means any lease, claim, account or demand against or agreement with any person, whether express or implied, executed or executory, oral or in writing. 
    "Employment" means any rendering of services on request, whether paid or unpaid. 
    "Immediate family" means an official or appointed official and such official's or appointed official's husband, wife, father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law, grandmother, grandfather, stepfather, stepmother, or stepchildren. 
    "Interest" means any direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit held by or accruing to an official or appointed official as a result of a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of or tangent to an official act or action by or with the city. Unless otherwise provided, the term "interest" does not include an interest more remote than described in this definition. For the purpose of this chapter, an official or appointed official shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving any one of the following: 
1.  Any person or such person's immediate family; 
2.  Any person with whom a contractual relationship (either written or implied) exists, whereby such person may receive payment or other benefit, including an agreement for gainful employment; 
3.  Any business in which such person is a director, officer, employee, prospective employee or substantial (greater than ten (10) percent) shareholder. 
    "Official" means the mayor and any member of the city council of this city. 
    "Official act or action" means any executive, legislative, administrative, appointive or discretionary act of the mayor and council or appointed official taken pursuant to a regular discharge of such official's or appointed official's official duties. 
    "Paid" means receipt of, or right to receive, a salary or a commission, percentage, brokerage, contingent fee, or other valuable consideration. 
    "Participation" means any individual, business, labor organization, representative, fiduciary, trust or association, whether paid or unpaid, the mayor and council and those whom the city legally exercises jurisdiction. 
    "Property" means any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible. 
    "Reprimand" means an expression of disapproval. 
    "Transaction" means the conduct of any activity that results in or may result in an official act or action of the city. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 2-25(2)) 
2.36.030 - Impartiality. 
    No official or appointed official shall, by such official's or appointed official's conduct, give reasonable basis for the impression that any person improperly can influence such official or appointed official or unduly benefit from such official's or appointed official's favor in the performance of official acts or actions, or that such official or appointed official is affected unduly by the kinship, rank, position or association with any person. This section, however, shall not apply to officials or appointed officials who are cooperating with local, state or federal law enforcement authorities during the course of an overt or covert criminal activity. 
(Prior code § 2-25(3)) 
2.36.040 - Gifts and favors. 
A.  No official or appointed official shall directly or indirectly request, exact, receive or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value for such official's or appointed official's self or another person where such gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value may in any way appear to influence the official or appointed official in their official capacity. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
1.  An official noncash gift of value not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00); or 
2.  An award publicly presented in recognition of service; or 
3.  A commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution authorized by the laws of the state to engage in the making of such a loan. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any official or appointed official from accepting a gift on behalf of the city, provided that the person accepting the gift shall promptly report the receipt of such gift to the mayor and council, which may have the gift added to the inventory of property of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-25(4)) 
2.36.050 - Campaign contributions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to campaign contributions made to an official in compliance with or authorized by the Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act (OCGA Section 21-5-1, et seq.). 
(Prior code § 2-25(5)) 
2.36.060 - Confidential information. 
    Except as required by Georgia's Open Records Act or other properly enacted statutory authority, or pursuant to order of an appropriate court, no official or appointed official, whether paid or unpaid, shall disseminate nonpublic information or discloseable information concerning the property, governing operations, policies, decisions, plans or affairs of the city, nor shall such official or appointed official use such information or any information acquired in such official's or appointed official's official capacity to advance the financial or personal interest of that party or others under any circumstances. 
(Ord. 00-05 (part): prior code § 2-25(6)) 
2.36.070 - Representation. 
    Except in the regular discharge of official duties or pursuant to a properly issued subpoena, no official or appointed official shall appear on such official's or appointed official's own behalf, or represent, or appear on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person before any other official or appointed official of the city, any court or legislative, administrative or quasi-judicial board, agency, commission or committee appointed by the city concerning any contract or transmission which is or may be the subject of an official act or action of the city, or otherwise use or attempt to use such official's or appointed official's official position to secure privileges or exemptions for such official's or appointed official's self or other persons. 
(Prior code § 2-25(7)) 
2.36.080 - Incompatible employment. 
    No official or appointed official shall engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any person or business when such is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of such official's or appointed official's official duties. 
(Prior code § 2-25(8)) 
2.36.090 - Disclosure of interest prior to official action. 
    An official or appointed official who has an interest that such official or appointed official has reason to believe may be affected by such official's or appointed official's official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the city shall disclose that interest and shall abstain from participating in such official acts or actions affected thereby. That interest shall be disclosed by such official or appointed official prior to there being taken any official acts or actions. 
(Prior code § 2-25(9)) 
2.36.100 - Acquiring an interest. 
    No official or appointed official shall acquire an interest in any contract or transaction at a time when he or she believes or has reason to believe that such an interest will be affected directly or indirectly by his or her official act or actions by the official acts or actions of the city. 
(Prior code § 2-25(10)) 
2.36.110 - Limitations on contracting with city. 
A.  An official or appointed official shall not enter into any contract with the city involving services or property, nor shall an official or an appointed official enter into any contract with the city involving a business in which an official or appointed official has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
1.  The designation of a bank or lending institution as a depository for city funds; 
2.  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest for such loan; 
3.  Contracts for services entered into with a business which is the only reasonably available source for such goods or services; 
4.  Contracts for services of city attorney or municipal court judge or with an attorney provided, however, the city attorney and the municipal court judge shall not be the same person and shall not be members of the same law firm. 
5.  Contracts entered into under circumstances which constitute an emergency situation of a nature which threatens loss of life or property, provided that a record explaining the emergency is prepared by the chief administrator and made a part of the minutes of the city at its next regular meeting. 
B.  Any official or appointed official who shall violate the terms and provisions of OCGA Section 36-37A or any provisions of any city ordinance, rule and/or regulation shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties in this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 2-25(11)) 
2.36.120 - Disclosure of interest in zoning matters. 
A.  All officials or appointed officials deemed subject to the provisions of OCGA Chapter 36-37A, et seq. shall make the disclosures therein required, and shall be subject to the penalties therein stated. In addition, any official or appointed official required to make the disclosure set forth in the aforesaid provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall be prohibited from participating in the zoning matter in which such official or appointed official has a direct or indirect interest. A violation of the aforesaid provisions of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated shall also constitute a violation of this chapter. 
B.  The disclosure requirements set forth in Chapter 36-37A of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and the prohibitions from participation imposed in subsection A of this section shall also pertain to all officials and appointed officials who are involved in the process of approving and/or disapproving residential and commercial subdivision plats. 
(Prior code § 2-25(12)) 
2.36.130 - Disclosure of relationships. 
A.  Each party subject to this chapter shall submit in writing to the city the following information: 
1.  Any business interests between or among any parties subject to this chapter, with complete description of such involvement; 
2.  Any business interests between or among any parties subject to this chapter which have been terminated within six months from the initial date of disclosure; 
3.  Any business interests between or among any parties subject to this chapter anticipated in the next six-month period; 
4.  Any real estate holdings in which an official or appointed official has an interest which is located in the city. 
B.  Henceforth, each party subject to this chapter shall inform the mayor and council in writing of any such business relationships or interests within thirty (30) days of the creation of any such contractual relationship or acquisition and shall provide all of the information requested in subdivisions (1) through (4) of subsection (A) of this section. Notwithstanding the preceding reporting requirement, it is required that at least one report be made by each official or appointed official at least once annually, which report shall be made on or before the first day of January of each year. 
C.  Failure on the part of any party subject to this chapter to comply with the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter. 
D.  All information supplied under this chapter shall be received by the city, and delivered to the judge of the probate court for retention, and except as otherwise provided by law, such information shall be kept confidential and not be disclosed to any person in any manner. 
(Prior code § 2-25(13)) 
2.36.140 - Use of city property. 
    No official or appointed official shall use any city property, services, personnel, labor or other thing of value for personal gain or for any purpose other than the official business of the city. The use of a city vehicle, however, in traveling to and from the employee's residence shall be deemed official business of the city when authorized by the mayor and council. Any parties so violating this provision shall be required to pay to the city a sum equal to the value of the benefits so received, and shall likewise be deemed to have violated the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-25(14)) 
2.36.150 - Compliance with applicable laws. 
    No official or appointed official shall engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by any law, now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him or her by virtue of his or her office. Without limiting the applicability of other statutory provisions, the provisions of OCGA Section 45-10-1 are incorporated in this chapter and by reference made a part thereof. 
(Prior code § 2-25(15)) 
2.36.160 - Complaints. 
    Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged ethics violation shall file in writing a verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro-tem. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, the mayor pro-tem shall appoint three members of council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified immediately. In the event the complaint if found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(Ord. 00-05 (part): prior code § 2-25(16)) 
2.36.161 - Board of ethics. 
A.  Composition of the board of ethics. 
1.  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for a least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
2.  The mayor and council members shall each designate two qualified citizens to provide a pool of fourteen (14) individuals who have consented to serve as a member of such board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
3.  The city administrator shall maintain a listing of these fourteen (14) qualified citizens. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor and council, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the listing of qualified citizens until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been appointed. Such board will elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
4.  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
B.  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
1.  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
2.  To hold a hearing within sixty (60) days after the receipt of complaint. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling if a complaint arises in the same incident for at least a period of six months; 
3.  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this chapter and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section; 
4.  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this chapter; 
5.  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this chapter; 
6.  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints; 
7.  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(Ord. 00-05 (part)) 
2.36.162 - Service of complaint-Hearings and disposition of complaints. 
    The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes, but in all circumstances, the hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and council within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. 00-05 (part)) 
2.36.163 - Penalty and member rights. 
A.  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this chapter shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
B.  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing, to be represented by council, to hear and examine the evidence and witness and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. 00-05 (part)) 
2.36.164 - Appeals. 
A.  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
B.  An action for judicial review may be filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Candler County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. 00-05 (part)) 
2.36.170 - Construal of provisions. 
A.  This chapter shall be construed liberally to effectuate the purpose and policies provided for in this chapter and to supplement such existing laws as may relate to the conduct of the persons made subject to this chapter. 
B.  To the extent that this chapter governs the conduct or activities of officials or appointed officials the same shall not have retroactive application. 
(Ord. 00-05 (part): prior code § 2-25(17)) 
Chapter 2.40 - RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

2.40.010 - Records management. 
    The mayor and clerk is designated as the coordinator of the records management plan and authorized to act for and on behalf of the city in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act; and records retention schedules approved by the State Records Committee shall be documented in the record of the governing body deliberations; and records shall be maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules; and no record shall be destroyed except as authorized by a State Records Committee approved retention schedule. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part): prior code § 2-24) 
Chapter 2.44 - CITY PROPERTY 
Sections: 

2.44.010 - Supervision and control of public property. 
    The mayor and council shall have the general supervision and control of all property, real and personal, owned by or under control of the city. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part): prior code § 2-21) 
2.44.020 - Authority to pass rules and regulations. 
    The mayor and council shall have the right and authority from time to time to fix, by ordinances or resolutions which shall be spread on their minutes, rules and regulations governing any city property. When such rules have been made, it shall be the duty of the mayor and council to cause the same to be posted at some public place upon the premises affected thereby and after such rules are posted, any person violating the same shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part): prior code § 2-22) 
2.44.030 - Personal use of city property unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for any officer of the city or other persons to use or take from their place of keeping any of the tools, equipment, motor vehicles or other personal property or any fixtures of the city, for the purpose of using the same otherwise than provided by the rules of the mayor and council or for the personal use or benefit of such officer or other person. 
(Ord. 97-2 (part): prior code § 2-23) 
2.44.040 - Unlawful peddling, selling, vending. 
    It is unlawful for anyone to place on any street, alley, park or parking area or any property of the city, any vehicle for the purpose of sale, or, to vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity, article or vehicle on any street, alley, park or parking area or any other property of the city, unless done so in connection with a festival or other celebrations specifically authorized by the council of the city. Any person who violates this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. dated 8-27-07 § 1; Added by ord. dated 10-12-98) 
Chapter 2.48 - EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN 
Sections: 

2.48.010 - Adopted. 
    The emergency operations plan in its entirety is on file in the office of the city clerk and is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8-9 (part)) 
Chapter 2.52 - CIVIL SERVICE SYSTEM PERSONNEL POLICIES 
    The latest version of the civil service system personnel policies is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Chapter 2.54 - PURCHASING CARD ORDINANCE 

2.54.010 - Overview. 
    The Georgia General Assembly established guidelines and penalties into the Official Code of Georgia Annotated ("O.C.G.A.") which provides that no municipal corporation shall issue government purchasing cards or government credit cards to elected officials on or after January 1, 2016, until the governing authority of the municipal corporation, by public vote, has authorized the issuance and has promulgated specific policies regarding the use of such government purchasing cards or government credit cards for elected officials of such municipal corporation. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § A; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this policy is to set requirements and standards for the City of Metter, Georgia Purchasing Card Program. The policy is not intended to replace current State of Georgia statutes but is intended to comply with such state laws and establish more efficient guidelines for elected officials using such purchasing cards. At no time should a city issued purchasing card or credit card be used for personal purchases regardless of the circumstances. Utilizing the purchasing card or credit card for personal use or for any item or service not directly related to such official's public duty may result in disciplinary action including, but not limited to, felony criminal prosecution and immediate termination. All purchases utilizing a government purchasing card or government credit card must be in accordance with these guidelines and with state law. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § B; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.030 - Scope. 
    This purchasing card policy, as required by state law under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c), applies to the use of government purchasing cards or government credit cards used by anyone, including elected officials, authorized to be issued such government purchasing cards or government credit cards. The below list of officials have been authorized by the governing authority of the city to use such government purchasing cards or government credit cards and must abide by all of the applicable state laws and this purchasing card policy. 
1.  Mayor; 
2.  City council; 
3.  City manager; 
4.  City clerk; 
5.  HR/purchasing manager; 
6.  Department heads (police chief, fire chief, public works director, and finance manager); 
7.  Anyone authorized to use a purchasing card or credit card by the city manager. 
a.  The city manager must notify the finance manager and city council of any additional authorized users. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § C; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.040 - Public inspection. 
    Any documents related to purchases using government purchasing cards or government credit cards incurred by city staff shall be available for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § D; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.050 - Transaction limits. 
    Transaction limits are hereby established to insure compliance with state purchasing laws, maintain proper budgetary controls, and to minimize excessive use of any individual credit line. Individual monthly card limits cannot exceed those established by the municipal governing authority. The established transaction limit for the city manager and city clerk is five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per month. All others shall have a single transaction limit of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per month. The total overall credit limit for the City of Metter shall not exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) per month. Any exceptions to the standardized limits must have express written approval by the municipal governing authority and must be added to this policy by amendment or addendum. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § E; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.060 - Purchasing restrictions. 
A.  Elected officials and city staff may not use a government purchasing card or government credit card for the following: 
1.  Any purchases of items for personal use. 
2.  Cash refunds or advances. 
3.  Any transaction amount greater than the transaction limits set for by this policy. 
4.  Items specifically restricted by this policy, unless a special exemption is granted by the municipal governing authority. 
5.  Alcohol or liquor of any kind. Such purchases should not be made with the purchasing card and may not be reimbursed by the city. 
6.  Purchases or transactions made with the intent to circumvent the city purchasing policy, transactional limits, or state law. 
B.  Elected officials and city staff may use government purchasing cards or government credit cards to purchase goods and/or services not prohibited by this policy or state law. Such purchases include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Purchases of items for official city use which fall within the transactional restrictions of this policy. 
2.  Purchase of lodging, fuel, food, non-alcoholic beverages, or education and training materials while on city business. 
3.  Emergency purchases necessary to protect city property. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § F; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.070 - Administrator. 
    The city designates the finance manager, or his/her designee, as the program administrator of government purchasing cards or government credit cards. Such administrator shall: 
1.  Serve as a liaison between the city's cardholders and the issuers of such cards. 
2.  Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders. 
3.  Provide instruction, training, and assistance to cardholders 
4.  Maintain account information and secure all cardholder information. 
5.  Keep cardholders up-to-date on new or changing information 
6.  Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards immediately report it to appropriate parties, including the issuer. 
7.  Ensure all card accounts are being utilized properly as set forth by state law and this policy. 
8.  Define the city's policy and procedures for proper documentation and storage of receipts, logs, and approvals required under this policy. 
9.  Identify any changes to named persons authorized to use a government purchasing card or government credit card. 
10.  Any other duties assigned by the municipal governing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § G; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.080 - Accounting and auditing. 
    The administrator, in an effort to ensure compliance with city policy and state law, will conduct monthly reviews and audits of all government purchasing card or government credit card transactions. The review is designed to ensure compliance, identify non-compliance issues and misuse, and through corrective measures assist the city with improving compliance. The monthly review and audit should happen within ten (10) days of the start of a new month. After completing the monthly audit the administrator shall notify cardholders of any violations or questions the Administrator has that occurred within that previous month. Depending on the severity of the violation, the administrator may suspend or revoke the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card after notification to the cardholder and to the municipal governing authority, but only after consultation with the city attorney. Any unresolved violations should be reported to the municipal governing authority and the city attorney in writing within ten (10) business days. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § H; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.090 - Violations. 
    The use of a government purchasing card or government credit card may be suspended or revoked when the administrator, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that the cardholder has violated the approved policies or state law regarding the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card. The government purchasing card or government credit card shall be revoked whenever a cardholder is removed from office with the city and shall be suspended if such elected official has been suspended from office. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § I; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
2.54.100 - Agreement. 
    Before being issued a government purchasing card or government credit card under this policy and state law, all authorized users of government purchasing cards or government credit cards shall sign and accept below indicating that such user will use such cards only in accordance with the policies of the city and with the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. of 9-21-17, § J; Ord. of 1-19-16) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
3.04 Fiscal Provisions Generally 3.08 Budget Procedures 3.12 Property Taxes 3.16 Motel Excise Tax 3.20 Fiscal Institutions Tax 3.24 Secondary Electric Suppliers  
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Fiscal year established. 
A.  The current fiscal year (2014-2015) shall conclude as previously scheduled on June 30, 2015; 
B.  Fiscal year 2016-2017 shall begin on July 1, 2015 and shall conclude on June 30, 2016, and every fiscal year thereafter shall be on the twelve-month calendar basis of July 1 through June 30 of the next immediate calendar year. 
(Ord. of 5-11-15(1); Ord. 97-2 (part): prior code § 2-1) 
Chapter 3.08 - BUDGET PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Adoption of budget. 
    The mayor and council shall adopt an annual operating budget for the city prior to the beginning of each fiscal year. 
(Prior code § 2-80) 
3.08.020 - Responsible officials-Assistance. 
    The mayor shall be the chief budget officer. The mayor may delegate responsibilities for the different departmental budgets to each responsible councilman. The mayor and council may make full utilization of existing staff capability and available outside technical assistance. 
(Prior code § 2-81) 
3.08.030 - Budget calendar. 
    Six months prior to the end of the current fiscal year, the mayor shall announce a budget calendar. The budget calendar shall set the dates for informal hearings, preliminary budget requests, revenue projections, completion of proposed budget, publication, formal hearings and final adoption. All officials involved shall be bound by this calendar and shall complete their assigned responsibilities by the prescribed time. 
(Prior code § 2-82) 
3.08.040 - Prebudgeting hearings. 
    Public hearings may be held prior to preparing the budget for the purpose of allowing citizens' input to the process. Such prebudgeting hearings may be informal. 
(Prior code § 2-83) 
3.08.050 - Form of budget-Cash flow plan-Cash basis. 
A.  The budget shall display anticipated revenues by category and expenditures by department. Beginning and ending cash balances shall also be projected. The budget shall be supported by line item justification. 
B.  The mayor, or his delegate, will prepare a cash flow plan, to be attached to the budget and approved by the mayor and council, displaying: 
1.  The anticipated revenues by source and by month; and 
2.  The anticipated expenditures by line item and by month. 
    This plan shall be prepared on a line item basis and totaled by department for expenses and category for revenues. 
C.  The budget shall be prepared on a cash basis. 
(Prior code § 2-84) 
3.08.060 - Proposed budget-Publication-Hearing. 
    The proposed budget, by department, shall be published in the local chronicle and a formal public hearing held on the proposed budget prior to final adoption of the budget by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 2-85) 
3.08.070 - Enforcement of budget-Expenditures. 
A.  The adopted budget together with supporting documents shall become an ordinance of the city with a life of one year from the beginning of the fiscal year. The city fiscal officer shall prepare monthly reports reflecting actual monthly and cumulative expenditures as compared to budgeted amounts. 
B.  No expenditures from city funds may be made for any purpose not set out in the approved budget. Any expenditure so made shall be deemed illegal and the officer approving such illegal expenditure shall be held accountable to the city for the amount so spent. 
C.  Cumulative expenditures by department must remain within eighty (80) percent and one hundred ten (110) percent of the anticipated cumulative monthly expenditures during the first nine months of the fiscal year. During the last three months of the fiscal year expenditures must be within ninety-five (95) percent and one hundred (100) percent of planned cumulative totals. 
(Prior code § 2-86) 
3.08.080 - Budget revision. 
A.  1. Should a change in total spending for any department become necessary or desirable within the year, such change may be made only with the formal approval of the mayor and council. Such change shall be displayed in a completely revised budget with changed items being emphasized and a short statement of the reason for the change being included. The revised budget may be approved without a public hearing, but the new budget and the reasons for change must be published in the local chronicle. 
2.  No interdepartment transfers of funds may be effected without the above procedure. 
3.  No change in planned capital outlay may be effected without the above procedure. 
B.  Should a departure from planned expenditures within a department become desirable, such departure may be made with the signed approval of the councilman in charge of the department. The change may be made from one line item to another or the delay or acceleration of a planned expenditure. To be deemed legal and proper, the change must be displayed in a revised budget justification and cash flow plan and incorporated into the monthly reports. Intradepartmental revisions need not be approved by the entire council but the council must be verbally informed of the change at the next regular meeting. It is the responsibility of the councilman in charge of the department to see that expenditures for his department are within the prescribed budget limitations. 
(Prior code §§ 2-87, 2-88) 
Chapter 3.12 - PROPERTY TAXES 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Payment. 
    Every person owning, either in his own right or in any capacity, any property of any kind, whether real, personal or mixed, within the corporate limits of the city, shall pay an annual tax thereon at such percent of the assessed valuation as may be fixed by the mayor and council each year. 
(Prior code § 22-1) 
3.12.020 - Delinquent taxes. 
    After December 20th of each year, unpaid taxes shall become delinquent. 
(Prior code § 22-2) 
3.12.030 - Interest on executions. 
    All city tax executions shall bear interest at the rate that is set by city council or authorized by the state. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part): prior code § 22-3) 
Chapter 3.16 - MOTEL EXCISE TAX 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
    "City" means the city of Metter, Georgia. 
    "Clerk" means the clerk of the city council of the city of Metter. 
    "Due date" means the twentieth day after the end of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
    "Guest room" means a room occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    "Monthly period" means a calendar month. 
    "Motel" means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any motel, lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, hotel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, bed and breakfast inn, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other buildings in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
    "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a motel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
    "Occupant" or "guest" means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any room in a motel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use, or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    "Operator" means any person operating a motel in the city of Metter, Georgia, including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, the lessee, sublessee, lender in possession, licensee, or any other person otherwise operating such motel. 
    "Person" means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit organization or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the State of Georgia, and any political subdivision of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this chapter. 
    "Rent" means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    "Return" means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this chapter. 
    "Tax" means the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-1) 
3.16.020 - Imposition and rate of tax. 
A.  There is levied and imposed, and there shall be paid a tax of seven percent of the rent for every occupancy of a guest room in a motel in the city which is required to be expended for the purpose of promoting tourism, conventions and trade shows, or for the other purposes as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-50 and O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-51. 
B.  Such tax shall be paid upon any occupancy occurring on or after January 1, 1996, although such occupancy is had pursuant to a contract, lease, or other arrangement made prior to such date. Whether rent is paid, or charged or billed, or falls due on either a weekly, monthly, or other term basis, the rent so paid, charged, billed or falling due shall be subject to the tax imposed in this section to the extent that it covers any portion of the month of January, 1996, and any portion of any monthly period thereafter. 
C.  No tax shall be levied as provided in this section upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days or for use as meeting rooms. 
(Ord. of 1-21-14(1); Ord. 2010-6: Ord. dated 10-9-95: prior code § 22A-2) 
3.16.030 - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no tax shall be levied as provided in this chapter upon the fees or charges for any rooms, lodgings or accommodations furnished for the use by Georgia State or local government officials or employees when traveling on official business. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-4) 
3.16.040 - Duty of operator to collect. 
    It shall be the duty of every operator of a motel located within the city to collect from the occupants the tax levied and imposed upon the occupancy of guest rooms by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-3) 
3.16.050 - Registration of operator. 
A.  Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a motel in this city shall immediately register with the clerk of the city council on a form provided by the clerk. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than fifteen (15) days after the date this chapter becomes effective, but such privilege of registration after the imposition of such tax shall not relieve any person from the obligation of payment or collection of tax on and after the date of imposition thereof. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place or places of business and such other information which would facilitate the collection of the tax as the clerk may require. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; by a member or partner in case of ownership by an association or partnership; and by an executive officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. 
B.  A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
C.  Should the clerk of the city council deem it necessary, in order to facilitate registration, he may prescribe administrative provisions therefor other than those provided in this section. Such provisions shall be made to effect the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-5) 
3.16.060 - Certification of taxing authority. 
    Upon the registration of an operator as provided in Section 3.16.050, the clerk of the city council shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax from the occupants, stating the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. Such certificates shall be nonassignable and nontransferable, and shall be returned immediately to the clerk upon the cessation of business by the registered operator at the location named, or upon sale or transfer of such business at such location. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-6) 
3.16.070 - Due date of taxes. 
    All taxes levied and imposed by this chapter shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period in which such taxes are collected. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-7) 
3.16.080 - Returns and time of filing-Remittance of tax. 
A.  On or before the twentieth day of the month following each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period shall be filed with the clerk of the city council, in such form as the clerk may prescribe, by every operator liable for the payment of tax under this chapter. 
B.  All returns shall show the gross rent, exempt rent, taxable rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the monthly period for which filed, and such other information as may be required by the clerk, and shall be accompanied when filed by remittance of the net amount of tax due. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-8) 
3.16.090 - Collection fee allowed operators. 
    Operators collecting the tax levied under this chapter shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due, if such amount is not delinquent at the time of the payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state sales and use tax under Section 48-8-50 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as now or hereafter amended. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-9) 
3.16.100 - Deficiency determinations. 
A.  Recomputation of Tax-Authority to Make-Basis of Recomputation. If the clerk of the city council is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any person, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information in his possession or which may come into his possession. One or more than one deficiency determination may be made of the amount due for one or more than one monthly period. 
B.  Interest on Deficiency. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from and after the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax and interest. 
C.  Offsetting of Overpayments. In making determination the clerk may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against the interest on such unpaid tax. 
D.  Notice of Determination-Service of. The clerk, or his designated representative, shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail. If by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the clerk. 
E.  Time Within Which Notice of Deficiency Determination to be Mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period shall last expire. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-10) 
3.16.110 - Determination if no return made. 
A.  Estimate of Gross Receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the clerk of the city council shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator or, as the case may be, of the amount of the total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the person failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the clerk. Upon the basis of this estimate the clerk shall compute and determine the amount required to be paid to the city, adding to the sum thus determined a penalty equal to fifteen (15) percent thereof. One or more determinations may be made of the amount due for one or for more than one monthly period. 
B.  Offsetting of Overpayments. In making a determination the clerk may offset overpayments for a period, or periods, against unpaid tax found to be due for another period or periods, against penalties, and against interest on unpaid tax found to be due. The interest on such unpaid tax shall be computed in the manner set forth in Section 3.16.100(B). 
C.  Interest on Amount Found Due. The amount of the unpaid tax found to be due shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month from and after the twentieth day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount should have been returned until the date of payment of such tax, penalties and interest. 
D.  Notice of Determination-Service of. Promptly after making his determination, the clerk shall give to the operator written notice of his determination, which notice may be served personally or by mail in the manner prescribed for service of notice of a deficiency determination. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-11) 
3.16.120 - Collection of tax. 
A.  Action for Tax-Time for. 
1.  When it is determined by a return filed, or by the clerk having made a determination under the provisions of Sections 3.16.100 or 3.16.110 of this chapter, that tax is due and payable to the city under the provisions of this chapter, the mayor and council may at any time within three years after determination that such tax is due and payable bring an action in the courts of this state, of any other state, or of the United States in the name of the city to collect the amount of tax payable to the city together with interest thereon and penalties, court costs, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
2.  The bringing of such an action shall not be a prerequisite for the issuance of a fi fa under the provisions of subsection (D) of this section. 
B.  Duty of Successors or Assignees of Operator to Withhold Tax From Purchase Money. If any operator liable for any amount of tax under this chapter sells or transfers his business, his successors or assigns shall withhold a sufficient amount of the purchase price of the business to cover such amount of tax, interest thereon and penalties, and pay such sum over to the city unless the operator liable for such tax delivers to such purchaser or transferee, as the case may be, at the time of such sale or transfer, a certificate from the clerk showing that all tax returns required of such operator have been filed and all taxes shown as being payable on such returns have been paid in full. 
C.  Liability for Failure to Withhold-Time to Enforce Successor's Liability. If the purchaser or transferee of a business fails to withhold the required amount of the purchase price, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. The time within which the obligation of a successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells or transfers his business, or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. 
D.  Issuance of Fi Fa. The clerk is authorized to issue a fi fa for execution and levy to satisfy the amount of any tax, penalty or interest due but not paid under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-12) 
3.16.130 - Administration. 
A.  Authority of the Clerk. The clerk of the city council, under supervision of the mayor and council shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter for the levy and collection of the tax imposed by this chapter. 
B.  Rules and Regulations. The clerk shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this chapter or other ordinances of the city, or the laws of the State of Georgia, or the constitution of this state or the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the collection of the taxes under this chapter. 
C.  Records Required from Operators, Etc.-Form. Every operator shall keep such records, receipts, invoices, and other pertinent papers in such form as the clerk of the city council may require. 
D.  Examination of Records-Audits. The clerk, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount of tax required to be paid. 
E.  Authority to Require Reports-Contents. In administration of the provisions of this chapter, the clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in such person's or persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the clerk when required by the clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date or dates of occupancy, and such other information as the clerk may require. 
F.  Limitation on Disclosure of Business of Operators, Etc. The clerk or any person having an administrative duty under this chapter shall not make known in any manner the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an audit of books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth or disclosed in any return, or permit any return or copy thereof or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person not having such administrative duty under this chapter, except in case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the tax levied and assessed by this chapter. Successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, may be given information as to the items included in the measure and amount of unpaid tax or amounts of tax, interest and penalties required to be collected. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-13) 
3.16.140 - Agents for receiving notices. 
    When registering pursuant to Section 3.16.050 of this chapter, each operator shall appoint, in writing, an agent to receive for the operator any notice required to be given to the operator under the provisions of this chapter, stating the full name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of such agent. Such agent shall be either an individual resident of the city or an employee of the operator who regularly works at the operator's place of business on a daily basis, and the appointment of the agent must be accompanied by the written consent of such agent to serve as agent for the operator. Such agent may be changed from time to time by written appointment of, and consent of a successor agent. The operator is required to have such an agent at all times and should an agent cease to be a resident of the city or an employee regularly working at the operator's place of business in the city, as the case may be, the operator shall immediately file a written appointment of a new agent and such agent's consent to serve as such with the clerk. Any agent so appointed by an operator shall be authorized to receive for and on behalf of the operator any notice required to be given to the operator by the provisions of this chapter. Delivery of any such notice to such agent, in person or by mail, shall be sufficient to meet the requirements of this chapter and such notice shall be binding on the operator. This method of giving notice to operators is supplementary and cumulative of the other methods of giving notice set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-14) 
3.16.150 - Violations-Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 4.13 of the Charter of the city. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such persons, and shall be punished accordingly. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report who makes any false or fraudulent report, with intent to defeat or evade the determination of an amount due required by this chapter to be made shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon convictions thereof shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. dated 1-11-93 (part): prior code § 22A-15) 
Chapter 3.20 - FISCAL INSTITUTIONS TAX 
Sections: 

3.20.010 - Levied. 
    Pursuant to OCGA Section 48-6-93, there is levied for the year 1995, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations at the rate of twenty-five-hundredths of one percent of the gross receipts of such institutions as defined in this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this section shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-17.1) 
3.20.020 - Gross receipts defined. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized in subdivisions (1) and (2) of this subsection during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by Section 3.20.010 is due: 
1.  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
a.  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
b.  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions; 
c.  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements to resell; 
d.  Interest on other bonds, notes and debentures, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
e.  Dividends on stocks; 
f.  Income from direct-lease financing; 
g.  Income from fiduciary activities; 
h.  Service charges on deposit accounts; 
i.  Other service charges, commissions and fees; and 
j.  Other income. 
2.  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
a.  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others; 
b.  Interest on mortgages, participation or mortgage-backed securities; 
c.  Interest on real estate sold on contract; 
d.  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased; 
e.  Interest on other loans, excluding interest obligations of the state, its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States; 
f.  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits; 
g.  Loan fees; 
h.  Loan servicing fees; 
i.  Other fees and charges; 
j.  Gross income from real estate owned operations; 
k.  Net income from office building operations; 
l.  Gross income from real estate held for investments; 
m.  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries; 
n.  Miscellaneous operating income; 
o.  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans and other assets; and 
p.  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
B.  The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (A)(1) and (2) of this section: 
1.  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period; 
2.  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to OCGA, Article 5A of Chapter 1 of Title 7; 
3.  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions; 
4.  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia; and 
5.  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subdivisions (2), (3) and (4) of this subsection, any deductions taken under subdivision (1) of this subsection shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subdivisions (2) and (4) of this subsection bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subdivisions (1) through (4) of this subsection. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-17.2) 
3.20.030 - Filing of returns. 
    Each depository financial institution within the city limits of the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the finance department by March 1st of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the same manner and in the form prescribed by the State Revenue Commissioner based on the allocation method set forth in subsection (d) of OCGA Section 48-6-93. The return shall provide the same information necessary to determine the portion of the taxpayer's total gross receipts to be allocated to each taxing jurisdiction in which such institution has a place of business. The tax levied pursuant to Section 3.20.010 shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-17.3) 
3.20.040 - Due date. 
    The due date of taxes levied by Section 3.20.010 shall be April 1st of each year. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-17.4) 
3.20.050 - Examination of records. 
    The finance director or designee shall have the right to examine, inspect and review all books and records of financial institutions required to collect the tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-17.6) 
3.20.060 - Violations, penalties and interest. 
A.  If any financial institution fails to make a return, the finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the total receipts which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to that period a return was not made and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the government of the city. The finance director shall give written notice of any estimate made under the provisions of this section. 
B.  All taxes imposed by this chapter that are not paid by the due date shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month or part of a month from the due date until paid and a penalty of ten percent of the unpaid tax. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-17.5) 
Chapter 3.24 - SECONDARY ELECTRIC SUPPLIERS 
Sections: 

3.24.010 - Gross receipts business tax established-Verified statement of revenues to be filed. 
    Each secondary electric supplier (including specifically Electric Membership Corporations whether or not operated for profit), within the meaning of OCGA Section 46-3-1 et seq., distributing and selling electric power within the city which is not otherwise paying a franchise fee pursuant to a franchise agreement, and whether or not such secondary electric supplier has, operates and maintains offices within the city shall pay a gross receipts tax at the rate of four percent on any and all gross revenue derived from distribution and sale of electric power to their customers, members or purchasers within the city, according to the verified statement of such gross revenues which shall be submitted by such secondary electric supplier at the time such taxes are paid. This gross receipts business tax is levied pursuant to authority granted the city in Ga. L. 1920, p. 1278 et seq. at Section 49. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-16(a)) 
3.24.020 - Taxes payable monthly-Taxes to be in lieu of certain other taxes. 
    The taxes set out in Section 3.24.010 shall be due and payable to the city on the twentieth day of each month, calculated on gross revenues billed for the immediately preceding month; also, the percentage of such gross revenues hereinbefore prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of such secondary electric supplier in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-16(b)) 
3.24.030 - Electric service within the city. 
    Secondary electric suppliers distributing and selling electric power within the city, and which do not have a franchise agreement with the city, do not acquire any additional rights by the payment of the tax levied under this chapter other than those rights granted under the Georgia Electric Territorial Service Act. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-16(c)) 
3.24.040 - Enforcement and administration. 
A.  The city clerk shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, and shall have the power to prepare and provide the necessary forms and for the collection of the tax levied in this chapter. 
B.  The city clerk shall issue executions for the collection of all outstanding and unpaid taxes imposed and assessed by this chapter. The unpaid taxes and executions shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the collection of other taxes due the city. 
(Ord. dated 3-20-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-16(d)) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters: 
5.04 Occupation Taxes and Fees 5.08 Alcoholic Beverages 5.12 Amusements 5.16 Insurance Companies 5.20 Peddlers and Solicitors 5.24 Charitable Organizations 5.28 Vehicles For Hire 5.29 Temporary Vendors and Transient Merchants  
Chapter 5.04 - OCCUPATION TAXES AND FEES 
Sections: 

5.04.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the following meanings: 
    "Administrative fee" means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    "City" means the city of Metter. 
    "Employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax or state income tax or whose employer issues to such individual for the purposes of document and compensation a form IRS W-2, but not a form IRS 1099. 
    "Location" or "office" shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
    "Occupation tax" means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city of Metter. 
    "Occupation tax certificate" means a document issued by the city of Metter acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
    "Practitioners of professions and occupations" means those individuals listed in OCGA Section 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. 
    "Regulatory fee" means a fee which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
    "Regulatory fee certificate" means a document issued by the city of Metter acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Ord. of 7-13-15; Added during 1997 codification) 
5.04.020 - Administrative fee. 
    A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of seventy dollars ($70.00) is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal of reopening of such accounts. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-2) 
5.04.030 - Regulatory fee. 
    Businesses and individuals may be required to pay a nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with rates as set by city council. 
(Amended during 1997 codification; Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-2.1) 
5.04.040 - Occupation tax levied-Limitations. 
A.  An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state of Georgia is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations of offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to OCGA Section 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state of Georgia in accordance with the following schedule: 
First ten employees       $21.00 per employee 
Next ten employees       17.00 per employee 
Next ten employees       15.00 per employee 
Next ten employees       13.00 per employee 
Next ten employees       6.00 per employee 
Remaining employees       1.55 per employee 
B.  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location shall be considered a separate business for purposes of the occupational tax. Employees of a business with multiple locations or offices within the city shall only be counted once for purposes for assessing a tax pursuant to this Chapter. 
C.  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this chapter shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
1.  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sale or service in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
2.  A business or practitioner with no location or office in Georgia shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in Georgia where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
3.  A business or practitioner which has locations in Georgia subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in Georgia shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government(s). 
4.  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
D.  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1st in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be fifty (50) percent 
(1)  Lawyers; 
(2)  Physicians licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; 
(3)  Osteopaths licensed under Chapter 34 of Title 43; 
(4)  Chiropractors; 
(5)  Podiatrists; 
(6)  Dentists; 
(7)  Optometrists; 
(8)  Psychologists; 
(9)  Veterinarians; 
(10)  Landscape architects; 
(11)  Land surveyors; 
(12)  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
(13)  Public accountants; 
(14)  Embalmers; 
(15)  Funeral directors; 
(16)  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
(17)  Architects; 
(18)  Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
    of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee shall not be reduced. 
E.  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31st the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk. 
F.  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this chapter only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-13-15; Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-3) 
5.04.050 - Occupation tax certificate. 
    Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this chapter shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-4) 
5.04.060 - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in this chapter shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in Section 5.04.040 or shall pay an occupation tax of four hundred dollars ($400.00) per practitioner. On the tax return for 1995 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1st of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
    Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the requirement of "practitioners of professions and occupations" as defined in this chapter to pay the occupation tax shall not be construed as a precondition to the practice of such profession and occupation. (Amdmt. to Ord. 1-9-95 dated 3-9-98 (part); Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-5) 
5.04.070 - Exemptions. 
A.  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
1.  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
2.  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission; 
3.  Those electrical service businesses organized under Chapter 3 Title 46 of the Official Code of Georgia; 
4.  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including any agribusiness; 
5.  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to OCGA Section 2-10-105; 
6.  Motor common carriers pursuant to OCGA Section 46-7-15; 
7.  Persons purchasing guano, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to OCGA Section 48-5-355; 
8.  Pursuant to OCGA Section 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within ninety (90) days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
9.  Depository institutions pursuant to OCGA Section 48-6-93; or 
10.  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state of Georgia or the United States. 
B.  The exemptions and limitations contained in this chapter shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-6) 
5.04.080 - Evidence of state registration when required. 
    Each person who is licensed under Title 43 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated by the Examining Boards of the Secretary of State's Office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-7) 
5.04.090 - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
A.  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or a regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
B.  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-8) 
5.04.100 - Filing returns-Other information required or requested. 
A.  On or before November 15th of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this occupation tax shall file with the city clerk on a form approved by and available from the city a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
B.  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within thirty (30) days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee(s). 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-9) 
5.04.110 - Confidentiality. 
    Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under Article 4 of Chapter 18 of Title 50 of the Official Code of Georgia. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax prosecution for failure or refusal to pay occupation tax. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-10) 
5.04.120 - Date due-Penalty for late payment. 
A.  Any occupation tax, and fees associated therewith, shall be payable January 1st of each calendar year and shall be delinquent if not paid by January 15th of said year and be subject to penalties for delinquency. In the event that any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1st in a given year, the tax and other fees associated with the enforcement of this chapter shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
B.  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this chapter which is unpaid for ninety (90) days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the tax or fee due. Interest shall be assessed on delinquent occupation taxes, regulatory fees, and administrative fees at a rate of one and one-half percent per month. 
(Ord. of 7-13-15; Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-12) 
5.04.130 - Enforcement-Violations. 
A.  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this chapter and to summon violators of this chapter to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
B.  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by OCGA Section 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by city clerk of the city upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the code and Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of Georgia in regard to tax executions. 
C.  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
D.  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax or regulatory fee charged pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, the same to be enforced by the municipal court of the city. In addition to the remedies expressed herein, any tax, fee, and/or penalty imposed may be collected in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
E.  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax or regulatory fee shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. 
F.  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this chapter shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining business for such person, business or practitioner shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain the required certificate or make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. (Ord. of 7-13-15; Amdmt. to Ord. 1-9-95 dated 3-9-98 (part); Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-13) 
5.04.140 - Public hearing. 
    After January 1, 1996, the city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax rate specified in Section 5.04.040. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-14) 
5.04.150 - Previously owed taxes still to be paid. 
    To the extent that any occupation taxes or regulatory fees are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to this one, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes or regulatory fees until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. dated 1-9-95 § 1 (part): prior code § 11-15) 
Chapter 5.08 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Sections: 
Forms 
* Prior ordinance history: Ord. dated 5-10-93. 
Article I. - In General 

5.08.010 - Purposes and authority. 
A.  The mayor and council of the city of Metter, Georgia shall issue retail licenses for the distribution of alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the city subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
1.  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
2.  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
3.  Insuring that any licenses issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises are issued only to a legitimate restaurant or private club as defined in this chapter; 
4.  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; 
5.  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
C.  To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, the following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Alcohol" means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, spirits or wine, from whatever source or whatever process produced. 
    "Alcoholic beverage" means and includes all alcohol, malt beverages, distilled spirits, wine and fortified wines defined in this section. 
    "City" means the city of Metter and when used in a geographical sense means the territorial limits of the city of Metter. 
    "City clerk" means the city clerk of the city of Metter. 
    "Distilled spirits" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    "Fortified wine" means any alcoholic beverage containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
    "Interest" includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
    "Licensed premises" includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served but also the entire building in which such room is located, except that when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the "licensed premises." 
    "Licensee" includes an individual licensee and in the case of a partnership or corporation includes both the partnership or corporation and the named licensee. 
    "Majority stockholder" means the person, if any, who owns more than fifty (50) percent of the voting stock of a corporation; if no person owns more than fifty (50) percent of the voting of a corporation, the "majority stockholder" is the person owning more of the voting stock than any other person; and if two or more persons each own the same amount of the voting stock of a corporation and each own more of the voting stock than any other person, then anyone of such persons may act as the "majority stockholder." 
    "Malt beverage" means fermented beverage made in whole or in part from malt or any similar fermented substance. 
    "Mayor and city council" means the mayor and council of the city of Metter. 
    "Mixed drink" means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, whether or not diluted by water or any other substance. 
    "Named licensee" means the person acting as such for a partnership or corporation pursuant to Section 5.08.130. 
    "Person" includes a corporation, partnership, association, club or institution. 
B.  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, OCGA Title 3. 
C.  As used in this chapter, the singular, and plural shall each include the other, the masculine and feminine shall each include the other, and any verb tense may include any other verb tense. 
D.  As used in this chapter, the term "may" is permissive and the term "shall" is mandatory. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.030 - Violations-Civil and criminal penalties. 
A.  Any person and/or business which violates any provision of the chapter shall be subject to being punished as provided in this Code, which may include a civil penalty (fine), a criminal penalty (fine), and/or imprisonment. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
    "Person" as referenced above refers to any individual and/or group of individuals which violate any provision of this chapter. "Business" includes any individual owner, group of owners, and/or entity which has an interest in the establishment that employed the individual who violates any provision of this chapter. 
B.  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including the maximum occupant load, shall be grounds for fines, suspension, or revocation of any retail or wholesale license issued hereunder. If an employee of the business violates a provision of the chapter, the employer is liable for the employee's actions and this penalty shall be imposed upon the business employing said employee. 
1.  For the first violation there shall be a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine. 
2.  For the second violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any twenty-four (24) month period of the first violation, there shall be a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine and a thirty (30) day suspension of the license privileges. 
3.  For the third, and any subsequent violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any twenty-four (24) month period of the first violation, there shall be a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) fine and a ninety (90) day suspension of license privileges. 
4.  For any fourth or subsequent violation, the date of occurrence of which is within any twenty-four (24) month period of the first violation, the license may be revoked at the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
5.  Any suspension or revocation of a license shall first require notice to the license holder of the grounds for potential suspension and revocation and shall entitle license holders to file an appeal which must be done within seventy-two (72) hours and shall be entitled to due process hearing before the mayor and city council which appeal shall be heard within ten (10) working days. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
6.  A license holder who receives a suspension or revocation of his license may not be an officer, director or shareholder of any succeeding entity that holds a license from the city during his period of suspension. 
C.  The Metter police department shall be responsible for notifying the city clerk or her designee in writing of all cited violations of Section 5.08.030 within forty-eight (48) business hours of the violations. After receiving the notice, the city clerk shall send a certified letter to the alcohol license holder and business owner accused of the violation and notify them of the civil penalty which has been assessed due to the nature of the violation. Should a civil penalty be assessed and the alcohol license holder and/or business owner fail to pay said civil penalty within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the city clerk's certified letter, the alcohol license in questions shall be automatically suspended or revoked until such time that the civil penalty is paid in full. Said civil penalties shall be assessed in accordance with Section 5.08.030, Section 5.08.210, and/or Section 5.08.220. This section shall not limit the actions permissible under any other provision of chapter 5.08, the alcohol beverage ordinance. 
(Ord. dated 2-14-05 § 1-3; Ord. dated 11-14-04 § 1; Ord. 02-04 (part); Ord. of 4-10-06, § 1) 
5.08.040-5.08.110 - Reserved. 
Article II. - Licensing 

5.08.120 - Required classifications, etc. 
A.  "Required." It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  "Pay schedule." License fees for renewal of a license shall be paid in advance, on or before the last business day at city hall, prior to the license expiration date of December 31 of each year. If an initial fee is paid on or after July 1 of the year of application, the license fees for the remainder of the year shall be fifty (50) percent of the license fee imposed for the entire year. Any administrative fees will not be reduced. The suspension or revocation of any license granted pursuant to this article shall not entitle the licensee to a return of any portion of the license fee. License fees for a new license shall be payable at the time that the application is submitted to the city clerk. 
C.  "Classification." Classes of licenses issued under this chapter, activities permitted and regulated thereunder, and the annual license fees shall be set by city council from time to time. 
D.  "Penalties." All fees set forth in this section are due prior to the license expiration date of December 31 of each calendar year. Failure for anyone to pay these fees for a license renewal, on or before the last business day at city hall, prior to the license expiration date, will result in the license holder and business establishment not being able to sell alcoholic beverages. Under no circumstances shall alcoholic beverages be sold after December 31 of each calendar year until all fees are paid in full. All fees which are not paid by January 10 of each calendar year will be subject to a ten (10) percent per month late charge or penalty and shall be grounds for revocation of the license. This provision shall not limit the fines and/or penalties which may be assessed under other sections of chapter 5.08, the alcohol beverages ordinance. 
E.  "Payment of fees." An applicant shall pay the annual license fee at the time the application is filed; and in such event the license applied for is not issued, the annual license fee shall be refunded. 
(Ord. dated 11-14-04 § 2; Ord. 02-04 (part); Ord. of 4-10-06, §§ 2, 3; Ord. of 3-14-16) 
5.08.130 - Procedure for issuance. 
A.  A license issued to an individual shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation; and such majority stockholder or officer shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises; and such officer or employee shall be the named licensee. 
B.  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall join as an applicant for the license and each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein. 
C.  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages, the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation shall join as applicants for the license; and each such person must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee. 
D.  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, the officer or employee who is to be the named licensee shall be the applicant and must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided herein; provided, however, that the mayor and city council may require the fingerprinting and investigation of officers and shareholders of the corporation if they deem it necessary in making their investigation. 
E.  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a corporation, the corporation shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.140 - Reserved. 
5.08.150 - Qualifications for a new application. 
A.  A licensee must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age, of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
B.  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the past five years of any felony or, misdemeanor, or violation of city alcohol ordinances within the past two years, or at any time of any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. The mayor and city council may at their discretion waive the conviction of a misdemeanor for a non-alcoholic offense for purposes of this subsection if the mayor and city council determines that the misdemeanor does not have a bearing on the applicant's fitness for a license. 
C.  A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
D.  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a private club or restaurant as defined in Sections 5.08.660 and 5.08.670. 
(Ord. dated 11-14-04 § 3; Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.160 - Application procedures. 
A.  Application for a license for the retail sale of beer and malt beverages and/or distilled spirits in the city shall be filed with the city clerk upon forms prescribed by the city and made available at city hall. The application shall be subscribed by the applicant under oath and fully completed and executed. The city clerk shall deliver the application to the mayor and city council. 
B.  There shall be attached to the application a bank money order, certified check or like remittance of the application. The applicant shall publish a notice stating an application has been applied for, the applicant's name, the name and location of the business and the type of license being applied for. The notice shall run two weeks in the legal organ of Candler County. The applicant will be responsible for running the public notice and the cost thereof. There shall also be attached an affidavit of publication in compliance with this section. 
C.  As a prerequisite to the issuance of the license, the applicant shall furnish a complete set of their fingerprints to the city clerk who will forward them to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation which shall search the files and forward the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation to determine the applicant's past criminal activity. All applicants must consent to the background check described within this section or the application shall be denied. The applicant shall not be entitled to a reimbursement of any application cost and/or fee should the application be denied as a result of the applicant's past criminal history or the applicant's refusal to cooperate with the background check. 
D.  Failure to fully complete and execute an application for a license or to furnish accurately all data, information and records required by the application form as well as failure to accompany the application with the payment of the prescribed fee or the affidavit of publication shall be deemed just cause for denying the application with prejudice. 
E.  Upon proper completion of the application and payment of fees, the city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police for such investigation and hearings thereon as deemed necessary under this article. The chief of police may seek the advice of additional law enforcement officers and state prosecutors during its consideration of the application. 
F.  As a prerequisite to the issuance of a license, all businesses where alcohol is consumed on the premises shall satisfy all requirements of a fire and life safety inspection performed by the state or local fire official, as applicable, and the city building official or his/her designee. In addition, all businesses where alcohol is consumed on the premises and the occupancy load is one hundred (100) or more shall provide the city clerk with a signed fire safety report and certificate of occupancy from the state or local fire official as applicable. The state or local fire official, as applicable, may cause to be inspected any building or portion of any building licensed under this chapter. 
G.  Upon full compliance with the requirements of the state fire code, the state or local fire official or the building inspector, as applicable, shall notify the city clerk for further processing of the license. 
H.  After its investigation, the mayor and city council shall grant or deny the license applied for. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part); Ord. of 4-10-06, § 4) 
5.08.170 - Renewal. 
    On renewal, the licensee shall be administered and take the oath specifically contained on the application form. Making any false statements will be grounds for automatic revocation of license. The mayor and city council may within its discretion require fingerprinting and a full background check on any renewal at any time. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.180 - Transfer. 
A.  Except as provided in this section, no license shall be transferable to any other person or location. 
B.  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensee's premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
C.  In the case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or adult heir or heirs of the deceased unless the mayor and city council determines that it would otherwise violate this chapter. If the transferee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter when the time comes to renew the license, it shall not be renewed. 
D.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided such withdrawal shall not without application for an issuance of a new license introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business. 
E.  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, a change in the named licensee may be permitted by the if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
F.  In the circumstances described in subsections (C), (D) and (E) of this section, the license may be revoked if the mayor and city council determines that the change results in a failure to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.190 - Change in business ownership. 
A.  If any licensee withdraws from, sells or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall within two days, notify the city clerk and surrender the license. 
B.  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, a new application shall be made as for an original license. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.200 - Temporary license. 
A.  A temporary license may be issued by the mayor and city council if, in their judgment, the denial of a temporary license would create an undue hardship such as the closing of an existing business. The temporary license cannot exceed a ninety (90) day period. 
B.  A temporary license may be revoked, with or without cause, by the mayor and city council at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary license shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. 
C.  Special Event Permits. 
1.  License required; council approval; suspension of enforcement of certain law. A special event alcohol beverage permit license is required for all special events that involve the sale and consumption of alcohol. Said license shall not be given without the prior approval of City of Metter. In the event said license is approved, the enforcement of subsection 12.12 shall be suspended in the area designated for the special event during the time of the special event. Provided, however, said suspension shall apply only to the drinking of alcohol beverages sold by the licensee and shall not suspend the enforcement of the remaining provisions of section 12-12. 
2.  Compliance with state and federal law required. In addition to all other rules and regulations, each applicant for a special event alcohol beverage permit license and each special event alcohol beverage permit licensee doing business in the city shall comply with all state, federal, and local laws and the violation of any such laws or regulations shall subject the licensee to the immediate revocation of his license and to criminal prosecution otherwise. 
3.  Place where permit valid; designation of area; patrons outside area; number of permits annually; adjacent property owners or renters of occupied parcels; notification of owners of property. 
a.  The special event alcohol beverage permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit and the area where alcohol may be served shall be specifically delineated on the application. In no event shall patrons of the licensee go on to property not delineated on the application. Any suspension of the enforcement of any city ordinance contained herein shall not apply on property not delineated on the application. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for licensees' employees or patrons of licensee to bring into or take outside the delineated area any alcoholic beverage or to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person outside the delineated area. Patrons taking alcoholic beverages purchased from the special event alcohol beverage permit licensee outside of the designated area shall be subject to arrest in accordance with the Code of Metter, Georgia and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
c.  No more than three such permits may be issued to the applicant in any one calendar year. 
d.  All applicants must provide proof that all adjacent property owners and/or renters of adjacent property have been notified of the application at least ten (10) days prior to the event. 
e.  The owner of the property where sales are to be made, if not the applicant, shall be notified in writing by the applicant of the application, and proof of said notification shall be attached to the application. 
f.  A special event alcohol beverage permit license shall authorize the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only in the designated area for a period not to exceed three days. 
g.  The special event alcoholic beverage permit shall be subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages. 
h.  Special event alcoholic beverage permits are privileges; and not rights. Applications for special event alcoholic beverage permits may be denied on a finding that the issuance of the applied for permit would jeopardize the health, safety, or general welfare of the citizens of the City of Metter or that conditions of previously issued permits were not adhered to by event sponsors. 
4.  License fee. Each application for a special event alcoholic beverage permit shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
5.  Application for license; time; review. 
a.  Special event alcohol beverage permit license applications must be submitted at least fifteen (15) days prior to the planned special event. 
b.  At least ten (10) days prior to the event, the applicant shall meet with the appropriate staff members of the City of Metter as designated by the city manager in the issuance of a permit for the event, the applicant shall sign a statement of understanding of an agreement to the terms and conditions imposed on the event. Such statements shall become a part of the conditions of the permit for the event. 
c.  The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit or the imposition of any staff imposed condition on the permit to the city council. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of notice of the denial or conditions. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal. 
6.  Posting of license and notice; proof of license; employees of licensee. 
a.  All special event alcohol beverage permit licenses shall be posted at greeting areas or main entrances to the event. 
b.  Every area where alcoholic beverages are consumed shall be conspicuously posted at all times at each point of entrance/exit with signs stating the following: "the possession of alcoholic beverages beyond this point is prohibited". The letters of such sign shall not be less than three inches in height and one-half-inch in width and shall be in black letters on a contrasting light background. 
c.  City staff may ask event producers or business owners to show proof of license during the event. 
d.  All employees working for the licensee during the event must be of legal age to drink. 
7.  Patrons identification; containers of alcohol; cleanup of site. 
a.  Licensee must provide some type of acceptable identification tag for patrons and said identification tag shall be worn at all times while the patron is consuming alcohol during the special event. Persons consuming alcohol during the special event without such identification shall be subject to arrest in accordance with the Code of Metter, Georgia and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
b.  All alcohol sold must be in non-glass containers. 
c.  Licensee shall be responsible for all cleanup of the area designated for the sale and consumption of alcohol. 
8.  Revocation of license for failure to comply with state rules and regulations. Licenses issued under this division shall be revocable in the event the licensee fails to comply with the rules and regulations of the state with the issuance of licenses for special event alcohol beverage permit and the state requirements pertaining to such issuance are hereby referred to and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. of 5-8-17, § 2; Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.210 - Suspension-Revocation. 
A.  Upon final disposition of a case by any court of competent jurisdiction, a license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council for any violation of this chapter and/or other city ordinances, for any violation of state or federal law, for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license, or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for license. 
B.  The mayor and city council, by resolution, may direct the chief of police of the city and his lawful officers to remove the license from any place of business of any licensee upon determination by the chief or his lawful officers that any provision of this chapter or the laws of the state of Georgia pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages has been violated. Upon removal of the license as provided above, it shall be illegal for the licensee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages until such time as the license has been reinstated as hereinafter provided. 
C.  Upon removal of a license as provided above, the city within three days, shall give written notice to the licensee of the reasons for such removal and as to any suspension or revocation of such license. The licensee may within ten (10) days from receipt of the aforesaid notice from the city, make written application to the mayor and council for a hearing on the matter of suspension or revocation, including the right of the licensee to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Failure of the licensee to request a hearing within the allowed period shall constitute a waiver of any right of further appeal of the city's decision regarding revocation or suspension. In the event a hearing is requested as provided above, the same will be held within ten (10) days from receipt by the city of the request. The city, after hearing evidence, shall reach its decision and advise the licensee of the same. In the event the city determines, with or without a hearing, that a license shall be reinstated, the same shall be immediately returned to the licensee. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.220 - Automatic revocation. 
    A license shall be automatically revoked by operation of law if: 
A.  The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked, suspended, canceled or not renewed. 
B.  Payment of the annual license fee is not received by the city within fourteen (14) days after notification that the approval to issue a license has been made by the mayor and city council. 
C.  Operation of the licensed activity is not commenced within six months after the license is issued. 
D.  Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days unless extended by the mayor and city council for good cause. 
E.  The licensed business declares bankruptcy or receivership, is the subject of levy or legal process, or fails to properly account for, file, report and pay any excise tax levied under this chapter. 
F.  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit any license fee imposed or taxes required under this chapter. 
G.  Payment of the annual renewal license fee is not received by the city within the time prescribed. 
H.  The named licensee is convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
I.  Any false statement in the application or renewal process by the licensee. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.230 - Reserved. 
Article III. - Location 

5.08.240 - Proximity restrictions. 
A.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
1.  Any distilled spirits in or within one hundred (100) yards of any church building or within two hundred (200) yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
2.  Any wine or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of any school building, school grounds, church or college campus. This subparagraph shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to January 1, 2003 nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the twelve (12) months immediately preceding such application; 
3.  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within one hundred (100) yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on January 1, 2003. 
4.  Nothing contained in this subsection shall prohibit licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only to obtain licenses for restaurants, so that for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only in restaurants, there shall be no distance requirements for properties zoned HOC (Highway Oriented Commercial), HOC IA (Limited Highway Oriented Commercial), or CBD (Central Business District). For the purpose of this subsection, a restaurant shall mean an establishment that promotes the sale of prepared food as the dominant part of its business and derives at least fifty (50) percent of its revenue from the sale of such prepared food. This revenue percentage shall be certified under oath by a certified public accountant for the applicant. For new licensees, the certification may be based on a business plan for the restaurant. For renewing licensees, the certification shall be based on historic revenues. This exemption for retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises for restaurants only is made pursuant to the express authority of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(b)(3). 
B.  Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by: 
1.  Hotels of fifty (50) rooms or more which have been in continuous operation for a period of at least five years preceding January 1, 2003. 
2.  Bona fide private clubs, owning their own premises, subject to licensing under state law. 
C.  For the purposes of this article, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground from the closest entryway of the applicant's business establishment to the closest entryway of a church, school, or educational building. 
(Ord. of 5-8-17, § 1; Ord. of 12-9-13, § 1; Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.250 - Reserved. 
Article IV. - Sales 

5.08.260 - Responsibility of named licensee. 
    The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.270 - Rentals paid restricted. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the licensed business's sale of alcoholic beverages. 
B.  Subsection (A) shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages; for example, a grocery store selling package beer and wine. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.280 - Display of license. 
    Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.290 - Retention of records. 
A.  All consumption-on-the-premises of licensees shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee and shall keep and preserve records of all food and non-alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by them. Such records shall at all times during normal business hours be open for inspection by an authorized agent of the city such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. 
B.  All consumption-on-the-premises licensees shall file with the city clerk the following reports at the time and in the form prescribed by the mayor and city council: 
1.  A semi-annual on premises consumption report in the form of a signed statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentages of the licensees total sales derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages sold on premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on premises. If a license holder elects to utilize a certified public accountant to prepare the semi-annual on premises consumption report, no documentation is required, but the mayor and city council may require documentation in addition to the report prepared by the certified public accountant. If the semi-annual on premises consumption report is not prepared by a certified public accountant, the report must be accompanied by a certified copy of the licensees monthly state sales tax reports, copies of the paid invoices from wholesale alcohol distributors and copies of the paid invoices from retail and wholesale food vendors coinciding with the on premises consumption report. However, nothing in this subsection shall preclude the mayor and city council from requiring complete documentation if it receives and is investigating a complaint alleging violation of the fifty (50) percent food sales revenue rule. 
2.  Any other documents, reports, records, or books as shall be required by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.300 - Knowledge of chapter provisions. 
    Every licensee shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself or herself with the provisions of this chapter and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of the ordinance from which this chapter derives on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages on the relevant provisions of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.310 - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
    Furnishing to, purchase of or possession of [by] persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years of age of alcoholic beverages shall be controlled by state law OCGA Section 3-3-23. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.320 - Days of sales prohibited. 
A.  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or any time when such sales are prohibited by state law. 
B.  The wholesale or retail sale of distilled spirits shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; however, the sale of alcoholic beverages within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a polling place is unlawful during such hours that the polls are open. 
C.  No licensee shall be permitted to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits on Sundays except between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Any licensee wishing to sell alcohol on Sunday pursuant to this chapter shall pay the requisite fee for Sunday sales, the amount of which shall be set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
D.  No license shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part); Ord. of 12-12-16) 
5.08.330 - Sales to intoxicated persons-Gambling-Disorderly conduct. 
A.  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
B.  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, illegal lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises. 
C.  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or noise or activity which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.340 - Container, storage, illumination. 
A.  Alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises only in the original container and only in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler). Alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
B.  A retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by an authorized agent of the city. Any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which was not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
C.  The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.350 - Cleanliness of premises-Inspections. 
    All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by authorized agents of the city. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.360 - Brown bagging prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee or any other commercial establishment to allow customers to bring with them their own alcoholic beverages (which is known as "BYOB" or "brown bagging"). 
(Ord. 03-02) 
5.08.370-5.08.400 - Reserved. 
Article V. - Sales to and by Underaged Persons 

5.08.410 - General prohibitions. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection (D), below, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of eighteen (18) years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
B.  No consumption-on-the-premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of eighteen (18) years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
C.  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
D.  This section shall not prohibit persons sixteen (16) years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.420 - Activity in grocery stores. 
    For the purposes of this article, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store or similar establishment shall not constitute handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.430-5.08.500 - Reserved. 
Article VI. - Breaking Package or Drinking on Premises 

5.08.510 - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to open or consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed only for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package for off premise consumption. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.520-5.08.650 - Reserved. 
Article VII. - Consumption on Premises 

5.08.660 - Same-Restaurant. 
    In order to be eligible for a pouring on-the-premises license, a restaurant shall: 
A.  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
B.  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and refrigeration as required by the Candler County Health Department and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests; 
C.  Have the ability to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
D.  Have a valid Candler County Health Department Food Service Permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc. required for food service establishments; 
E.  Have at least fifty (50) percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
F.  Have a permanent seating capacity at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least twenty-five (25) persons. 
G.  The occupancy load for purposes of this section must meet the following criteria: 
1.  The square footage of the interior area of the restaurant, which is enclosed and under roof and is conditioned air space, shall be determined using a set of building plans showing the fixed and other seating and tables. 
2.  The food preparation, service areas (kitchen, buffet and salad bar areas), storage, the preparation area behind bars, restrooms and all connecting hallways shall be removed from the total square footage of the floor space. 
3.  The maximum occupant load for the remaining areas shall be calculated in accordance with the building code and life safety code as follows: 
a.  The assembly area where restaurant seating is located shall be calculated using fifteen (15) square feet per person. 
b.  The waiting area at the entrance/exit shall be calculated using three square feet per person. The number of occupants allowed in the calculation for waiting area cannot exceed fifty (50) percent of the occupant load of the assembly area in subsection (a) above. 
c.  An additional area for live entertainment and dancing shall be calculated using seven square feet per person. The number of occupants allowed in the calculation for this additional area cannot exceed twenty (20) percent of the occupant load of the assembly areas in subsection (a) above. 
d.  The city council may consider a request for consumption on the premises of a deck or patio attached or adjacent to the principal restaurant assembly area, provided that the area is screened from the view of anyone or any public right-of-way. If such a request is granted, it does not alter the calculation of the maximum occupant load. 
4.  The occupancy load determined by the designated agent of the city for each location shall be posted for public view. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.670 - Private club. 
A.  In order to be eligible for a pouring or consumption on-the-premises license, a private club must be a veterans organization, fraternal organization or other nonprofit organization all of which must be incorporated and: 
1.  The local chapter has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
2.  Have a least seventy-five (75) regular dues-paying members; 
3.  Be organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profitable purposes; 
4.  Own, hire, or lease a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
B.  For purposes of subsection (A)(4), above, a "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
C.  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
D.  Private clubs licensed under the provisions of this section shall not be required to maintain the percentage sale of food/non-alcoholic beverages as compared to alcoholic beverages; however, any such organization shall be subject to all chapter regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.680 - Ratio of alcoholic/non-alcoholic sales. 
    Should the total sales from food and non-alcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for consumption on the premises not equal those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council after a hearing as provided for in Section 5.08.210. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.690 - Reserved. 
5.08.700 - Illumination of premises, location of sales restricted. 
A.  All restaurants including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that those inside the premises may view them. 
B.  The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room, which is not open to the general public, is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
1.  Private parties, which have been scheduled in advance; 
2.  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a properly licensed restaurant is located on the premises; 
3.  Private clubs. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.710 - Hours of sale. 
    Consumption on-the-premises licensees shall only engage in the sale and service of alcoholic beverages between the following hours: 
A.  Monday through Friday 6:00 a.m. to 1:45 a.m. All persons including owner must vacate premises by 2:00 a.m. 
B.  Saturday 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. (midnight), consumption of purchased beverages on the premises until 1:00 a.m. All persons including owner must vacate premises by 2:00 p.m. 
C.  Sunday by 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
    For the purpose of this section, the premises are defined as follows: 
    "Premises" shall include, but is not necessarily limited to, the building or facility in or about which alcoholic beverages are sold, and the adjacent parking areas. 
    Consumption off premises licensees shall only engage in the sale and service of alcoholic beverages only between the following hours: 
1.  Monday through Friday 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. (24-hour sales) 
2.  Saturday 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. (Midnight) 
3.  Sunday 12:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part); Ord. of 12-12-16) 
5.08.720 - Dancing on premises prohibited. 
    Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on-the-premises sales only where: 
1.  Adequate space exists; 
2.  All fire and safety regulations are met. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.730 - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
    All alcoholic beverages sold by consumption on-the-premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises to a public street or public area. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.740 - Prohibition of certain types of entertainment, attire and conduct. 
A.  "Findings; public purpose." Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; Dekalb County, Georgia; Richmond County, Georgia; Amarillo, Texas; Austin, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Houston, Texas; Renton, Washington; Phoenix, Arizona; Indianapolis, Indiana; St. Paul, Minnesota; Tucson, Arizona; Augusta, Georgia; LaGrange, Georgia; Dalton and Whitfield County, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; Smyrna, Georgia; and Ft. Lauderdale and Palm Beach, Florida, which experiences, we believe are relevant to the problems faced by the city, the mayor and city council takes note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the mayor and city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order, increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein-above described, and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude conduct in establishments licensed to sell alcoholic beverages is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest, and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments, which serve alcohol and also allow and/or encourage nudity. To that end, this section is hereby adopted. 
B.  "Enactment." The following types of entertainment, attire and conduct are prohibited upon any premises licensed to sell, serve or disperse alcoholic beverages. 
1.  The employment or use of any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft or the buttocks, vulva and genitals. 
2.  Live entertainment where any person appears in the manner described in subsection (1) of this subsection or where such persons (or person) perform(s) acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
a.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
b.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
c.  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
3.  The holding, promotion, sponsoring or allowance of any contest, promotion, special night, event or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are encouraged or allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in subsections (1) and (2) above. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.750-5.08.800 - Reserved. 
Article VIII. - Excise Tax on Mixed Drinks 

5.08.810 - Imposition. 
    In accordance with O.C.G.A. 3-4-130, there is imposed upon the sale of mixed drinks in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the mixed drinks to the consumer. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction of three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of such taxes; provided that such tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. A record of each sale will be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.820 - Collection. 
    Every consumption on-the-premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this article from purchasers of mixed drinks. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the mayor and city council to facilitate the collection of the tax. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of the mixed drink to the purchaser. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.830 - Payment to city. 
A.  Each licensee shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
B.  On or before the 20th day of each month, a return shall be filed with the city clerk for the preceding month by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this article. Returns shall be in such form as the mayor and city council may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of mixed drinks and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.840-5.08.900 - Reserved. 
Article IX. - Wholesale Licenses, Excise Tax on Alcoholic Beverages 

5.08.910 - Required issuance. 
    Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
5.08.920 - Tax-imposed in accordance with O.C.G.A. 3-5-80, 3-6-60 and 3-4-80. 
A.  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city, as follows: 
1.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six-dollars ($6.00) on each container containing not more than (151/2) gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of (151/2) gallons; 
2.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of five cents ($0.05) per twelve (12) ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of twelve (12) ounces. 
B.  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
C.  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of twenty-two cents ($0.22) per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
D.  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. 
(Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
Article X. - Additional Rules, Regulations and Enforcement 
    All the provisions of this chapter are and shall be subject to the regulations hereinafter prescribed by ordinance of this body as the same may from time to time be amended, setting forth the rules, terms and conditions upon which such licenses may be issued; the annual license fees; the qualifications of licensees; the hours of operation of such licenses; the control of customers doing business with licenses; and any other matters that this body may deem advisable to set forth for the proper control and regulations of the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in the designated area of the city; and all such licenses as may be hereafter issued shall be expressly subject to the provisions of such ordinance and regulation as may be then or thereafter in force; and all such licenses shall be nontransferable except with the express approval of the city, and shall convey to the licensee no property right but only a privilege, which may be revoked by this body at any time by written notice to the licensee with the reasons stated therefore, Enforcement. 
A.  The city, by resolution, may direct the chief of police of the city and his lawful officers to remove the license from any place of business of any licensee upon a determination by the chief or his lawful officers that any provision of this chapter or the laws of the state of Georgia pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages has been violated. Upon removal of the license as provided above, it shall be illegal for the licensee to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages until such time as the license has been reinstated as hereinafter provided. 
B.  Upon removal of a license as provided above, the city within three days, shall give written notice to the licensee of the reasons for such removal and as to any suspension or revocation of such license. The licensee may, within ten (10) days from receipt of the aforesaid notice from the city, make written application to the mayor and council for a hearing on the matter of suspension or revocation, including the right of the licensee to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. Failure of the licensee to request a hearing within the allowed period shall constitute a waiver of any right of further appeal of the city's decision regarding revocation or suspension. In the event a hearing is requested as provided above, the same will be held within ten (10) days from receipt by the city of the request. The city, after hearing evidence shall reach its decision and advise the licensee of the same. In the event the city determines, with or without a hearing, that a license shall be reinstated the same shall be immediately returned to the licensee. 
(Ord. dated 11-14-04 § 4; Ord. 02-04 (part)) 
CITY OF METTER, GEORGIA
APPLICATION FOR RETAIL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE 
LICENSE 
DATE OF APPLICATION ___________ NEW _______ 
TYPE OF BUSINESS TO BE OPERATED: _____ 
(1) Retail licenses: 
(a) 
Package sales for off premises consumption of beer and wine or 
sales for on premises consumption of beer and wine:       $  400.00 
(b) 
Non-pouring license for consumption of distilled spirits on 
premises:       $2,000.00 
(c) 
Pouring license for on premises consumption of distilled spirits 
by the drink:       $3,000.00 
(d) 
Package sales for off premises consumption of distilled spirits:       $2,000.00 
APPLICANTS FULL NAME _____      
BUSINESS NAME _____      
DBA _____      
BUSINESS ADDRESS _____      
BUSINESS MAILING ADDRESS _____      
BUSINESS TELEPHONE # _____      
APPLICANTS HOME ADDRESS _____      
APPLICANTS HOME PHONE # _____      
APPLICANTS AGE _____ DATE OF BIRTH _____ SS # _____      
HAVE YOU EVER BEEN ARRESTED FOR ANYTHING OTHER THAN A TRAFFIC 
VIOLATION? _______ YES _______ NO 
IS THE APPLICANT THE OWNER OF THE BUSINESS? _____ YES _____ NO 
IF NO, WHAT IS YOUR TITLE IN THE BUSINESS? _____ 
HOW MANY PARTNERS, SHAREHOLDERS, ETC. ARE INVOLVED IN THE BUSINESS _____ 
PLEASE LIST THE PARTNERS BELOW: 
_____   _____ 
_____   _____ 
I UNDERSTAND THAT ANY PARTNER INVOLVED MUST COMPLETE AN APPLICATION AND IT IS MY RESPONSIBILITY TO INSURE THIS IS DONE. 
OATH OF APPLICANT OR LICENSEE 
"I DO SOLEMNLY SWEAR THAT I HAVE PROVIDED TRUE AND ACCURATE INFORMATION ON THIS APPLICATION; AND UNDERSTAND IF I HAVE BEEN UNTRUTHFUL IT WILL RESULT IN DENIAL OF MY LICENSE." 
NEW APPLICATION _______       RENEWAL APPLICATION _______ 
IF MY APPLICATION IS APPROVED, I CERTIFY (PLEASE INITIAL EACH ONE) 
A.  I HAVE RECEIVED A COPY OF THE ALCOHOL ORDINANCE _______. I UNDERSTAND THAT NO LICENSE WILL BE ISSUED UNTIL I HAVE RECEIVED A COPY OF THIS ORDINANCE. 
B.  I WILL ABIDE BY THE CITY OF METTER ALCOHOL ORDINANCE _______ 
C.  I UNDERSTAND ANY LICENSE GRANTED TO ME IS NOT TRANSFERABLE _______ 
D.  I WILL ALLOW MY BUSINESS PREMISES TO BE OPEN TO INSPECTION AT ANY REASONABLE TIME BY CITY OFFICIALS AUTHORIZED TO CONDUCT INSPECTION OF BUSINESS PREMISES _______ 
E.  I UNDERSTAND THAT NO LICENSE WILL BE PROCESSED OR ISSUED UNTIL ALL FEES ARE PAID WITH THE CITY CLERK _______ 
F.  I HAVE COMPLETED THE ATTACHED CONSENT FORM AND UNDERSTAND IT AUTHORIZES THE METTER POLICE DEPARTMENT THE RIGHT TO CHECK MY BACKGROUND _______ 
G.  I UNDERSTAND IT IS MY RESPONSIBILITY TO CONTACT THE METTER POLICE DEPARTMENT FOR FINGERPRINT PROCESSING _______ 
H.  I UNDERSTAND THAT I WILL NOT BE GRANTED A LICENSE UNTIL I HAVE PRESENTED A COPY OF MY CITY/STATE CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY _______ (Not required for a renewal). 
I.  I HAVE NEVER BEEN CONVICTED FOR ANY VIOLATION OTHER THAN TRAFFIC OFFENSES _______. 
J.  I HAVE PUBLISHED A NOTICE OF THIS APPLICATION AND HAVE PROVIDED AN AFFIDAVIT IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE ALCOHOL ORDINANCE _______ (Not required for a renewal). 
SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT           DATE 
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME THIS _____ DAY OF _______, 2002 
NOTARY PUBLIC          MY COMMISSION EXPIRES 
CITY OF METTER
CONSENT FORM 
I, _______, am authorizing the Metter Police Department to release information on any criminal history record the State of Georgia or the Metter Police Department might have to the City of Metter. 
I hereby agree the Metter Police Department, the Georgia Crime Information Center, the employees of either agency, or the employees of any other agency of the state, shall not be responsible for the accuracy of the information given or have any liability for defamation, invasion of privacy, negligence or any other claim in connection with any dissemination of information pursuant to this record check. 
I further agree that if I am granted a license, this consent form shall remain in force as long as I hold an alcohol beverage license from City of Metter. 
FULL NAME _____ 
ADDRESS _____ 
SSN # _____ DATE OF BIRTH _____ 
PLACE OF BIRTH _____ 
SEX _____ RACE _____ HGT _____ WGT _____ EYES _____ HAIR _____ 
SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT            DATE 
NOTARY PUBLIC      
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES   
APPLICATION MEETS ALL ZONING AND ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LICENSE. 
APPROVED: _______ DATE: _______ 
_____ IS HEREBY APPROVED FOR AN ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LICENSE AT THE FOLLOWING LOCATION: 
_____
BY: ;hg; 
CITY CLERK OR CITY ADMINISTRATOR   
BY: ;hg; 
CHIEF OF POLICE         
THIS APPLICATION DOES NOT MEET ALL ZONING AND ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ALCOHOL BEVERAGE LICENSE AT THE FOLLOWING LOCATION: 
_____
DENIED: _______ DATE: _______ 
BY: ;hg; 
CITY CLERK OR CITY ADMINISTRATOR   
BY: ;hg; 
CHIEF OF POLICE      
COMMENTS: 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
CITY OF METTER
SEMI-ANNUAL REPORT 
SALE OF FOOD AND ALCOHOL 
FOR PERIOD ENDING _______ 
BUSINESS NAME _____ 
BUSINESS LOCATION _____ 
LICENSE HOLDER _____ TELEPHONE # _______ 
MAILING ADDRESS _____ 
GROSS RECEIPTS: $ _______  A: SALE OF BEER $ _______  B: SALE OF WINE $ _______  C: SALE OF LIQUOR $ _______ TOTAL ALCOHOL SALES $ _______ TOTAL GROSS SALES $ _______  
REPORT PREPARED BY: _____ DATE _______ 
SIGNATURE OF LICENSE HOLDER _____ 
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME THIS _____ DAY OF _______,, ___
_____ NOTARY PUBLIC, GEORGIA, STATE AT LARGE COMMISSION EXPIRES: _______ 
RETURN TO: ;hg; ANGIE CONNER
CITY OF METTER, P.O. BOX 74, METTER, GA 30439 
NOTE: ;hg;THIS REPORT IS DUE SEMI-ANNUALLY ON JANUARY 31ST AND JULY 31ST JANUARY 31ST IS FOR THE PERIOD FROM JULY 1 THRU DECEMBER 31 JULY 31ST IS FOR THE PERIOD FROM JANUARY 1 THRU JUNE 30TH 
DO NOT WRITE IN THE SPACE BELOW 
RATIO (GROSS FOOD SALES DIVIDED BY TOTAL GROSS SALES) _____
RATIO (GROSS ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES DIVIDED BY TOTAL GROSS SALES) _____
TAX CLERK _____
DATE REPORT RECEIVED: _____ 
City of Metter 
Post Office Box 74 
Metter, GA 30439 
912-685-2527, Fax 912-685-3364 
"A Better Hometown Community" 
MONTHLY RETURN - LIQUOR BY THE DRINK COLLECTIONS
***IMPORTANT*** This return must be filed and taxes paid by the 20th day of the following month for which the tax is due. Otherwise, you must forward the total amount collected, including your 3% deduction. 
MAIL RETURN AND TAX PAYMENT TO: ;hg;CITY CLERK
P.O. BOX 74 
METTER, GA 30439 
Return For The Month Of _______, _______ Date Return Filed _______ 
Business Name _____ 
Business Address _____ 
Gross Receipts from Sale of Liquor by Drink _____ 
3% of Total Gross Receipts     _______    
Less 3% Deduction     _______    
Total Due to City of Metter     _______    
I certify that this return has been examined by me and is to the best of my knowledge and belief a true and complete return, made in good faith, for the period stated above. 
Signature & Title            Please Print or Type Name         Date  
Chapter 5.12 - AMUSEMENTS 
Sections: 

5.12.010 - License fees for carnivals, circuses, etc. 
A.  A license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per week, or fractional part thereof, is imposed upon each carnival, circus, tent show or other form of itinerant entertainment doing business within the corporate limits of the city; and the grant of any license for such itinerant form of entertainment, except when sponsored by the management of a county agricultural fair, shall be within the discretion of the mayor and council. 
B.  The fact that any such form of itinerant entertainment may be sponsored by a civic, fraternal, educational, charitable or religious organization shall not authorize an exemption from the license fee imposed by this section. 
(Prior code § 5-1) 
5.12.020 - Bond, liability insurance required for amusement rides. 
    No person shall conduct, operate, manage or sponsor any Ferris wheel, merry-go-round or other amusement ride operated for hire or for the purpose of promoting or advertising any trade or business, without first filing with the city clerk a bond or certificate of liability insurance, in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), or an amount equal to the limits of general liability insurance carried by the city, indemnifying the public against damages sustained by reason of the operation of such ride. Such bond or certificate of insurance shall apply to all persons, whether or not a license or permit is required by any other provision of this code, state law or city ordinance, rules or regulations. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 5-3) 
Chapter 5.16 - INSURANCE COMPANIES 
Sections: 

5.16.010 - Insurer defined. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in OCGA Section 33-3-5. 
(Ord. dated 10-11-93 § 1 (part)) 
5.16.020 - Insurer license fee levied. 
    Each insurance company doing business in the city shall pay an annual license fee, allowed by O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8, and additional fee in the same amount for each business location in excess of one operated and maintained by such company within the city. 
(Ord. of 5-11-15(2); Ord. dated 10-11-93 § 1 (part)) 
5.16.030 - Separate business locations. 
    Each separate business location of an insurance company operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in connection with the loans or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits, or takes application through a licensed agent of the insurance company shall pay an additional annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00) or thirty-five (35) percent as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 33-8-8(b)(1-2). 
(Ord. of 5-11-15(2); Ord. dated 10-11-93 § 1 (part)) 
Chapter 5.20 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
Sections: 

5.20.010 - Authority. 
    The city is authorized to license, tax, regulate or prohibit in accordance with Georgia state law. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part): prior code §§ 15-1, 15-2) 
Chapter 5.24 - CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS 
Sections: 

5.24.010 - Authority to solicit contributions. 
    Charitable organizations registered in accordance with Section 43-17-5 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated and such organizations exempt from registration in accordance with O.C.G.A., Section 43-17-9 are authorized to solicit contributions on the streets and highways within the city, subject to compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-11 § 1) 
5.24.020 - Permit required. 
    Charitable organizations seeking a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file an application, in the form provided by the city, with the city clerk. Such application shall include the name, address and telephone number of the organization, the offices of the organization, the date(s), time(s), and place(s) of the proposed solicitation and must include an agreement by the organization to hold harmless and indemnity the city from liability for damage or injury arising out of the permitted solicitation. Such application must be executed by a duly authorized office of said organization. Such organization must provide a copy of the declaration page of a liability insurance policy which provides liability insurance coverage, with limits of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for the permitted solicitation to the city. Such policy shall include an endorsement listing the city as a named insured. 
    Solicitation for contributions on the streets and highways within the city without a permit shall be punished as provided in this code. 
(Ord. 97-11 §§ 2, 3) 
Chapter 5.28 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
Sections: 

5.28.010 - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be recited as "The Vehicles for Hire Ordinance." (Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.020 - Definitions. 
(a)  City. The word "city" shall mean the mayor and council of the City of Metter, Georgia, a municipal corporation, said definition to include all areas within the corporate limits of the City of Metter. 
(b)  Taxicab. A motor vehicle engaged in the business of carrying passengers for hire, or offering to carry passengers for hire, except motor vehicles used as ambulances, sightseeing cars or buses, and except for limousines and buses operating on a fixed route. 
(c)  Taxicab regulatory permit. The right and privilege granted by the city for the operation of a taxicab within the corporate limits of the city issued upon the receipt of a regulatory fee established by the city. 
(d)  Taxicab company. The holder of one or more taxicab regulatory permits to operate a taxicab under the provisions of this article, whether a person, firm, partnership, or corporation. 
(e)  Driver. Any person who drives or operates a taxicab on the streets of Metter. 
(f)  Taxicab driver's permit. The written authority granted by the city for an individual to drive or operate a taxicab within the City of Metter. 
(g)  Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any street, alley, lane, avenue, court, or public place in the City of Metter. 
(h)  Taximeter. A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which measures the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.030 - Taxicab regulatory permit required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall operate a taxicab on the streets of the city unless a taxicab regulatory permit has been issued by the city for such taxicab. All taxicabs shall display a current taxicab regulatory permit issued by the city to signify compliance with this permit requirement in each vehicle. A taxicab regulatory permit shall be issued by the city clerk only after the taxicab has been inspected and found to comply with all requirements of this article, including the payment of the taxicab regulatory permit fee. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.040 - Fixed business address required. 
    Each taxicab company shall, as a condition of receiving one or more taxicab regulatory permits to operate a taxicab in Metter, provide a physical address for the taxicab company. If the company headquarters is to be moved, the owner of the taxicab company shall notify the city clerk of the new location prior to relocation. If the taxicab company is located within the corporate limits of the City of Metter, the taxicab company shall conform with all zoning, business tax certificate, and other applicable laws of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.050 - Indemnity for benefit of city. 
    Any taxicab company operating under this article shall hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss, costs, damages, or expense which may accrue to the city by reason of the negligence, default, or misconduct of the company in connection with the rights granted to such company hereunder. Nothing in this article shall be considered to make the city liable for damages because of any negligent act or omission or commission by any taxicab company, its servants, agents, drivers, or other employees, during the operation by the company of a taxicab business or service, either in respect to injuries to persons or with respect to damage to property which may be sustained. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.060 - Insurance for benefit of passengers. 
    Any taxicab company desiring to do business in the city shall give and maintain a policy of indemnity insurance with an indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in the state for each vehicle in use as a taxicab, or a self insurance certificate issued under state guidelines and regulated by the insurance commissioner of Georgia. Proof of insurance shall be kept in the vehicle and on file at the office of the city clerk. The minimum insurance coverage shall be in accordance with Georgia state law. Such indemnity insurance shall inure to the benefit of any person who is injured or who sustains damage to property caused by the negligence of a taxicab company or the taxicab driver, whether as servant, agent, or independent contractor. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.070 - Blanket policy. 
    Any company or person operating a taxicab in the city shall give a separate policy of indemnity insurance or certificate of self insurance for each separate taxicab for hire, except where such company or person actually owns or holds legal title to more than one taxicab, in which event, such company or person may give one policy of indemnity insurance or certificate or self insurance covering all the taxicabs actually owned. This latter provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning taxicabs who may be jointly operating or doing business under a licensed taxicab company name. The taxicab company is responsible for ensuring that individual persons operating taxicabs under said license shall comply with all state laws and local ordinances governing insurance coverage. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.080 - Notice when voided. 
    Each certificate of insurance submitted to the city clerk prior to the issuance of a taxicab regulatory permit shall include, by endorsement to the policy, a statement that written notice shall be given to the city by certified mail thirty (30) days prior to cancellation or upon any material change in coverage. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.090 - Taxicab driver's permit required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or operates a taxicab company shall permit a taxicab to be driven, and no taxicab operating under a taxicab company licensed by the city, shall be driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article and the certificate of insurance coverage for the vehicle is on file as provided for in this article with proof of such insurance being in the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.100 - Application. 
    Any person desiring a permit required by this article shall submit an application in writing to the city clerk, on a form to be furnished by the city. Such application shall be made under oath and shall state the age of the applicant, the applicant's address, length of time the applicant has resided in the city, whether the applicant has any physical infirmities, and whether the applicant has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of the state or of this Code or other ordinances of the city and if so, when and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.110 - Qualifications of applicant. 
    An applicant for a driver's permit under this article must: 
1.  Not be less than 18 years of age. 
2.  Have no physical infirmities which make said applicant an unsafe or unsatisfactory taxicab driver. 
3.  Not have been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs within two years prior to the date of the application for such permit, or have been convicted of reckless driving within one year prior to the date of the application for such permit, or have been convicted of any of these offenses three or more times within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit. Nor shall a permit be issued to any person who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of any crime relating to transporting persons for immoral purposes (prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or any sex-related offense), or who has within three years prior to the date of the application for such permit been convicted of, been on probation, parole, or served time on a sentence for a felony. A plea of nolo contendere to any of the offenses set out in this section shall be deemed a conviction. 
4.  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Services. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.120 - Photographs of applicant. 
    Before any permit is granted under this article, the city clerk shall take two photographs of the applicant. One photograph shall be attached permanently to the driver's permit for display in the vehicle which the applicant is to drive, and the second photograph shall be filed for record by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.130 - Driver's fees. 
    Before any permit is granted under this article, the following fees shall be paid by the applicant: 
(a)  Background investigation fee. A twenty dollar ($20.00) background investigation fee shall be paid by the applicant in accordance with Section 5.28.150 of this article. 
(b)  Driver permit fee. A driver permit fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid by the applicant upon issuance of the permit or five dollars ($5.00) if applicant brings two pictures of herself/himself to the city clerk. 
(c)  A current seven-year M.V.R. is required at the time of application and renewal. This is the responsibility of the permit holder. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.140 - Current state driver's license required. 
    Any person applying for a taxicab driver's permit under this article must show that a current motor vehicle operator's license has been issued or approved by the State of Georgia, and that the license is not under suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.150 - Police investigation of applicant. 
    The city clerk shall conduct or arrange to be conducted an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit, and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.160 - Examination of applicant; issuance or denial of permit. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to examine the applicant, his reference, police and traffic record, and other vouchers, and thereafter submit a written recommendation to the mayor and city council to either grant or refuse the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.170 - Permit and notice to be displayed. 
(a)  The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be placed on display in the taxicab to be operated by the holder of the permit in a display case or holder designed for that purpose on the dashboard facing the passenger compartment, in clear view of the passengers at all times when the taxicab is for hire. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.180 - Alteration of permits or notices prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to alter, deface, obliterate, or destroy a taxicab driver's permit or notice to passengers, or cause or allow the same. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.190 - Permit not transferable. 
    Any taxicab driver's permit issued under this article is not transferable from one taxicab driver to another, and is to be used solely by the person to whom it is issued. Any permitted taxicab driver shall notify the city clerk prior to beginning employment with another taxicab company. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.200 - Duration of permit. 
    Any taxicab driver's permit shall be in effect for twelve (12) months from the date of issue. Permits may be renewed, upon application and payment of the required fee, for each twelve-month period thereafter, unless the permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.210 - Safe mechanical condition of taxicabs required. 
    Every taxicab operated on the streets of the city shall be maintained in a safe mechanical condition, with all safety and pollution control equipment remaining intact and operative at all times when the taxicab is in service. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.220 - Cleanliness of taxicabs required. 
    Each vehicle operating under this article shall be kept painted and in a clean sanitary condition, free of litter and debris and at all times suitable for public transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.230 - State license tag for taxicabs required. 
    Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle as a taxicab under the provisions of this article, the owner of said vehicle shall secure and display on the vehicle a current Georgia license registration tag. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.240 - Log. 
    Each taxicab driver, operator, or company shall maintain a daily log upon which shall be recorded all trips made by each vehicle each day, showing time and place of origin, destination of each trip and amount of fare. All such completed logs shall be returned to the taxicab company by the driver at least weekly or shall be maintained by the company at its offices at the conclusion of each driver's daily tour of duty. Each taxicab company shall retain and preserve all driver's logs for at least ninety (90) days and said logs shall be made available to the city, any official of thereof, or to any officer of the police department at all reasonable times. The log shall be kept in a legible condition. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.250 - Taximeter required. 
    All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped with a taximeter fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night; and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. The taximeter shall be operated by a mechanism of standard design and construction. Any such taximeter shall be sealed at all points and connections by the transportation coordinator or representatives which, if manipulated, would affect its correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon a signal to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to activate the signal of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. Any taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time by the transportation services coordinator. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.260 - Maximum rates of fare; posting required. 
(a)  Maximum meter rates. As a condition of licensing by the city and operating within the city, all taxicab companies and drivers shall charge no more than the following schedule of fares for all trips originating or terminating within said city, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b): 
(1)  The maximum meter rate shall be as follows: 
a.  A rate of two dollars ($2.00) for the first one-sixth of a mile; 
b.  A rate of thirty cents ($0.30) per one-sixth of a mile thereafter; 
c.  Should a taximeter charge for increments of a mile differently from those in subsections a. and b., the maximum rates shall nevertheless not exceed three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) for the first mile and one dollar and eighty cents ($1.80) per mile thereafter. 
(2)  One dollar ($1.00) for each passenger in excess of one riding in the vehicle on the same trip. 
(3)  Twenty-one dollars ($21.00) per hour waiting time; thirty-five cents ($0.35) per minute for traffic delays. 
(4)  There shall be no charge for baggage which can be transported within the interior and/or cargo area of any taxicab. 
(5)  Taxi fuel surcharge of one dollar ($1.00) surcharge for each trip with a fare equal to or less than five dollars ($5.00), a one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) surcharge for each trip with a fare of more than five dollars ($5.00) and less than ten dollars ($10.00), and a two dollar ($2.00) surcharge for each trip with a fare of more than ten dollars ($10.00). The surcharge must be posted in all taxicabs. 
(c)  Travel to passenger location. No charge shall be made for time and/or mileage for traveling to the location of a prospective passenger. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.270 - Receipts. 
    The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be the name of the taxicab company, the taxicab number, name and permit number of the driver, trip origin and destination, amount of charges, and date of transaction. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.280 - Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any vehicle having a valid taxicab driver's permit under this article after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.290 - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit passengers verbally or by gesture, directly or indirectly, at any taxicab stand or upon the streets of the city. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.300 - Cruising. 
    Taxicab drivers shall be permitted to drive such taxicabs about the streets of the city for the purpose of picking up and transporting passengers. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.310 - Carrying more than one fare-paying passenger. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any taxicab to pick up a second passenger or to permit any other person to occupy or ride in the taxicab when the same is occupied by a fare-paying passenger or by members of the party of the fare-paying passenger. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.320 - Restriction on number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his taxicab. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.330 - Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
    No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or persons, upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.340 - Prohibitions of drivers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab to solicit business for any hotel or other business, or to attempt to divert patronage from one hotel or business to another. It shall be unlawful for a driver to solicit business from any employee of any hotel or other such business. Neither shall such driver engage in selling or soliciting for the sale of intoxicating beverages or illegal drugs, or solicit for prostitution, or use his vehicle for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.350 - Smoking prohibited when taxicab is occupied by passenger. 
    It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab operated upon the streets of the city to smoke in such taxicab while the taxicab is occupied by a passenger. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.360 - Taxicab movement prohibited under certain circumstances. 
    No driver shall collect fares, make change, or take on or discharge passengers while his taxicab is in motion. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.370 - Property left in taxicab by passenger. 
    Any taxicab driver or operator discovering in any taxicab under such driver's or operator's control personal property, which was lost or left therein by a passenger of such taxicab, shall report such loss and deliver all such property to the office of the city police department. The driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the police department to identify the owner of the property. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.380 - Firearms in taxicabs. 
    Any driver possessing a firearm in a taxicab must have a current valid State of Georgia firearms permit and written permission of the taxicab company. Such driver shall furnish the transportation services coordinator a copy of the firearms permit, the brand name, serial number, type, and caliber of the firearm, and the original written permission statement of the taxicab company, which statement shall be signed by the owner or chief operating officer of the company. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.390 - Age limit of taxicabs. 
    Every taxicab operating on the streets of the city shall be no more than ten (10) model years older than the current calendar year. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.400 - Vehicle inspections required. 
    Each taxicab shall be inspected by an authorized mechanic for compliance with the provisions of this article and shall pass such inspection before the vehicle may be used as a taxicab in the city. Each taxicab involved in an accident shall be inspected by an authorized mechanic before it may be returned to service transporting passengers for hire. Each taxicab shall be inspected by an authorized mechanic at least once annually to ensure continued maintenance of safe operating condition and continued compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.410 - Additional vehicle inspection. 
    Any taxicab shall be subject to inspection at any time and, upon discovery of any violation of this article or other applicable laws to ensure compliance with this and other applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.420 - Taximeter inspection. 
    Pursuant to Sections 5.28.250 and 5.28.420 of this article, any taximeter shall be subject to inspection at any time and, upon discovery of any violation or any inaccuracy, the city clerk shall notify the operator of said taxicab to cease operation immediately, which action shall be taken. The taxicab shall be kept out of service until the taximeter is repaired, the required working condition is restored. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.430 - Citation for violation of taxicab ordinance. 
    The city police department, or other agents authorized by law, shall have the authority to cite or subpoena taxicab operators and/or taxicab company owners for violations of this article. The fees for violations of this article shall be as provided by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.440 - Failure to pay fee. 
    When any taxicab company owner or taxicab operator fails to pay a fine as specified by this ordinance and within ten (10) calendar days after the notice was issued, a late payment penalty shall be added to the violation fee amount as specified by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.450 - Deadline decal. 
    The city police department, upon observing violations of this article, which deals with the physical condition of taxicabs, shall place a deadline decal on the windshield of the vehicle, said decal to list all violations. No driver or other unauthorized person shall remove or deface a deadline decal. No driver shall use a vehicle to transport passengers for hire while a deadline decal is in place. The city police will remove the deadline decal after correction of all listed violations. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.460 - Authority for removal of taxicabs from streets. 
    The city police shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a taxicab which is in violation of this article and to prohibit operation of such taxicab until all deficiencies have been corrected. An order of the city police to remove a vehicle from the city streets may be appealed to the mayor and city council. Until the appeal has been heard and the mayor and council have ruled otherwise, the taxicab ordered to be removed from service shall not be used for operations. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.470 - Suspension of the driver's permit. 
    The city staff or city police shall have the authority to recommend to the mayor and council suspension of a taxicab driver's permit for the following reasons: (i) the driver is charged with operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs, or reckless driving; (ii) making any false statement in the application for the permit; (iii) operating a taxicab in violation of any provisions of this article or applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
    The mayor and council, after hearing evidence from both parties, including the taxicab driver or his representative, shall have authority to suspend the taxicab driver's permit for a period of up to six months. If a taxicab driver is suspended three times within any three-year period, the fourth such suspension within said three-year period shall be for a period of one year. The city clerk will promptly notify the taxicab driver in writing of any suspension, in which case the taxicab driver shall have the immediate right to appeal in writing. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.480 - Driving after suspension or revocation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle for hire or taxicab for the carriage of passengers during any period in which his permit to do so is suspended or revoked in accord with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
5.28.490 - Revocation of driver's permit. 
    In the event that any driver holding a permit under this article at any time ceases to meet the qualifications described in Section 5.28.110, or fails to correct satisfactorily any false statement made in the application for the permit, or fails to operate his taxicab in accordance with the provisions of this article, upon recommendation of the city police, administrative staff, or the city manager, the mayor and council shall be empowered to revoke permanently the permit or to restore the same after a hearing. 
(Ord. of 9-10-07 § 1) 
Chapter 5.29 - TEMPORARY VENDORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 
Sections: 

5.29.010 - Definitions. 
    As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meaning: 
    "Nonprofit organization" means a registered 501(c)(3) non-taxable organization or agency. 
    "Personal property" means property which is owned, utilized, and maintained by an individual or members of his or her own residence and acquired in the normal course of living or in maintaining a residence. It does not include merchandise which was purchased for resale or obtained on consignment. 
    "Temporary business" means the sale of goods or services by a person or business being operated out of a vehicle, trailer or tent for a specified period of time. 
    "Tent" means a portable shelter consisting of canvas or other material stretched over poles or other like devices attached to stakes or anything suggestive of a portable shelter. 
    "Transient vendor" means any person, firm or corporation whether as owner, agent or employee that sells, offers or exhibits for sale any goods, wares or services from private premises, but remains at one place for a temporary period only. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.020 - Temporary business; temporary vendor license and occupation tax certificate required. 
    Any person desiring to operate a temporary business within the city shall be required to obtain a temporary vendor license in the form of an occupation tax certificate and shall be subject to all provisions set forth herein. It shall be unlawful for any person, agent, servant or employee of any person to engage in, carry on or conduct a temporary business without having first obtained an occupation tax certificate as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.030 - Garage, yard, or stall sales; temporary vendor license and occupation tax certificate required. 
    Any person desiring to sell personal property of every kind and character, not at their own residence, shall obtain a temporary vendor license in the form of an occupation tax certificate and shall be subject to all provisions set forth herein. It shall be unlawful for any person, agent, servant or employee of any person to engage in, carry on or conduct a garage, yard, or stall sale, not at their own residence, without having first obtained an occupation tax certificate as provided herein. All merchandise or items associated with any sale shall be removed immediately at the end of the sale. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.040 - Application for temporary vendor license and occupation tax certificate required. 
    Any person required to procure an occupation tax certificate under the provisions of this article shall submit an application for an occupation tax certificate and a current copy of its Georgia sales tax certificate to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city. The application shall include, but shall not be limited to the following information: 
1.  Name under which business is to be conducted and the business's state of incorporation; 
2.  Name of the applicant; 
3.  Permanent residential address of applicant and length of time at such address; 
4.  Address where business is to be conducted; 
5.  Property owner's address and contact information; 
6.  Written consent of property owner or his agent and any conditions to lease agreement; 
7.  Nature of the business; 
8.  Type of merchandise; 
9.  Description and number of vehicles and/or tents to be used; 
10.  Dates and times within which the temporary business or garage, yard or stall sale will be operated; 
11.  Name and address of the person and/or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the temporary business or garage, yard or stall sale. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.050 - Occupation tax certificate and annual renewal fees. 
    An occupation tax shall be submitted with each and every application to operate a temporary business pursuant to the ordinance providing for the issuance of an occupation tax certificate and the schedule of fees and charges for such as adopted by city council. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.060 - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
A.  Businesses possessing a current occupation tax certificate in good standing with the City of Metter. 
B.  Participants in any city or other governmental agency sanctioned event. 
C.  Any nonprofit organization sanctioned event provided that: 
1.  No sale shall last more than two consecutive days. 
2.  No more than one sale of personal property within a 30-day period. 
3.  All merchandise or items associated with any sale shall be removed immediately at the end of the sale. 
D.  Any person desiring to sell personal property of their own and at their own residence provided that: 
1.  No sale shall last more than two consecutive days. 
2.  No more than two sales of own personal property at each residence within a 30-day period. 
3.  All merchandise or items associated with any sale shall be removed immediately at the end of the sale. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.070 - Transfer of occupation tax certificate. 
A.  An occupation tax certificate issued hereunder shall not be transferable. 
B.  A temporary vendor permit issued hereunder shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.080 - Location. 
A.  Any temporary business which sells its goods or services from more than one location within the city shall submit a separate application for each location and pay the occupation tax for each location. 
B.  Any business regulated hereunder which moves to another location after the expiration of the temporary period shall obtain a new occupation tax certificate from the city and pay the required fees. 
C.  Temporary vendors and transient merchants shall not locate within the right-of-way. 
D.  All temporary vendors and transient merchants must comply with the Metter Zoning Ordinance, including zoning district and temporary structure regulations. 
E.  Any temporary vendor or transient merchant required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, state licensing, zoning approval, fire approval, certificates of occupancy, or other regulatory matter, shall first, before the issuance of a temporary vendor permit or occupation tax certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.090 - Regulations. 
A.  The premises where such temporary business is located shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
B.  The temporary vendor shall have sufficient parking on the premises to provide parking for the customers and must not allow parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
C.  The vendor may not sell any goods or services by means of any outcry, sound, speaker or amplifier of any kind. 
D.  The temporary vendor permit and occupation tax certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous location at the temporary business site. License shall be shown to any peace officer or agent of the City of Metter or State of Georgia requesting it. 
E.  The vendor's tent shall comply with all fire and life safety code provisions and any additional requirements established by the authority having jurisdiction. 
F.  The vendor shall not be located within any public right of way or any City of Metter property. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.100 - Signs. 
    Any signs erected in conjunction with the operation of a temporary business must be permitted in accordance with Metter Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.110 - Penalties for failure to make timely payment. 
    Any person failing to register and apply to the city for an occupation tax certificate to operate a temporary business prior to commencement of operation shall be subject to a penalty of ten (10) percent of the fee due. All fees not paid as required herein shall be considered delinquent and shall from the due date bear interest at the rate of one percent per month. For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one month. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.120 - Penalties for operation without an occupation tax certificate. 
    Any temporary business which operates within the city without first registering with the city and obtaining the occupation tax certificate provided herein shall be charged with violating the ordinance. Each day any violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.130 - Revocation of an occupation tax certificate. 
    Any occupation tax certificate issued to conduct a temporary business may be revoked by the city clerk due to the failure of the vendor, his agent or employees to comply with the provisions herein; fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license; or for any violation of any other ordinance of the city or of any state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.140 - Duration. 
    Any occupation tax certificate issued to a temporary business shall be valid for the dates stated upon the temporary vendor permit or occupation tax certificate or thirty (30) consecutive days, whichever is shorter. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.150 - Limits of issuance. 
A.  No temporary vendor or transient merchant shall be issued more than three (3) temporary vendor permits or occupation tax certificates per calendar year. 
B.  No temporary vendor or transient merchant permits shall be issued during city sponsored events that allow for vendor booths, such as during Another Bloomin' Festival and Downtown Christmas; except through the proper registration process for said event. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
5.29.160 - Fee structure. 
    Regulatory fees, administrative fees, occupation taxes for temporary vendor permits or occupation tax certificates shall be levied in accordance with the most recently adopted Schedule of Fees by the City of Metter Mayor and City Council. 
(Ord. of 4-9-18) 
Title 6 - ANIMALS 
Chapters: 
6.04 Dogs 6.08 Livestock 6.12 Birds  
Chapter 6.04 - DOGS* 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the humane treatment of dogs by regulating the case and control of animals within the city and to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. This chapter sets forth necessary controls on the unrestrained activities of animals which threaten the safety and pleasantness of streets, parks, sidewalks, yards and all areas of the city; and the lack of knowledge or intent is not a defense in the violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 1 (part)) 
6.04.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    "Adequate food" means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance that is appropriate to the species, size, age, and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licenses veterinarian, which is sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
    "Adequate shelter" means a protective covering for an animal that is of adequate size and provides adequate protection to maintain the animal in a state of good health, and that prevents pain, suffering, or significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It should also be clean, dry, and compatible with current weather conditions, in addition to age, size, species, and condition of the animal. The structure should be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down, and go in and out of the structure comfortably. To be adequate, some type of bedding that is quick drying, such as hay or pine straw, must be provided to maintain comfortable temperatures within the structure during times when the ambient, outside temperature is below freezing. From April through October, the structure shall either be shaded or moved out of direct sunlight. If the shelter is made of wood, it shall be raised at least two inches off the ground to prevent seepage or rotting. Examples of inadequate shelter include, but are not limited to, lean-tos, metal or plastic drums, boxes, dog transport carriers, abandoned vehicles, porches, decks, or material that does not provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
    "Adequate space" means a sufficient safe space for adequate exercise suitable to the age, size, species, and breed of animal. 
    "Adequate water" means clear, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, and rancid/contaminated water. 
    "Animal" means any living, creature, both domestic and wild, except humans. The term "animal" also includes fowl, fish and reptiles. 
    "Animal control officer" means any individual designated by the city of Metter as an enforcement official for this chapter and shall include, but not limited to, the city code enforcement officer and officers with the city police department. These officials shall have the authority to act on behalf of the city in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying animals, issuing citations and taking other lawful action as required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with any animal control officer or other enforcement official in the performance of their duties. 
    "At heel" means a dog is directly behind or next to a person and obedient to that person's command. 
    "At large" means that an animal is off the premises of the owner, and not on a leash or otherwise under the immediate control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal. 
    "Dangerous dog" means any dog that, according to records of an appropriate authority, inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property or aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
    "Impoundment" means the taking into custody of an animal by any law enforcement officer, animal control officer, code enforcement officer, or any authorized representative thereof. 
    "Owner" means any natural person or legal entity including, but not limited to a corporation, partnership, firm or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody of an animal. 
    "Potentially dangerous dog" means any dog that, without provocation, bites a human being on public or private property or acts in a threatening or aggressive manner towards a person that places the person in reasonable apprehension of immediately receiving a violent injury. 
    "Public nuisance animal" means any animal that unreasonably annoys humans, endangers the life or health of persons or other animals, or substantially interferes with the rights of citizens, other than their owners to enjoyment of life or property. 
    "Sanitary conditions" means an animal living space, shelter, or exercise area that is not contaminated by health hazards, irritants, pollutants, items, or conditions that endanger or pose a risk to an animal's health. 
    "Under restraint" means that an animal is secured by a leash, lead under the control of a person physically capable of restraining the animal and obedient to that person's commands, at heel, or securely enclosed within the real property limits of the owner's property. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 2 (part); Ord. of 4-9-18) 
6.04.030 - Inoculation required. 
    All dogs within the city shall be inoculated annually for rabies. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 1 (part)) 
6.04.040 - Failure to inoculate prohibited. 
    No person owning, having and/or controlling within the city shall fail or refuse to provide such dog with the inoculation required in this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 2 (part)) 
6.04.050 - Dogs to wear tag. 
    Proof of inoculation shall be evidenced by a tag stamped with the date of inoculation and fastened to a collar worn by each dog. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 3) 
6.04.060 - Dogs without tags. 
    All dogs found within the city and not wearing a tag evidencing inoculation within the previous twelve (12) months may, be impounded, in a humane manner, and the owner charged with the costs of the impounding and caring for the same, which cost shall be fixed by the mayor and council. The authority housing the dog shall only be required to make reasonable efforts to contact the dog owner if contact information is affixed to the animal at the time it is impounded. In the event that a dog is not claimed within seven days from the date of impoundment, the animal may be disposed of in a humane manner. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 4) 
6.04.070 - Remedies. 
    If any provisions of this chapter has been violated or is being violated, in addition to any other remedies, the city may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent or abate such violation. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 7) 
6.04.080 - Caring for dogs. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to refuse or fail to provide such dog with adequate food, humane care, adequate water, adequate space, adequate shelter, sanitary conditions and treatment needed to prevent suffering. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person or custodian of any dog to permit or cause unsanitary, offensive or dangerous condition by virtue of the size or number of dogs maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities in the city. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any dog to willfully abandon such animal on any street, lanes, alleys, public place or private property in the city. 
D.  It is unlawful for a person to allow any dog in their possession or under their control to run at large upon the streets, lanes, or alleys of the city. 
E.  It shall be unlawful for anyone to subject cruelty to any animal. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 9; Ord. of 4-9-18) 
6.04.090 - Restraint and confinement. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or custodian to allow any dog in their possession or under their control to run at large upon the streets, lanes or alleys of the city. 
B.  No owner or custodian of any dog shall fail to exercise proper care and control of such animal to prevent the same from becoming a public nuisance. 
C.  No person shall allow any dog in their possession or under their control to be tied, chained, or otherwise restrained in an area of their property which would provide the animal access to individuals traversing the streets, lanes, or alleys of the city. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 10) 
6.04.100 - Impoundment. 
    The animal control officer may seize and impound at the animal shelter any of the following dogs: 
A.  Any dog at large; 
B.  Any dog constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to the public; 
C.  Any unattended dog that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of care; 
D.  Any dog that is reasonably believed to have been abused or neglected; 
E.  Any dog that is charged with being potentially dangerous or dangerous; 
F.  Any dog that a court of competent jurisdiction has ordered impounded or destroyed; 
G.  Any dog that is reasonably suspected of having rabies or any other condition that threatens the health or well-being of humans or other animals. 
    The animal control officer may also or in lieu of impoundment, issue to the owner a notice of violation. Such notice will cite the owner or custodian to appear on a date certain before the city court of the city or state court as provided in this chapter. 
    The owner or custodian may obtain such dog upon payment to the city a fee fixed by the mayor and council. 
    Any dog not reclaimed within seven days shall become the property of the city and shall be placed up for adoption or put to death. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 5) 
6.04.110 - Enforcement. 
    Those individuals designed as animal control officers shall have the authority to act on the behalf of the city in investigating complaints, impounding and destroying animals, issuing citations, and taking other lawful action as required to enforce the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter to interfere with any animal control officer in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 11) 
6.04.120 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to: 
1.  Pay cost imposed by the city unless payment thereof is lawfully stayed; 
2.  Comply with any provision of this chapter; or 
3.  Comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer, code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed. 
    Any person who violates any provision(s) of this chapter or who fails to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may be amended shall be, at a minimum, guilty of a misdemeanor, amenable to the process of the state or city courts and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section and/or in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 12) 
6.04.130 - Nuisance. 
    It is unlawful for any person to keep any dog on any property located within the city limits, when keeping of such animal constitutes a public nuisance or menace to public health or safety. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 13) 
6.04.140 - Dog bites. 
    Whenever any dog bites a person, the owner of such animal shall immediately notify the animal control department and the Candler County Health Department, who shall order the animal held on the owner's premises or shall have it impounded at the owner's expense for a period of fourteen (14) days. The dog shall be examined immediately after it has bitten anyone and again at the end of the fourteen (14) day period. This cost will be paid for by the owner or custodian. If at the end of the fourteen (14) days, a veterinarian is convinced that the dog is then free from rabies, the dog shall be released from quarantine or from the pound as the case may be. If the dog should die in the interim, its body shall be sent to a local veterinarian for examination for rabies. All costs associated with quarantine, veterinarian examination, treatment, and/or disposal shall be paid for by the owner or custodian of the dog. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 6) 
6.04.150 - Rabies. 
A.  If a dog is believed to have rabies or has been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies, such dog shall be confined by a leash, chain or locked up on the owner's premises and shall be placed under the observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner for a period of fourteen (14) days. The owner shall immediately notify the animal control department of the fact that the dog may have been possibly exposed to rabies. It is within the discretion of the animal control department and within their authority to have such dog removed from the owner's premises and taken to a veterinary hospital. The dog shall be taken to the hospital and placed under observation for a period of fourteen (14) days at the expense of the owner. Should the animal control department decide to take possession of the animal, the dog shall be taken to the hospital and placed under observation for a period of fourteen (14) days at the expense of the owner. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person knowing or suspecting a dog to have rabies to allow such dog to be taken off their premises or beyond the limits of the city without the written permission of the animal control department. 
C.  Whenever a dog is ascertained to be rabid, notification of same shall be made to the animal control department, who shall cause such dog to be removed to the city pound or put to death. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 8) 
6.04.160 - Dangerous dog control. 
A.  The animal control officer is designated to carry out the duties of animal control officer as set forth in the state Dangerous Dog Control Law O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-20 et seq. 
B.  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of the state Dangerous Dog Control Law O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-20 et seq. 
C.  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration, but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 14) 
6.04.170 - Injured dogs and euthanasia. 
    When any animal, whose owner is unknown or incapable of being located, is impounded subject to the provisions of this chapter, or found on any of the city's streets, right-of-ways, alleys, parks, etc. and such animal is injured or otherwise in a state of suffering, it shall thereupon be the duty of the animal control officer to obtain the opinion of a licensed practicing veterinarian as to the extent of such suffering or injury to such animal. When such opinion is made by the licensed practicing veterinarian, that euthanasia should be performed, it shall then become the duty of the animal control officer to authorize such euthanasia. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-05 § 15) 
Chapter 6.08 - LIVESTOCK 
Sections: 

6.08.010 - Livestock running at large. 
    No person shall permit cattle, hogs, mules, horses, goats and chickens to run at large on the streets and other unenclosed places in the city. 
(Prior code § 6-60(a)) 
Chapter 6.12 - BIRDS 
Sections: 

6.12.010 - Bird sanctuary designated. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Prior code § 6-17) 
6.12.020 - Protection of birds. 
    It is unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl, or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests. 
(Prior code § 6-18) 
6.12.030 - Birds constituting a nuisance. 
A.  If starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, in the opinion of the proper health authorities of the city, then in such event the health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, bird club, garden club or humane society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days' notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such clubs. 
B.  If, as a result of such meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed to be advisable by the health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 6-19) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
8.04 Fire Limits 8.06 Outdoor Burning 8.08 Littering 8.12 Nuisances 8.14 International Property Maintenance Code 8.16 Handbills 8.20 Wellhead Protection 8.24 Fireworks 8.28 Private Well Drilling 8.30 Environmental Conservation, Onsite Sewage Management and Permit Ordinance  
Chapter 8.04 - FIRE LIMITS 
Sections: 

8.04.010 - Established. 
    The fire limits of the city are established as that area within the corporate limits of the city. The city has authority notwithstanding anything contained in this code to the contrary to enter into mutual aid agreements regarding fire protection. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part): prior code § 7-1) 
Chapter 8.06 - OUTDOOR BURNING 
Sections: 

8.06.010 - Building fire in streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to kindle or use any fire or to make a bonfire upon any public street, alley, and public ground or public right-of-way within the city. 
(Ord. 02-06 (part)): Ord. 00-03 § 1) 
8.06.020 - Shutting water off. 
    It shall be the duty of any person who supplies water to the city and its inhabitants through hydrants located upon the streets, alleys and public places in the city, whenever, by reason of repairs or work or from any cause, it becomes necessary to turn the water off from any such hydrant, to notify the chief or other head of the fire department of the city of the need to do so, before the water is turned off, and the length of time such hydrant will remain without water. 
(Ord. 00-03 § 2) 
8.06.030 - Burning of garbage and rubbish restricted in the PEB park, education and health zoning district PEH park, education and health zoning district. 
    It is unlawful for any person, for the purpose of burning leaves, limbs, garbage, rubbish, dead animals or dirt, to kindle or maintain any fire or knowingly to furnish the materials for any such fire, or to authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained in a garbage or rubbish receptacle, or on any street, alley, road, lane or public grounds or upon any private lot provided, however, that rubbish may be burned in an incinerator duly approved by both the chief of the fire department and the building inspector in any PEH zone. Exceptions may be approved by the chief of the fire department and building inspector on a case-by-case basis. 
(Ord. 02-06 (part)): Ord. 00-03 § 3) 
Chapter 8.08 - LITTERING 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning given in this section: 
    "Container" means an approved receptacle used for the disposal and storage of solid waste. 
    "Litter" is any quantity of uncontainerized paper, metal, plastic, glass or miscellaneous solid waste which may be characterized as trash, debris, rubbish, refuse, garbage or junk. 
    "Private property" means and includes, but is not limited to the following, owned by private individuals, firms, corporations, institutions or organizations: yards, grounds, driveways, parking areas, passageways, working areas, storage areas, vacant lots and structures. 
    "Public property" means and includes, but is not limited to, the following: streets, street medians, catch basins, sidewalks, lanes, alleys, public rights-of-way, public parking lots, school grounds, parks, and other publicly owned grounds. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 1) 
8.08.020 - Depositing litter prohibited when. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw, discard, place or deposit litter in any manner or any amount on any public or private property within the city, except in containers or in lawfully established dumping grounds. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 2) 
8.08.030 - Throwing litter from a vehicle prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person, whether driver or passenger in a vehicle, to throw or deposit litter in any manner or amount upon any street or other public or private property within the city. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 3) 
8.08.040 - Sweeping litter into streets prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city, the accumulation of litter from any building or lot. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 4) 
8.08.050 - Depositing household waste in public litter receptacles prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to deposit household solid waste in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 5) 
8.08.060 - Placing commercial waste in public litter receptacles prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of a commercial establishment or institution to deposit solid waste from that establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 6) 
8.08.070 - Removal of litter required-Work performed by city when-Costs. 
A.  Procedures. The accumulation of litter on private property is declared to be a public nuisance. If the owner or person in control of any private property in the city fails to remove all litter which is located on the property after due warning or citation, the city shall issue a notice to remove the litter. The notice shall contain a description of the property and state that, if the litter condition is not corrected within ten days, the property will be cleaned by the city and the owner will be billed for the cleanup cost. Any city employee or contracting agent is expressly authorized to enter upon private property to remove accumulated litter. It is unlawful for any person to interfere, hinder or refuse to allow them to enter upon private property for such purpose and to remove litter in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any person owning, occupying, renting, managing, leasing or controlling real property in the city shall have the right to remove litter or have the same removed at his/her own expense any time prior to the arrival of the city for such purpose. 
B.  Assessment of Costs. 
1.  The city clerk shall keep an account of the cost for the city to remove the litter as provided for each separate lot or parcel of land, and shall place such account in a report and assessment list to be sent to the city council. The report shall identify each separate lot or parcel of land, and shall state the cost proposed to be assessed against it. The report shall be filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall mail a notice to each name on the assessment list. The notice shall contain the following: 
a.  The cost of the litter removal; 
b.  The place and time of the city council hearing to consider and confirm the assessment report and list; 
c.  That failure to make any objection to the report and list shall be deemed a waiver; and 
d.  That, upon confirmation by the city council, the amount of the assessment shall be payable. 
2.  The assessments shall be confirmed by resolution of the city council, and the amount shall constitute a lien on the property assessed until paid. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 7) 
8.08.080 - Building construction and demolition litter. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of any construction or demolition site to make appropriate arrangements for the collection or transport to an authorized facility for final disposition. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 8) 
8.08.090 - Transportation of loose cargo. 
    It is unlawful for any person to transport any loose cargo by truck or other motor vehicle within the city unless the cargo is covered and secured in such manner as to prevent depositing of litter on public and private property. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 9) 
8.08.100 - Enforcement. 
    This chapter may be enforced by the police department, the fire department, and employees of the public works department, as authorized by the city council. 
(Ord. 97-3 § 10) 
Chapter 8.12 - NUISANCES* 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed below: 
    Nuisance: Anything which causes hurt, inconvenience or damage to another provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary, reasonable man; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
    Nuisance per se: An act, occupation or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
    Private nuisance: A nuisance limited in its injurious effect to one or a few individuals. 
    Public nuisance: A nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.020 - Nuisances enumerated. 
A.  The various nuisances described and enumerated in this section shall not be deemed to be exclusive, and this section shall not be construed to limit the broad definitions of nuisance found in Section 8.12.010 above, but shall be in addition to all other nuisances described and prohibited in this Code. 
B.  The following are hereby declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(9)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed; 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; 
(12)  Dogs which bark continuously or with such regularity so as to disturb the peace and tranquility of the people of the city; 
(13)  Dogs which engage in destructive acts such as destroying property, chasing and/or snapping at people, or overturning of garbage cans; and 
(14)  Any building or structure that has any conditions such that the life, health, property or safety of its occupants or the general public are endangered, is declared illegal and shall be abated by repair or rehabilitation or demolition or qualify for a secured building status in accordance with this chapter. 
(15)  Deposit of junk. No person shall place, authorize the placing or permit the placing of any junk of any kind, junked motor vehicle, parts of any motor vehicle, any motor vehicle to be junked, any motor vehicle for repair, any motor vehicle for storage and/or any motor vehicle for sale, upon any of the streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, vacant and/or unenclosed lots or parcels of land within the city either by right of ownership, tenancy or permission. 
(16)  Weeds-Maximum height. It is unlawful for any owner or resident of any lot, area or place located within this city to permit any weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthful growths to obtain a height exceeding ten (10) inches on such property. For the purposes of this section, "weeds" means and includes jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, dandelion or other unsightly growths of a like kind. 
(17)  Sales of controlled substancesdrug pushers: 
(a)  Any business where illegal sales of controlled substances take place on the premises with such frequency that the judge determines that the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known, that such sales were taking place and such owner or operator or manager in charge has failed to take effective action to stop such sales. 
(b)  Any business where persons who are known to the owner or operator or manager in charge of such business, or should in the exercise of ordinary care be known to them, or who are reputed to be illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances, are permitted to loiter on the premises without legitimate business reasons. 
(18)  Utilization of premises for sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances; devices used in furtherance of sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances: 
(a)  Any premises of whatever type or nature where illegal sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances takes place on the premises with such frequency that the judge determines that the owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of the premises, knew, or in the exercise of ordinary care should have known that such sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances were taking place and such owner, operator, manager, or person in charge of the premises has failed to take effective action to stop such sales, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances. 
(b)  Any premises of whatever type or nature which installs devices, including, but not limited to, steel doors, electric locks, and peep holes, which control the ingress and egress of the public at large, to further the illegal sale, possession, use, or transfer of controlled substances taking place on the premises and which devices are without legitimate business reasons. 
(19)  Any place, whether a place of business or not, that allows water to escape and pond, run through or collect on the premises of another, or to collect, pond or run through any of the streets, alleys or other property of the city, is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(20)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.030 - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any nuisance on any property within the city. Violations of this section shall be punishable by imprisonment not to exceed one year, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or both for each offense. Each day a nuisance continues to exist is a separate offense. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.040 - Notice of violations. 
A.  When any objectionable nuisance is being permitted or maintained on any lot of land or premises in the city in violation of this ordinance, it shall be the duty of the chief building inspector, chief of police, and/or his/her designee, to notify in writing the occupant of such lot and the owner thereof or their agents or representatives, stating that in the opinion of the official, the conditions existing upon the property constitute a nuisance, and setting forth the actions to be taken to eliminate the objectionable conditions, and requesting that the conditions be eliminated within ten (10) days. The notice shall further state that unless the objectionable conditions are voluntarily removed within the specified time, it will be the duty of the official to cause a summons to issue requiring the party notified to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether the conditions existing constitute a nuisance and should be abated. 
B.  Where the owner of unoccupied land or building violates the provisions hereof and the owner is a nonresident of the city, with no agent or representative in the city, and such owner cannot be served with notice or summons so as to subject him to the jurisdiction of the municipal court, the notifying official shall notify the owner by certified or registered mail, directing that the objectionable nuisance on the lot be removed within a specified time period so as to comply with the provisions of this Code. The notice shall further state that if the objectionable nuisance is not eliminated within the specified time period, the official shall cause a summons to be issued requiring the owner to appear in the municipal court to have there determined whether the existing conditions constitute a nuisance and should be abated. Such notice or summons shall be sent certified or registered mail. 
C.  When the owner of an unoccupied lot or building cannot be located by the city official after due diligence, the official shall cause such notice or summons to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in a news publication of general distribution in the city, setting forth the nature of the complaint, the date of the municipal court trial, and the place of said trial, and shall further be in the form prescribed in Section 8.12.060 hereof. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.050 - Right to enter and inspect. 
    The chief building inspector, chief of police, his/her designee and/or any uniformed officer of the police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. If such entry is refused, such official may obtain an order ex parte from the municipal court judge of the City of Metter, Georgia pursuant to an affidavit setting forth the (i) name(s) and address(es) of property owner(s) and any part in interest, and the person refusing entry, (ii) the date and time entry was attempted, (iii) the reason why entry was not effected, (iv) the means by which and by whom entry is proposed, (v) the reason why entry is necessary, and (vi) the predicate creating probable cause that entry and inspection is necessary. The order shall specify a date and time for a hearing before the municipal court to determine whether entry shall be permitted, unless the affidavit sets forth sufficient cause to justify immediate entry and inspection, whereupon such authority may then be granted. The order with a copy of the affidavit shall be served pursuant to the provisions applicable to service of subpoenas issued from the court or the provisions of Section 8.12.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.060 - Issuance of summons for abatement and hearing. 
    Whenever any nuisance exists within the city or whenever any condition shall exist on any property within the city that is required or subject to be demolished, removed or abated under this ordinance or any other city ordinance the chief of police, the chief building inspector or their designees may issue a summons and cause the summons to be served upon such owner or other person responsible for the condition. The summons shall describe the condition complained of and specify the ordinances or parts thereof claimed to be violated thereby. The summons shall require such person to appear before the municipal judge at a time, date and place specified therein, to show cause why such condition should not be demolished, removed or abated. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.070 - Abatement by order of municipal court. 
A.  Authority of court; imposition of lien. The municipal court of the city, having jurisdiction to hear and determine questions of the existence of nuisances within the city as required by Section 8.12.060 and, if found to exist, to order abatement, under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, is authorized to implement the following procedures to deal with nuisances affecting properties within the city: 
(1)  The owner of any property which has been declared by the court as a nuisance shall be given a reasonable amount of time to comply with any order to abate the nuisance within a period of time to be fixed by the judge. 
(2)  If the owner of property which has been declared to constitute a nuisance fails to comply with the court's order, the court may direct the city to take steps specified in a court order to repair, alter, improve, clear or demolish, or otherwise remedy the situation that causes the property to be a nuisance. 
(3)  Fine or imprisonment within the parameters of Section 8.12.030. 
(4)  The amount of the cost of the repair, alteration, cleaning, removal or demolition authorized by the court and undertaken by the city shall be a lien against the property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of the costs by the city in the office of the clerk of court on a lien docket maintained by the clerk for such purposes. If a dwelling, building, structure or property is removed or demolished by the city, the city shall sell the materials of such dwelling and buildings or structures, and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the costs. 
B.  Enforcement of lien. The city shall enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien for removal or demolition of dwellings, buildings or structures in the following manner: 
(1)  The owner or parties at interest shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within thirty (30) days after perfection of the lien, that is, filing on the lien docket, a sum of money equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the total amount due and by further paying to the city the remaining balance due of such lien, together with interest at a rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as prescribed in this subsection. 
(2)  Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner or parties at interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year period, then the entire balance due on such lien shall be due and payable to the city. 
(3)  Should the amount due on such lien or any portion thereof be unpaid after the passage of the three-year period, or upon the occurrence of the contingency provided for in subsection B.(2) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable statutes relating to tax liens. This procedure shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-40 et seq. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.080 - Nuisances constituting imminent danger. 
    Whenever any condition shall exist which constitutes an immediate and grave hazard to public health and safety requiring immediate action, the condition may be abated or otherwise remedied summarily and without following the procedures set forth herein. Notice shall be given to the owner or manager responsible for the property of a hearing to be held at the next scheduled court date of the Metter Municipal Court. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.090 - Placarding. 
A.  When the owner and/or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure and the building official shall cause such dwelling, building or structure and premises to be vacated and closed, the building official shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling, building or structure to be closed a placard with the following words: " This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or other use. The use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or other use is prohibited and unlawful ." 
B.  The placard shall bear the date posted, street number of the building involved, and the signature of the building official. It shall thereafter be unlawful for such placard to be mutilated or removed or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
8.12.100 - Summary abatement when. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. 08-03) 
Chapter 8.14 - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
Sections: 

8.14.010 - Adopted. 
    A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk of City of Metter, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2006 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Metter, in the State of Georgia for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance doe on file in the office of the City of Metter are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 08-02) 
Chapter 8.16 - HANDBILLS 
Sections: 

8.16.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
    "Handbill" means any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature. 
    "Newspaper" means any newspaper of general circulation or any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation and in addition thereto, it means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public, and means and includes any other copy-righted material. 
    "Vehicle" means every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Prior code § 3-19) 
8.16.020 - Exemption for mail and newspapers. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Prior code § 3-20) 
8.16.030 - Distribution on inhabited private premises. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulation. 
(Prior code § 3-21) 
8.16.040 - Prohibited where properly posted. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No Advertisement," or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any handbills left upon such premises. 
(Prior code § 3-22) 
8.16.050 - Depositing on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
    It is unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any private premises which is uninhabited or vacant. 
(Prior code § 3-23) 
8.16.060 - Placing on vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle. 
(Prior code § 3-24) 
8.16.070 - Restricted in public places. 
    It is unlawful for any person to hand out or distribute or sell any handbill in any public place; except that a handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing to accept the same. 
(Prior code § 3-25) 
Chapter 8.20 - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Short title and purpose. 
A.  This chapter shall be known as the "wellhead protection ordinance." 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 1) 
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section: 
    "Hazardous waste or material" means any waste or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
1.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or 
2.  Post a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
    "Sanitary landfill" means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
    "Wellhead" means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 2) 
8.20.030 - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
    There is established a use district to be known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within the circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is one hundred (100) feet. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 3) 
8.20.040 - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection zones: 
A.  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot any portion which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less one acre; and 
B.  Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 4) 
8.20.050 - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses or conditions shall be and are prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under Section 8.20.040: 
A.  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
B.  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
C.  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings, and streets, driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under Section 8.20.040; 
D.  Sanitary landfills; 
E.  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
F.  Storm water infiltration basins; 
G.  Underground storage tanks; 
H.  Sanitary sewer lines within one hundred fifty feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 5) 
8.20.060 - Administration. 
    The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this chapter, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. 97-8 § 6) 
Chapter 8.24 - FIREWORKS 
Sections: 

8.24.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and restrict the use, sale and storage of sparklers within the city to prevent adverse affects on the public health, safety and welfare of the city on its citizens and property. This chapter is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally authorized activities but is meant to represent a balancing of interests between such lawful activities and the city's responsibility to assure the reasonable public health, safety and welfare and to protect the city and its citizens from the danger of fire. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 2) 
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
    "Fireworks" means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
    The term "fireworks" shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models; toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content does not average more than 0.25 grains of explosive mixture per paper cap; nor toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; or "sparklers" as further defined. 
    "Sparklers" are defined as being constructed of wire or wood containing one hundred (100) grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain seventy-five (75) grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of two hundred (200) grams or less for multiple tubes; snake and glow worms; trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of 0.25 grains or less of explosive mixture. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 3) 
8.24.030 - Sparklers. 
(a)  Sale and storage. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, or to manufacture any sparklers except within commercial zoning districts as described and defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The storage and display of sparklers is prohibited within thirty (30) feet of matches, lighters, or any other similar devices designed to produce spark or flame for the purpose of initiating combustion. 
(3)  Any storage or display of sparklers must be accompanied by a fully charged and functional fire extinguisher within the distance specified by the International Fire Code. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to store, keep, or sell any sparklers within fifty (50) feet of any gasoline pump, or gasoline filling station. 
(b)  Use. 
(1)  The use of sparklers is prohibited by any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership within or upon property classified and used as residential high rise, commercial high rise, or industrial high rise, as such classifications are described and defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
(2)  (i) The possession or use of sparklers is prohibited by any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership within or upon any city property except as provided in (ii) of this subsection. 
(ii)  Sparklers may be used on paved areas of city parks during their normal operating hours provided that sparklers may not be used during periods of drought. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation association, or partnership to allow any child under twelve (12) years of age to use sparklers without adult supervision. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other partnership to use sparklers in a reckless manner which creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another person or damage to the property of another. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to throw any ignited sparklers. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to use any sparklers within fifty (50) feet of any gasoline pump or gasoline filling station. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to use any sparklers within one thousand (1,000) feet of any hospital, nursing home or daycare center. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to sell sparklers without having a sign with letters at least two inches in height stating "YOU MUST BE 18 YEARS OLD TO PURCHASE SPARKLERS, PHOTO ID REQUIRED". 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to sell sparklers without having a sign with letters at least two inches in height stating "NO SMOKING" or the a sign at least four inches in height depicting the international symbol for no smoking. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 4) 
8.24.040 - Hours of use. 
    It shall be unlawful to use sparklers between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. from January 2 through December 31. On January 1 it shall be unlawful to use sparklers between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 5) 
8.24.050 - Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks. 
    Public exhibitions or displays of fireworks, and sale and transportation of fireworks for such use, shall be allowed if properly permitted according to provisions of article 10 of chapter 25 of O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 6) 
8.24.060 - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to punishment, upon conviction, as provided for in the City Charter. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 7) 
Chapter 8.28 - PRIVATE WELL DRILLING 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Short title and purpose. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Private Well Drilling Ordinance." The purpose of this chapter is to prohibit the drilling of private wells within the corporate city limits of the City of Metter; to require that all new construction requiring water service be connected to the City of Metter water system; to prohibit the connection of any water system supplied by a private well to the water system of the City of Metter; to provide penalties for violating this chapter; and to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 2) 
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrase, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, have the following meaning: 
    "Department" means the City of Metter Water Department. 
    "City" means the City of Metter. 
    "Well" means any means of drawing ground water for use or consumption. 
    "City Code" means the City of Metter Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 3) 
8.28.030 - Prohibited uses. 
    The drilling of private wells within the corporate city limits of Metter is prohibited. All new construction within the city requiring water service is required to be connected to the city's water system. No water system supplied by a private well and/or water source is permitted to be connected to the City of Metter's water system. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 4) 
8.28.040 - Offenses declared. 
    Any violation of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 13.12.150 of the Code. All buildings occupied as homes, residences, business, etc., shall be connected with the city water system. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow a house or business to be occupied or for any tenant to occupy a house or business unless the same is connected with the city water system. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 5) 
8.28.050 - Existing wells. 
    Any and all houses, homes and/or business's that are connected to an existing well at the time of this ordinance; and that has city water available to their property, shall have the well disconnected from their house, home and/or business and shall connect to the city's water system. All locations that are effected will have a period of one year from the adoption of this ordinance to comply. All locations that are affected by this ordinance will not be required to pay the tap fee for water connection. The existing wells at that point may be used for irrigation only. 
(Ord. of 7-10-06, § 6) 
Chapter 8.30 - ENVIRONMENTAL CONSERVATION, ONSITE SEWAGE MANAGEMENT AND PERMIT ORDINANCE 
Sections: 

8.30.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known, referred to, and may be cited as "The Environmental Conservation, Onsite Sewage Management, and Permit Ordinance of the City of Metter." 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 1) 
8.30.020 - Purpose. 
    It is the intent and policy of the City of Metter to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the City of Metter and its residents; to protect the natural resources, the environment, and the public health of the City of Metter to facilitate the adequate provision of onsite sewage management for all development in the local jurisdiction; to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections, and other development; to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, flood plain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas, and wildlife habitat areas; to establish measures to preserve an adequate supply of safe drinking water and a quality for state waters which is necessary to protect the health and welfare of the public as well as to provide for future growth; to protect the environment, including the soils, air quality, and water resources, from pollution and inappropriate development; to assist in the orderly, efficient, and integrated development of the city; and to require permits for new development or location within the city. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 2) 
8.30.030 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have meanings given in this section. 
    "Hazardous waste." Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Sections 260 and 261, and as amended by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division Rules for Hazardous Waste Management (Chapter 391-3-11). 
    "Lot." The contiguous land in the same ownership which is not divided by any public highway or alley, including any part thereof subject to any easement for any purpose other than a public highway or alley, but excluding any part thereof severed from another lot where the severance creates any nonconformity of size or use. 
    "Perennial river/stream." A river/stream or section of a river/stream that has normal stream flow consisting of base flow or both base flow and direct runoff during any period of the year. 
    "Protected river corridor." All land, inclusive of islands, in areas of a protected river within a distance of one hundred (100) feet horizontally on both sides of the river measured from the uppermost part of the river bank, as existing at the time of the application of this Chapter; the area between the top of the bank and the edge of the water is included in the protected area. 
    "River/stream bank." The rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
    "Subdivision." All divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale, legacy, or building development, whether immediate or future. This shall include all divisions or re-subdivisions of land involving a new road or change in existing roads. Excluded from this definition is the combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased. 
    "Utility." Public or private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, fiber optic lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
    "Wetlands." Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas, including wetlands created for mitigation purposes under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 3) 
8.30.040 - General provisions. 
A.  Permit Required. No building, mobile home, structure, or land within the jurisdiction of the City of Metter shall hereafter be erected, constructed, located, moved, used, subdivided, altered or disturbed except in conformity with the regulations herein and without first obtaining a permit from the City of Metter. This provision does and shall apply to the location of all manufactured housing and industrialized buildings in the city. 
B.  Minimum Lot Size. All lots intended for residential or other use within the city shall be of such size as necessary to meet all requirements, rules, and regulations of the Georgia Department of Public Health according to the "Rules of Georgia Department of Public Health for Onsite Sewage Management Systems" Manual for Onsite Sewage Management Systems; and as necessary to comply with the minimums set forth in the tables MT-1 and MT-2 hereby attached to and made a part of this chapter as Appendix 1, if onsite sewage management is utilized, and/or the local County Board of Health determination under the Manual; and/or this or other local ordinance, whichever is stricter (requires the largest lot size). 
C.  Onsite Sewage Management Permit Required. No person or business shall construct an onsite sewage management system on any lot within the city until site approval and an onsite sewage management construction permit has been obtained from and issued by the Candler County Health Department. 
D.  Permit Coordination. The required permit under Section 8.30.040.A. of this chapter shall not be issued until the Candler County Health Department issues an onsite site sewage management construction permit or a site approval letter, whichever is appropriate, so that all lots proposed to be used or subdivided would satisfy the requirements of this Chapter, including the "Rules of Georgia Department of Public Health for Onsite Sewage Management Systems." If the Candler County Health Department is delegated the responsibility for administering this Chapter, the permit or letter under this Section 8.30.040.D. shall suffice as the permit required under Section 8.30.040.A. 
E.  Requirements are Minimum. The regulations and requirements set by this Chapter shall be the minimum requirements. 
F.  Compliance with State and Federal Regulations. All developments, structures, and uses within the city shall also meet the requirements of all other local, federal and state regulations in effect, including but not limited to, Department of Transportation regulations, State Fire Marshal regulations, Georgia's Uniform Construction Codes, Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act permits, and all other Georgia Department of Natural Resources and Georgia Environmental Protection Division environmental rules and regulations. Issuance of a permit under this chapter does not constitute certification of compliance with such codes or regulations, and does not abrogate responsibility of the owner to so comply. 
G.  Map Interpretation. If there is any uncertainty as to whether a lot, portion of lot, or a proposed construction or location impacts an environmental resource regulated by this chapter because of interpretation of the applicable map, the decision of the City of Metter, or the Candler County Health Department if it is delegated the responsibility for administering this chapter shall take precedent and be considered correct and final, but may be appealed as set forth in Section 8.30.040.H. 
H.  Map Appeal. Any person who feels aggrieved by a decision of the City of Metter or the Candler County Health Department, as appropriate, regarding map interpretation may at their own expense request reconsideration. Such reconsideration shall include submission of scientific evidence for reversal of the alleged error in map interpretation, and such evidence must be documented by a state registered engineer, geologist, or soils scientist. To obtain a reversal of the decision of map interpretation, the evidence must be acceptable to Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division, and the City of Metter, or and the Candler County Health Department if the Candler County Health Department is delegated responsibility for administering this chapter. Any costs for submission of evidence to the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' Environmental Protection Division shall be borne by the person requesting reconsideration. 
I.  Coordination with Zoning and Other Regulation. This chapter shall be coordinated with any zoning or other regulations adopted by the City of Metter, and if there is any conflict with those zoning or other regulations, the stricter provisions shall apply. If zoning is or has been adopted, the provisions of this chapter shall be considered an overlay, or additional requirement(s) to the requirements of underlying zoning regulations and district. 
J.  Fees. Any fees for applications, inspections, and the issuance of permits or certificates required or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be paid by the person seeking such permit at the time of application in advance of the issuance of such permits or certificates. 
    The amount of such fees, if any, shall be those established by the City of Metter from time to time. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 4) 
Editor's note- Appendix 1 is not set out herein at length but is available for review in the offices of the city. 
8.30.050 - Delegation of ordinance administration. 
    The City of Metter, because of the need for coordination, hereby charges the City of Metter Zoning Administrator with responsibility for administering this chapter and ensuring compliance with its provisions. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 5) 
8.30.060 - Wetlands protection regulations. 
A.  Findings of Fact. The wetlands within the City of Metter are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife, and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; open space; and recreational opportunities. 
B.  Reference Map. The official maps to be used as the determinant for location of wetlands in the City of Metter and to be regulated areas under this chapter will be the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's National Wetlands Inventory Maps for Candler County. These maps portray generalized wetlands inventory areas, and these wetlands inventory areas do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands under the authority of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or a wetland delineation by that agency. 
C.  Wetlands Development Permit Requirements. No activity or use except those identified in Section 8.30.060.D. shall be allowed within wetlands without a permit issued under this chapter. Activities or uses permitted under Section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act may receive a local permit once any required federal permit, or if appropriate, letter of permission/determination, is obtained as described below, and any other applicable provisions of this chapter have been satisfied. 
1.  If there is a determination in the administration of this chapter that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein would not be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and would not disturb an identified wetlands inventory area, no further action concerning this particular ordinance section is necessary. 
2.  If there is a determination in the administration of this chapter that a proposed activity, use, or development subject to permit herein may be located in or near an identified wetlands inventory area and might disturb wetlands which appear to be under the jurisdiction of Section 404 of the U.S. Clean Water Act, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination shall be required prior to issuance of a permit under this chapter. 
3.  If a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' jurisdictional wetlands determination is required, no local permit under this Chapter will be issued until the person requesting the permit, at their own expense, obtains either a Section 404 permit, if so required, or a letter of permission/determination from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers that no federal permit is required. 
4.  No action in the administration of this chapter, or no local permit issued pursuant to this chapter, relieves the landowner from any federal or state permitting requirements, including those relating to wetlands or land disturbance. 
D.  Permitted Uses Not Requiring a Permit. The following uses are permitted without permit within the wetlands of the city to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein, and provided they have no long term impairment for wetland function. 
1.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission. (Section 404 does not require permits for normal, ongoing silvicultural activities. However, Section 404 does list some required road construction best management practices that must be followed in order to qualify for such an exemption.). 
2.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish, or other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the State of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require a Section 404 Permit. 
3.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, hunting, bird watching, hiking, biking, boating, horseback riding, kayaking, and canoeing. 
4.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
5.  Normal agriculture activities, including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture. 
E.  Prohibited Uses. In compliance with the Georgia "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. 
1.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
3.  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 6) 
8.30.070 - Groundwater recharge areas protection regulations. 
A.  Findings of Fact. Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. Pesticides and herbicides sprayed on crops and animal waste, like septic tank affluents, contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
B.  Reference Map. The official map for delineation of significant groundwater recharge areas in the City of Metter to be regulated areas under this chapter is the Georgia Department of Natural Resources' "Significant Recharge Areas, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 edition)." 
C.  Groundwater Recharge Areas Development Permit Requirements. All uses except those identified in Section 7.4 and those subject to further restriction by any underlying zoning district are allowed. The following are additional requirements for specific uses: 
1.  All new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, shall have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks, and shall otherwise meet the requirements of U.S. EPA rules for oil pollution prevention, 40 CFR 112.1 and following. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal and state requirements. 
2.  All single-family dwellings, multi-family dwellings, mobile home parks, or other uses located within a groundwater recharge area and not served by both public water and sewer systems shall be required to have one hundred fifty (150) percent of the minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of the Georgia Department of Public Health Manual for Onsite Sewage Management Systems (DPH Manual) Tables MT-1 and MT-2 (included as part of this chapter in Appendix 1), as determined by the Candler County Health Department. The minimums set forth in Tables MT-1 and MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the Public Health Manual. Said minimum lot size shall not be in any case less than the minimum lot size specified by any underlying zoning district. The regulations or determination specifying the largest minimum lot size shall apply. 
3.  All lots shall have a minimum width of one hundred fifty (150) feet, or as specified in any underlying zoning district if stricter (larger), in the area where an approved onsite sewage management system is to be located. 
4.  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank or other onsite sewage management system unless the Candler County Health Department first approves the proposed onsite sewage management system installation as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Public Health Manual for Onsite Sewage Management Systems and the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  All new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner except for the construction of mining settling basins. 
6.  All new agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compact clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service, or Georgia's Environmental Protection Division. 
D.  Prohibited Uses. The following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. 
1.  All new hazardous waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities. 
2.  New facilities handling hazardous materials regulated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources as to require a permit. 
3.  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins. 
4.  All new sanitary or other landfills. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 7) 
Editor's note- Appendix 1 is not set out herein at length but is available for review in the offices of the city. 
8.30.080 - Major river corridor protection district regulations. 
A.  Findings of Fact. Perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least four hundred (400) cubic feet per second are of vital importance to Georgia in that they help preserve those qualities that make a river suitable for habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation, and a source for clean drinking water. These river corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb flood waters. 
B.  District Delineation. Protected Rivers as defined under the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, adopted by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to Section 12-2-8 of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, includes any perennial river or water courses with an average annual flow of at least four hundred (400) cubic feet per second. The Ohoopee River through Candler County meets this criteria. A protected river corridor and a protective one hundred-foot natural vegetative buffer, as defined in Georgia Rule 391-3-16, is hereby established along the entire length of this river(s) within the jurisdiction of Candler County. The buffer area is measured horizontally from each river bank, if any, within the City jurisdiction. Under the method prescribed by the Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, no development or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the protected river corridor and within a one hundred-foot buffer of the river bank except for the following permitted uses. 
C.  Permitted Uses. No development, or construction, or other land disturbing activity will be allowed to occur within the one hundred (100) foot buffer from the protected river except for the following uses, as long as they do not impair the long term functions of the protected river or the protected river corridor. In addition, the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity or construction permitted within the river corridor for these acceptable uses. 
1.  Single-family dwellings, if any underlying zoning district so permits, provided each dwelling is located on a lot with a minimum size as specified by the Candler County Health Department or the underlying zoning district regulations, but shall be the greater of these requirements; however, in any case the lot for each dwelling shall not be less than two (2) acres, not including any area between the river banks; and provided the septic tank drainfield is located outside of the one hundred-foot buffer area. 
2.  Any residential uses existing or under construction prior to the adoption of these local protection ordinances provided the use has an onsite sewage management construction permit issued by the Candler County Health Department prior to the date of adoption of these local protection ordinances. 
3.  Any industrial or commercial uses existing prior to the adoption of these local protection ordinances, providing they do not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and meet all other federal and state environmental rules and regulations. 
4.  Road and utility crossings, and utility locations if no other location is reasonable, providing the construction of these crossings and uses meet the requirements of the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, or any other state or local requirements, if stricter, protect the integrity of the buffer area to the extent reasonably possible, and are located as far from the river bank as is reasonably possible. 
5.  Timber production and harvesting, providing it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission, and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
6.  Agricultural production and management, provided it is consistent with the best management practices established by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission or its successor, and all other state and federal laws and regulations, including those promulgated by the Georgia Department of Agriculture; and does not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the federal Clean Water Act, as amended. 
7.  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of Section 12-2-8 (as amended) of Article 1, Chapter 2, Title 12 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (O.C.G.A.). 
8.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
9.  Wastewater treatment. 
10.  Recreational usage consistent with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river dependent recreation. 
D.  Prohibited Uses. In compliance with the Georgia "Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria," the following uses are prohibited entirely and no permit shall be issued for them. 
1.  Facilities or areas used for the handling, receiving, storing, or disposal of hazardous wastes. 
2.  Hazardous or solid waste landfills. 
3.  Septic tank drainfields within the one hundred-foot buffer area under any circumstance. 
4.  Septic tanks within the one hundred-foot buffer area, except as expressly provided for single-family dwellings which are permitted under and comply with Section 8.30.080.C.1. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 8) 
8.30.090 - Variances. 
    When due to a particular hardship or extraordinary circumstance of the property involved which is not easily corrected, it is impractical for an owner or developer to comply with all of the requirements of this chapter, the City of Metter shall be authorized to vary such requirements (under its jurisdiction) only to such extent as to provide fairness to the owner or developer and as to not violate the intent and purposes of this chapter. Such variances shall only be granted in an official public meeting, and the reasons for granting them shall be entered into the minutes of the public meeting. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 9) 
8.30.100 - Violations and penalties. 
    Violation of these provisions, prohibitions, and installation restrictions by any private individual, land owner, builder, remodeler, contractor, licensed electrician, licensed plumber, septic tank dealer or installer, mobile or manufactured home dealer or mover, or developer; or installation and delivery of any utility services by a public or private utility to any property which holds a septic tank system installed against these prohibitions and restrictions, shall be a violation of this chapter. 
    Any person violating, neglecting, or refusing to comply with any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law. The City of Metter may take other actions or remedies as available at law to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 10) 
8.30.110 - Court of jurisdiction. 
    The City of Metter or the Candler County Board of Health, as appropriate, may bring complaints of violation of any provision of this chapter before either the Magistrate Court of Candler County, the State Court of Candler County, or the Metter Municipal Court, as so desired. 
(Ord. of 1-14-19, § 11) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters: 
9.04 Offenses Against Public Peace and Decency 9.08 Offenses Relating to Property 9.12 Curfew 9.16 Adult Entertainment Establishments 9.20 Noise Control  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND DECENCY 
Sections: 

9.04.010 - Disorderly conduct.* 
A.  Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he: 
1.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear of safety for his life, limb or health; 
2.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
3.  Endangers lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; 
4.  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property; 
5.  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
6.  Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
7.  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes; 
8.  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
9.  Frequents any public place with the intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device; 
10.  Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or aids or abets therein; 
11.  Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
12.  Frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs, practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
13.  Acts in a dangerous manner toward others; 
14.  Uses "fighting words" directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
15.  Assembles or congregates with another for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another; 
16.  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
17.  Congregates with another in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
18.  Makes any unreasonably loud and unnecessary noise; 
19.  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
20.  Consumes alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk or any other public property within the corporate limits of the city. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption; 
21.  Consumes alcoholic beverages in a vehicle or not on any public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the city, except those maintained at establishments holding a valid on-premises license for the retail sale of beer or wine. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
B.  Any person convicted of disorderly conduct shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010. 
(Ord. 97-1 (part)) 
* Editor's Note: Ordinance 97-1 becomes effective January 1, 1998. 
9.04.020 - Firearms-Discharge prohibited.* 
    It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer in the discharge of his duties, to discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm in the city, except for the lawful defense of person or property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. 97-1 (part): prior code § 13-10) 
* Editor's Note: Ordinance 97-1 becomes effective January 1, 1998. 
9.04.030 - Carrying loaded weapons.* 
    It is unlawful for any person, except peace officers in the discharge of their official duties and other persons in a lawful manner so authorized by the laws of the state and the United States, to carry on the streets of the city, any loaded gun, pistol, rifle or any kind of firearm, either exposed or otherwise. 
(Ord. 97-1 (part)) 
* Editor's Note: Ordinance 97-1 becomes effective January 1, 1998. 
9.04.040 - Discharging air rifles or BB guns. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to shoot or discharge any BB gun or air rifle in the city, except on his own property or property of another with consent of the owner, or property of his parent or guardian if a minor, and then only in such a manner that the projectiles will not be propelled onto adjacent or other property, and that harm will not be done to anyone, or anyone's property. 
B.  Parents and guardians will be held responsible for acts of their children seventeen (17) years of age and under. 
C.  The mayor or chief of police shall have the authority to make special exceptions to this section as they might deem necessary. 
(Prior code § 13-11) 
9.04.050 - Report of treatment of wounds. 
    All physicians and all hospital superintendents in the city are required to report to the police department all patients treated by physicians or diagnosed or known to be suffering from wounds inflicted by a dangerous or deadly weapon of any kind. Such report may be made in writing or by telephone, giving the name of the reporting person and the patient and any other pertinent data requested by the police department. All reports shall be made within twenty-four (24) hours after treatment by a physician or after admission to the hospital. 
(Prior code § 13-14) 
9.04.060 - Fireworks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to shoot, fire, discharge or cause to explode any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, Roman candles or other fireworks or substances designed and intended for pyrotechnic display or noise, or any pistols, canes, cannons or other appliances using blank cartridges or caps, powder, chlorite or potash mixture, or other explosive mixture, in the city. 
(Prior code § 13-19) 
9.04.070 - Palmreaders, fortunetellers. 
    The city is authorized to license, tax, regulate or prohibit palmreading, fortunetelling and other like performances in accordance with Georgia state law. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part): prior code § 13-20) 
9.04.080 - Disturbing or interfering with performances. 
    It is unlawful for any person, having entered any public building, tent or enclosure used for purposes of public or private amusement, entertainment or exhibition, to disturb, interrupt or otherwise interfere with any performance, entertainment, amusement or any other undertaking in progress therein or to engage in any boisterous, noisy, or disorderly speech or conduct therein. 
(Prior code § 5-2) 
9.04.090 - Refusal to disperse. 
    Any two or more persons, who shall assemble on any street, lane, alley, park or other public place within the city between the hours of twelve-thirty a.m. and daylight of the ensuing day, shall disperse when commanded to do so by any peace officer who has reasonable grounds to suspect that they intend to commit a breach of the peace or violate some city ordinance. 
(Prior code § 13-2) 
9.04.100 - Loitering or congregating so as to obstruct pedestrian travel. 
    It is unlawful for any persons to gather, loiter, congregate or assemble with others on any of the public streets or sidewalks or other public places within the corporate limits of the city in such a manner or to such an extent as to prevent or interfere with the free and unobstructed passage or travel of pedestrians thereon or thereover or with the free and unobstructed access of pedestrians to or from private property or buildings or other structures abutting on such streets, sidewalks or other public places. 
(Prior code § 13-3) 
9.04.110 - Loitering.* 
    Every person who commits any of the following acts is guilty of a misdemeanor: 
A.  Who loiters or wanders upon the streets of from place to place without apparent reason or business and who refuses to identify himself and to account for his presence when requested by any peace officer so to do, if the surrounding circumstances are such as to indicate to a reasonable person that the public safety demands such identification; 
B.  Who loiters, prowls or wanders upon the private property of another, in the nighttime, without visible or lawful business with the owner or occupant thereof; 
C.  Who loiters in or about any toilet open to the public for the purpose of engaging in or soliciting any lewd or lascivious or any unlawful act. 
(Ord. 97-5 § 1) 
* Editor's Note: Ordinance 97-5 becomes effective January 1, 1998. 
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY 
Sections: 

9.08.010 - Posting of advertising matter. 
    It is unlawful for any person to post, tack, nail, attach or in any other manner fasten signs, bills, circulars, posters, notices, papers or other advertising matter of any description to any pole, tree, structure or any other property, public or private, without the permission of the owner or occupant of such property. 
(Prior code § 3-1) 
9.08.020 - Removal of advertising matter. 
    It is unlawful for any person to remove, tear down, deface or destroy any poster, handbill or other kind of advertisement when the same has been lawfully posed while the same is still of value. 
(Prior code § 3-2) 
9.08.030 - Ballplaying. 
    It is unlawful for any person to play ball by throwing, catching, pitching or batting a ball on any public street, alley or sidewalk of the city. 
(Prior code § 13-4) 
9.08.040 - Throwing of missiles. 
    It is unlawful for any person in the city to throw any stone, rock or other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or other public or private property, or upon or at any person in any public or private way or place. 
(Prior code § 13-8) 
9.08.050 - Interference with radio reception. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate any instrument, device or machines of any kind whatsoever, the operation of which shall cause electrical interference with radio reception within the limits of the city, save and excepting only such as may be necessary in making X-ray pictures, or examinations in emergency cases of physical injuries. 
(Prior code § 13-9) 
9.08.060 - Protection of trees. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cut, trim or cut down, or top or abuse any tree within the limits of the city or on the city's property without first securing permission from the city tree board. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 13-15) 
Chapter 9.12 - CURFEW 
Sections: 

9.12.010 - Curfew for minors-Hours specified. 
    It is unlawful for any person under the age of seventeen (17) to idle, loiter or congregate with any persons other than their parents or guardians on or in the public streets, sidewalks or other public places within the city between the hours of twelve midnight and five a.m. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-94 (part): prior code § 13-5) 
9.12.020 - Responsibility of adult. 
    It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having custody or control of any person under the age of seventeen (17) to permit, allow or encourage such person to violate Section 9.12.010. 
(Ord. dated 4-11-94 (part): prior code § 13-6) 
Chapter 9.16 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 

9.16.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult entertainment establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
B.  Findings. Based on the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; DeKalb County, Georgia; Augusta-Richmond County, Georgia; Indianapolis, Indiana; Athens-Clarke County, Georgia; Marietta, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Warner Robins, Georgia; Rome, Georgia; Carrollton, Georgia; and Smyrna, Georgia; which experiences, we believe are relevant to the issues faced by the city of Metter, Georgia, the mayor and city council take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality, which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within our country. Moreover, it is the findings of the mayor and city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Among the acts of criminal behavior identified with nudity and alcohol are disorderly conduct, prostitution, and drug trafficking and use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood; increased expenditures for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior herein above described; and acceleration of community blight by the concentration of such establishments in particular areas. Therefore, the limitation of nude or partially nude conduct in establishments affects the public welfare; and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to prevent the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments that allow and/or encourage nudity. Based on these findings, this article is adopted to regulate certain types of businesses and to establish where such activity may or may not be conducted. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 1) 
9.16.020 - Definitions. 
    As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    "Adult entertainment establishments" Under this chapter, the term adult entertainment establishment shall include, without limitation, the following types of establishments, which shall be defined as follows: 
1.  "Adult bookstore" means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines, or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising twenty (20) percent or more of its total floor or wall space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or twenty (20) percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
2.  "Adult business" means either (a) Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or (b) any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
3.  "Adult dancing establishment" means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
4.  "Adult motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
5.  "Adult hotel or motel" means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
6.  "Adult motion picture arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
7.  "Adult video store" means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising ten (10) percent or more of its total floor or wall space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
8.  "Bath house" or "adult massage parlor" means a business or establishment in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
9.  "Erotic dance establishment" means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainment, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
10.  "Encounter center" or "rap establishment" means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
11.  "Escort bureau" or "introduction services" means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
12.  "Lingerie modeling studio" means a business or establishment whose primary business activity consists of live performers exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 2) 
9.16.030 - Definitions-General. 
    "Church" means a body of communicants gathered into church order united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same rituals and ceremonies; place where persons regularly assemble for worship; congregation; organization for religious purposes. 
    "Good moral character" a person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
    "Minor" for the purposes of this chapter, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    "Person" is defined as an individual, association, club, society, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity. 
    "Premises" is defined as the building for which or upon which a license is issued hereunder and "premise" and "building" are further defined as a structure or edifice enclosing a space within its exterior walls, and covered with a roof or outside top covering of a building or connected or attached or joined with or by a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway. Any structure or structures of any nature that share a wall, roof, walkway or breezeway shall be considered a single premises and building for the purposes of this chapter. No building may be subdivided for the purpose of creating more than one premises for the purposes of this chapter. In addition, the word "premises" shall include the land and real estate as well as its appurtenances, including the entire parcel together with the boundaries thereof, upon which the licensed premises sits as well as the area of land surrounding said premises. 
    "Specified anatomical areas" shall include any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or public region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    "Specified sexual activities" means and shall include any of the following: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of clothed or unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, sapphism; or 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
3.  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
4.  Fondling or touching of clothed or unclothed human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 3) 
9.16.040 - Regulations. 
A.  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
B.  No later than November 1st of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file an occupation tax report with the city clerk showing the present number of employees as required in Section 5.04.040. 
C.  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed. 
D.  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer, a person under the age of twenty-one (21) years or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  No person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
F.  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of eleven a.m. and twelve midnight Monday through Saturday. No adult entertainment establishment shall be open on December 25th of each year or on Sunday. 
G.  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute, or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
H.  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter. 
I.  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
J.  No dancing shall occur closer than ten (10) feet to any patron. 
K.  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
L.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
M.  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
N.  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
O.  Any adult entertainment establishment having available for customers, patrons or members any booth, room, or cubicle for the private viewing of any adult entertainment must comply with the following requirements: 
1.  Access. Each booth, room or cubicle shall be totally accessible to and from aisles and public areas of the establishment, and shall be unobstructed by any curtain, door, lock, or other control-type or view-obstructing devices or materials. 
2.  Construction. Every booth, room or cubicle shall meet the following construction requirements: 
a.  Each booth, room or cubicle shall be separated from adjacent booths, rooms and cubicles and any nonpublic areas by a wall. 
b.  Have at least one side totally open to a public lighted aisle so that there is an unobstructed view at all times of anyone occupying same. 
c.  All walls shall be solid and without openings, extended from the floor to a height of not less than six feet and be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
d.  The floor must be light colored, nonabsorbent, smooth-textured and easily cleaned. 
e.  The lighting level of each booth, room or cubicle when not in use shall be a minimum of ten (10) candles at all times, as measured from the floor. 
3.  Occupants. Only one individual shall occupy a booth, room or cubicle at any time. No occupant of same shall engage in any type of sexual activity, cause any bodily discharge or litter while in the booth, room or cubicle. No individual shall damage or deface any portion of the booth, room or cubicle. 
P.  All adult entertainment which is licensed and permitted by this chapter shall be carried on inside a closed building with all windows and doors covered so that the activities carried on inside cannot be viewed from the immediate areas surrounding the outside of the building. 
Q.  All adult entertainment establishments shall permit representatives of the police department or any other city official acting in their official capacity to inspect the premises as necessary to insure the business is complying with all provisions of this chapter. 
R.  If any portion, or subparagraph, of this section of this chapter or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 4) 
9.16.050 - Certain activities prohibited. 
A.  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or expose with less than a full opaque covering, any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area, or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
B.  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall engage in, or be allowed to engage in, any specified sexual activity as defined herein on the premises of any adult entertainment establishment. 
C.  No adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, commit the offense of public indecency as defined in OCGA Section 16-6-8. 
D.  Pursuant to OCGA Section 16-6-24, no adult entertainer, other employee, patron or other person at an adult entertainment establishment shall, while on or off the premises of an adult entertainment establishment, loiter for the purpose of procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 
E.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise found to be obscene, lewd or illegal under applicable code, regulation or statute which provides any prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this chapter shall only be allowed if they are not obscene or lewd and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 5) 
9.16.060 - License required-Automatic forfeiture for nonuse. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city of Metter any adult entertainment establishment as defined in this chapter, without a license so to do. No adult entertainment establishment license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state of Georgia or the United States. 
B.  Any holder of any license hereunder who shall for a period of three consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the said three month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 6) 
9.16.070 - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult entertainment establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid adult entertainment establishment license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this chapter, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 7) 
9.16.080 - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within licensed premises. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 8) 
9.16.090 - Sales to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 9) 
9.16.100 - Location (district requirements). 
    For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the nearest part of the premises of the establishment, as defined herein, to the closest property lines of the parcel of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
    No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
A.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
B.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, college campus, governmental building, library, civic center, children's day care facility, public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
C.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which any other adult entertainment establishment is located; 
D.  Within any zoning category other than the following categories: 
1.  Light Industrial (L-I); 
a.  The provisions of Article IX of the Zoning Ordinance regarding signage shall apply, and no animated sign shall be allowed. 
E.  On a lot which contains less than one hundred (100) feet of road frontage. 
F.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment authorized to sell alcoholic beverages or malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises is located. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 10) 
9.16.110 - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
A.  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
B.  Approval for Employment. Before any person works on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the chief of police of his/her intended employment on forms supplied by the police department that require the information set forth in provision (a) of this section. The Metter Police Department shall have fifteen (15) days to investigate the information required of the prospective employee. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the police department requires including fingerprinting by the department and consent to an NCIC and/or GCIC records check. If the employee is found to be of good moral character, the chief of police shall grant approval of employment. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten (10) days of said denial, apply to the chief of police for a hearing. The decision of the chief of police after hearing may be appealed to the Metter City Council, which will use the appeals procedure contained in this chapter. 
C.  Suspension, Revocation of License. Violation of the provisions of this code, the ordinances of the city of Metter, laws and regulations of the state of Georgia, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of said license. Should any licensed employee of an adult entertainment establishment leave employment with said establishment for sixty (60) or more days, that employee's license shall lapse automatically without any further action required. All adult entertainment establishments are required to notify the chief of police within five days of the termination, either voluntarily or otherwise, of any licensed employee of said adult entertainment establishments, giving the former employee's name, social security number, and date of termination. 
D.  Independent Contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, all independent contractors, except those who are licensed in a trade or profession which is not involved in serving or entertaining customers at adult entertainment establishments, shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 11) 
9.16.120 - Application for license. 
A.  Any person desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city clerk or her designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable regulatory license fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) shall be paid to the city clerk. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such regulatory fee has been paid. 
B.  The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 12) 
9.16.130 - Application contents. 
    Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
A.  The full true name, and any other names used by the applicant; 
B.  The present address and telephone number of the applicant(s); 
C.  The previous addresses of the applicant(s), if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
D.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
E.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and date and place of birth; 
F.  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last thirty (30) days; 
G.  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and if a corporation, all shareholders holding five percent or more of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
H.  The business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, county, state or territory under license has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment establishment or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
I.  All convictions in the last five years, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
J.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of superior court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporation shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
K.  The names and addresses of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
L.  Such other identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
M.  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, directors, or any stockholders of five percent or more of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
N.  If the applicant, any partners, or any of the officers or stockholders controlling five percent or more of the outstanding shares of the corporation, have been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
O.  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
P.  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and current annual report filed with the Georgia Secretary of State; 
Q.  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
R.  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
S.  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
T.  A certified plat by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, licensed by the state of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated in order to verify compliance with Section 9.16.100 of this chapter. This provision may be waived if compliance can be readily determined. 
U.  Such further information as may be required to review the applicant. 
V.  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
1.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
2.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
3.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
4.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 13) 
9.16.140 - Applicant to appear. 
    The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, or a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the city clerk and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee has been paid; that the application containing the aforementioned and described information has been presented to the city clerk; and that all information contained therein is true and correct. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 14) 
9.16.150 - Application-Investigation. 
    The city clerk shall refer the application to the chief of police for investigation. The police department shall have up to thirty (30) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation and after an investigative report by the chief of police is furnished to the city clerk, the city clerk shall place the investigative report and completed application on the next city council agenda if it is received by noon on the Friday prior to the regular meeting on the following Monday. The mayor and city council may grant the license at that meeting if it finds. 
A.  The required fee has been paid; 
B.  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
C.  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
D.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
E.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
F.  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
G.  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant complies with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
H.  The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
I.  That the applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder controlling five percent or more of the corporation stock, or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitation for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
J.  That on the date the business for which an adult entertainment establishment license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
K.  That the proposed premises is in compliance with those location restrictions as set out in Section 9.16.100 of this chapter. 
L.  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this chapter or any other ordinance or regulation of the city of Metter, state of Georgia or the United States. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 15) 
9.16.160 - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
A.  No adult entertainment establishment license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
1.  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes or special assessments duly imposed; 
2.  Any person who is not of a good moral character; 
3.  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding five percent or more of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
4.  Any partnership, association, or other entity, any of whose officers, partners, or members are not of good moral character; 
5.  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
6.  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state of Georgia or the city of Metter. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 16) 
9.16.170 - License-Refusal-Appeal. 
    If the mayor and city council following investigation of the applicant, deem that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements set forth in this chapter, they shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within ten (10) days of such notice, the city clerk shall notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied an adult entertainment establishment license may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the receipt of notice from the city clerk of such denial. A hearing before the mayor and city council shall be scheduled within forty-five (45) days of such notice. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 17) 
9.16.180 - Licenses-Renewal. 
    An adult entertainment establishment license may be renewed on a calendar year basis provided that the renewal application contains the same information required in the original application and that applicants continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter as they exist at the time the renewal application is filed. Applicants have no vested right to the renewal of said license. Renewal applications shall be due by November 1st of the calendar year prior to the year for which such license is requested. The annual license fee remains at two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and shall not be prorated for any portion of a year. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 18) 
9.16.190 - Licenses-Nontransferable. 
    No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner(s). An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 19) 
9.16.200 - Change of location or name. 
A.  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a new application has been filed with the city clerk and approval has been obtained from the mayor and city council. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in this chapter have been met. 
B.  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the adult entertainment establishment license. 
C.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 20) 
9.16.210 - Appeal-Procedure. 
    The licensee shall, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination by the city clerk, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council, and the name and address of the applicant. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five days nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the appeal for city council action. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 21) 
9.16.220 - Appeals-Council determines procedure. 
    When an appeal is placed on city council's agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
A.  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing. 
B.  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 22) 
9.16.230 - City council hearing. 
    Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefore, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 23) 
9.16.240 - Powers of hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses an he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 24) 
9.16.250 - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
    The mayor and city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 25) 
9.16.260 - Hearing officer-Report. 
A.  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed thirty (30) days from the date a hearing before the hearing officer is terminated, submit a written report to the mayor and city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. 
B.  A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city administrator and chief of police. 
C.  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten (10) days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 26) 
9.16.270 - Hearing officer report-Action by city council. 
    City council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
A.  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter; 
B.  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 27) 
9.16.280 - Violations-Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per violation. In addition to such fine, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. Every day that such violation occurs shall be considered a separate violation punishable as stated above. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 28) 
9.16.290 - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 29) 
9.16.300 - Revocation and appeal. 
    The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license previously granted herein. In the event the chief of police seeks to suspend or to revoke an adult entertainment establishment license, he shall give written notification to the applicant of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations and shall be served upon the licensee at least five days prior to the notice of hearing. The applicant shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
A.  The chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment license in the event of any one or more of the following: 
1.  An applicant gave false or misleading information in the original application process; 
2.  An applicant has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises and/or knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances to a minor on the premises; 
3.  An applicant has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state of Georgia to occur on the premises; 
4.  An applicant has violated any provision of this adult entertainment chapter; 
5.  An applicant has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state of Georgia or the city of Metter regarding an offense which was committed on the premises or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this chapter; and 
6.  An applicant fails to pay any fee, occupation or business license or tax, fine or other amount of money due to the city of Metter under this chapter or any other taxing ordinance or resolution of the city of Metter. 
B.  In the event the chief of police shall suspend or revoke any adult entertainment establishment license hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than three hundred sixty-five (365) days, within the discretion of the chief of police. Provided, however, that the applicant shall be authorized to continue its business operations until that date of the appeal hearing scheduled in accordance with subsection (C) of this section. No applicant may apply for an adult entertainment establishment license during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing conducted by the chief of police, the chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension or revocation, and the duration of either. 
C.  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the chief of police, the applicant may appeal the decision of the chief of police to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days from the date of the decision of the chief of police. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled by the city before the mayor and city council within forty-five (45) days after the date of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the mayor and city council, city council may take such action as it deems appropriate, including upholding of the action of the chief of police or the imposition of such action as the mayor and city council may deem appropriate under the facts. The decision of the mayor and city council shall be final. Appeals from the decision of the mayor and city council shall be in the form of a writ of certiorari to the superior court of Candler County filed within thirty (30) days of the final action of the mayor and city council. In the event the applicant does not file an appeal from any decision of the chief of police, as provided herein, the decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 30) 
9.16.310 - Business or occupation tax. 
    The adult entertainment establishment occupation tax shall be the amount stipulated in the business occupation tax provisions of the Metter Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 31) 
9.16.320 - Change of location. 
    There is established an administrative fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) to apply for a change of location for an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 32) 
9.16.330 - Alcoholic beverages-Prohibitions. 
A.  No person, association, partnership or corporation licensed under this chapter of the Metter Municipal Code after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating or controlled substance upon the premises of any licensee. 
    This section shall not apply to nor prohibit the live performance of legitimate plays, operas, ballets at mainstream theaters, concert halls, museums or educational institutions holding a license, which derive less than twenty (20) percent of its gross receipts from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 33) 
9.16.340 - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
    Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 34) 
9.16.350 - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
    The licensee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the licensing officer. Each licensed premise shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 35) 
9.16.360 - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the licensing officer on his/her finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the licensing officer shall serve on the licensee, by personal service of him or by posting in conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within twenty-four (24) hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the licensing officer may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the licensing officer. The licensing officer shall affix to the sealed premised a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 36) 
9.16.370 - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. 02-05 § 37) 
CITY OF METTER, GEORGIA 
APPLICATION FOR ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT 
Date of application: _____ New: _____ Renewal: _____ 
Change of Location _____ 
_____ License fee.   $2,500.00 
Applicant's full name _____ 
If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the Clerk of Superior Court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporation shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
Any other names used by applicant: 
_____
Business name _____ 
DBA _____ 
Business address _____ 
Business mailing address _____ 
Business telephone # _____ 
Applicant's home address _____ 
Applicants home phone # _____ 
Applicant's previous addresses, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence of each:   List or attach a separate sheet. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age must be provided. Attach to application. 
Applicants age _____ Date of birth _____ SS # _____ 
Height _____ Weight _____ Color of eyes _____ Color of hair _____ 
Date and place of birth 
_____
_____
_____
Attach two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last thirty (30) days. 
List or furnish business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. List or furnish business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and if a corporation, all shareholders holding five percent or more of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
List or furnish the business license or occupation tax history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, county, state or territory under license has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment establishment or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefore, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
List all convictions in the last five years, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
The names and addresses of the owner and/or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
If the applicant, any partners, or any of the officers or stockholders controlling five percent or more of the outstanding shares of the corporation, have been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
_____
The applicant is required to furnish fingerprints to the chief of police. 
If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and current annual report filed with the Georgia Secretary of State. Please attach to application. 
Provide at least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the adult entertainment establishment license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. List or attach a separate sheet. 
_____
_____
_____
_____
Address of the premises to be licensed: 
_____
_____
Are the premises owned or rented: 
_____
_____
Does the applicant have a right to legal possession of the premises? 
_____
_____
_____
Please provide copies of those documents giving such legal right. 
Attach a certified plat by a registered engineer or registered land surveyor, licensed by the state of Georgia, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated in order to verify compliance with Section 10 of this chapter. This provision may be waived if compliance can be readily determined. 
Further information may be required by the Metter Police Department in reviewing the applicant. 
Oath of Applicant 
"I, _____ , DO SOLEMNLY SWEAR THAT I HAVE PROVIDED TRUE AND ACCURATE INFORMATION ON THIS APPLICATION; AND UNDERSTAND IF I HAVE BEEN UNTRUTHFUL IT WILL RESULT IN DENIAL OF MY LICENSE." 
Date: _______ Name: _____ 
Signature: _____ 
Title: _____ 
1) If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
2) If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
3) If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
4) If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
Notary: 
_____
Signed and sealed this the _____ day of _____ , _______. 
APPLICATION MEETS ALL ZONING AND ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS: 
APPROVED: _______       DATE: _______ 
_____ IS HEREBY APPROVED TO OPERATE AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT AT THE FOLLOWING LOCATION: 
_____
BY: CITY CLERK OR CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
BY: CHIEF OF POLICE         
THIS APPLICATION DOES NOT MEET ALL ZONING AND ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR AN ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT AT THE FOLLOWING LOCATION: 
_____
DENIED: _______       DATE: _______ 
BY: CITY CLERK OR CITY ADMINISTRATOR 
BY: CHIEF OF POLICE         
COMMENTS: 
_____
_____
_____
CITY OF METTER
CONSENT FORM 
Adult Entertainment License Application 
I, _____ , am authorizing the Metter Police Department to release information on any criminal history record the State of Georgia or the Metter Police Department might have to the City of Metter. 
I hereby agree the Metter Police Department, the Georgia Crime Information Center, the employees of either agency, or the employees of any other agency of the state, shall not be responsible for the accuracy of the information given or have any liability for defamation, invasion of privacy, negligence or any other claim in connection with any dissemination of information pursuant to this record check. 
I further agree that if I am granted a license, this consent form shall remain in force as long as I hold an adult entertainment license from the City of Metter. 
FULL NAME _____ 
ADDRESS _____ 
SSN # _____ DATE OF BIRTH _____ 
PLACE OF BIRTH _____ 
SEX _____ RACE _____ HGT _____ WGT _____ EYES _____ HAIR _____ 
SIGNATURE                DATE        
NOTARY PUBLIC         
MY COMMISSION EXPIRES      
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 
NOTICE OF INTENDED EMPLOYMENT 
Date: _______ 
Licensee: _____ 
Name of Business: _____ 
Address: _____
_____ 
Telephone # _______ 
Employee's Name: _____ 
Home Address: _____
_____ 
Home Telephone # _______ 
TO BE COMPLETED BY PROSPECTIVE EMPLOYEE 
Employees Age _____ Date of Birth _____ SSN # _____ 
Have you ever been convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee? Refer to the City of Metter Adult Entertainment Establishment Ordinance, Section 11 (a) Qualifications of employees. 
_______ No 
_______ Yes  Offense: _____ Date: _______ 
Please supply fingerprints to the Chief of Police. 
I, _____ , am authorizing the Metter Police Department to release information on any criminal history record the State of Georgia or the Metter Police Department might have to the City of Metter. 
I hereby agree the Metter Police Department, the Georgia Crime Information Center, the employees of either agency, or the employees of any other agency of the state, shall not be responsible for the accuracy of the information given or have any liability for defamation, invasion of privacy, negligence or any other claim in connection with any dissemination of information pursuant to this record check. 
Approved: _______  Denied: _______ 
Date: _______  ;hg; _____
Chief of Police 
Adult Entertainment Application 
STATEMENT OF APPLICANT 
"I DO SOLEMNLY SWEAR THAT I HAVE PROVIDED TRUE AND ACCURATE INFORMATION ON THIS APPLICATION; AND UNDERSTAND IF I HAVE BEEN UNTRUTHFUL IT WILL RESULT IN DENIAL OF MY LICENSE." 
IF MY APPLICATION IS APPROVED, I CERTIFY (PLEASE INITIAL EACH ONE) 
A. ;hg;HAVE RECEIVED A COPY OF THE ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ORDINANCE _____ . I UNDERSTAND THAT NO LICENSE WILL BE ISSUED UNTIL I HAVE RECEIVED A COPY OF THIS ORDINANCE. 
B. ;hg;I WILL ABIDE BY THE CITY OF METTER ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ORDINANCE _____ . 
C. ;hg;I UNDERSTAND ANY LICENSE GRANTED TO ME IS NOT TRANSFERABLE _____ 
D. ;hg;I WILL ALLOW MY BUSINESS PREMISES TO BE OPEN TO INSPECTION AT ANY REASONABLE TIME BY CITY OFFICIALS AUTHORIZED TO CONDUCT INSPECTION OF BUSINESS PREMISES _____ . 
E. ;hg;I UNDERSTAND THAT NO LICENSE WILL BE PROCESSED OR ISSUED UNTIL ALL FEES ARE PAID WITH THE CITY CLERK _____ . 
F. ;hg;I HAVE COMPLETED THE ATTACHED CONSENT FORM AND UNDERSTAND IT AUTHORIZES THE METTER POLICE DEPARTMENT THE RIGHT TO CHECK MY BACKGROUND _____ . 
G. ;hg;I UNDERSTAND IT IS MY RESPONSIBILITY TO CONTACT THE METTER POLICE DEPARTMENT FOR FINGERPRINT PROCESSING _____ . 
H. ;hg;I UNDERSTAND THAT I WILL NOT BE GRANTED A LICENSE UNTIL I HAVE PRESENTED A COPY OF MY CITY/STATE CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY _____ 
SIGNATURE OF APPLICANT          DATE _______ 
SWORN TO AND SUBSCRIBED BEFORE ME THIS _______ DAY OF _______, _______, _____ 
NOTARY PUBLIC            MY COMMISSION EXPIRES 
Chapter 9.20 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections: 

9.20.010 - Declaration of policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy and purpose of this chapter to assess complaints of noises alleged to exceed the ambient noise levels. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.020 - Liberal construction. 
    This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to effectuate its purposes. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.030 - Definitions. 
    The following words, phrases and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    "Ambient noise level" means the all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
    "Cumulative period" means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments which may be continuous or interrupted. 
    "Decibel" or "dB" means a unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten (10) times the logarithm to the base of ten (10) of this ratio. 
    "Hertz" means a unit of measurement of frequency, numerically equal to cycles per second. 
    "Impulsive noise" means a noise characterized by brief excursions of sound pressures whose peak levels are very much greater than the ambient noise level, such as might be produced by the impact of a pile driver, punch press or a drop hammer, typically with one second or less duration. 
    "Noise level" means the "A" weighed sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of twenty (20) micropascals. The unit of measurement shall be designated as dBA. 
    "Person" means a person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity, public or private in nature. 
    "Simple tone noise" or "pure tone noise" means a noise characterized by the presence of a predominant frequency or frequencies such as might be produced by whistle or hum. 
    "Sound level meter" means an instrument that meets or exceeds American National Standard Institute's Standard S1.4-1971 for Type 2 sound level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
    "Sound pressure level" means a sound pressure level of a sound, in decibels, as defined in ANSI Standards 51.2-1962 and 51.13-1921; that is, twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be 0.0002 dynes per square centimeter. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.040 - Prohibited generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.050 - Sound level measurement (general). 
A.  Any noise level measurements made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in Section 9.20.030 of this chapter. 
B.  The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the receiver's affected property. In the case of interior noise measurements, the windows shall be in normal seasonal configuration and the measurement shall be made at a point at least four feet from the wall, ceiling or floor nearest the affected occupied area. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.060 - Exterior noise standards. 
A.  The following noise standards unless otherwise specifically indicated in this chapter shall apply to residential properties: 
(1)  From 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. the exterior noise standard shall be fifty-five (55) dBA. 
(2)  From 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the exterior noise standard shall be fifty (50) dBA. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.070 - Interior noise standards. 
A.  In any apartment, condominium, townhouse, duplex or multiple dwelling unit it is unlawful for any person to create any noise from inside his or her unit that causes the noise level when measured in a neighboring unit during the periods 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. to exceed: 
(1)  Forty-five (45) dBA for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour; 
(2)  Fifty (50) dBA for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; 
(3)  Fifty-five (55) dBA for any period of time. 
B.  If the ambient noise level exceeds that permitted by any of the noise level categories specified in subsection A. of this section, the allowable noise limit shall be increased in five dBA increments in each category to encompass the ambient noise level. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.080 - Specific prohibitions. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
A.  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as to create any unreasonable loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device for an unreasonable period of time, or the use of any siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire or other emergency vehicle or equipment. 
B.  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle, or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
C.  Sales by "hawking" or "barking." No person shall offer for sale or sell anything by shouting or outcry within any residential or business area unless authorized by the city. 
D.  Regulation of sound equipment and sound amplifying equipment. 
1.  Except for activities for which a permit has been issued by the city under this section, no person shall so operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, or phonograph, amplifier, or loudspeaker, or similar device so as to: 
a)  Create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. Provided, however, bars, taverns, lounges, night clubs, dance halls, game rooms and similar activities which produce a noise that is plainly audible beyond the premises shall be deemed a noise disturbance in violation of this article; 
b)  Create a noise which is plainly audible to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated on a common carrier, or public right-of-way or public place or space. 
2.  Sound equipment permitted. Except as hereafter provided, no person shall use, operate or cause to be used or operated any radio, record player, tape deck or player, loud speaker, amplifier, sound truck or other device for producing, reproducing, or amplifying sounds, hereinafter referred to as "sound equipment," upon the public streets or in any building or upon any premises, public or private, so as to produce a noise disturbance. Provided, however, the following activities where authorized by the city may use sound equipment which produces a sound not to exceed ninety (90) db(A)'s when measured at a distance of fifty (50) feet from such equipment. Where the receiving land is residential such equipment may be used only from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
a)  Public health and safety purposes; 
b)  Fairs, carnivals and similar activities; 
c)  Parades, processions, excursions and associated festivities; 
d)  Outdoor concerts and theatrical performances; 
e)  Outdoor neighborhood functions such as lawn and pool parties, street dances and similar activities; 
f)  Civic and religious celebrations; 
g)  Recreational and athletic activities. 
E.  Loading and unloading. No person shall so load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, refuse, garbage cans, motor vehicles, or similar objects between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. 
F.  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on week days, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. 
If the building official should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest if such work were to be prohibited, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
G.  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court which the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
H.  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
I.  Motor noises . Any noise made by the motor of any automobile, truck, tractor, motorcycle, not reasonably required in the operation thereof under the circumstances and shall include but not be limited to backfiring and motor racing. 
J.  Yelling and shouting . Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or blowing of horns on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel, motel, apartment or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
K.  Tools. The use or operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any power saw, power planer, or other powered tool or appliance or saw or hammer, or other tool, so as to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel, motel, apartment, or other type of residence, or of any person in the vicinity. 
L.  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.090 - Exemptions. 
    The following activities shall be exempted from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  School bands, school athletic and school entertainment events. School entertainment events shall not include events sponsored by student organizations. 
B.  Activities conducted on parks and public playgrounds, provided such parks and public playgrounds are owned and operated by a public entity. 
C.  Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment related to or connected with emergency activities or emergency work. 
D.  Any noise sources associated with the maintenance and operation of aircraft or airports which are owned or operated by the United States. 
E.  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency. 
F.  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. 
G.  Agricultural activities, exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals or birds. 
H.  Rail and air transportation and public mass transportation vehicles. 
I.  Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes. 
J.  The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons or in fireworks displays for which a permit has been issued. 
K.  Emergency work or repair work by governmental entities and public initiative. 
L.  The emission of sound in sounding the car horn by a mobile telephone. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.100. - Off-road vehicles. 
    It is unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle or recreational off-road vehicle on or off a public road in such a manner that the noise level exceeds the exterior noise standards specified in Section 9.20.070 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.110 - Outdoor recreation activities. 
A.  Outdoor recreational activities involving amplified sound, including but not limited to athletic events, sporting events, entertainment events and concerts, may create excessive noise which is detrimental to the public health, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city and its environs. 
B.  The city's existing noise regulations, which require extended off-site measurements of the sound rather than measurements at its source, are very cumbersome and expensive to enforce, especially in connection with outdoor recreational activities. 
C.  Limiting sound levels of outdoor activities to ninety (90) dba leq is necessary to protect the public health, safety, welfare and the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city. 
D.  Limiting sound levels at the source is content neutral. It helps to avoid the problem of complaints being received, and therefore measurements being made and enforcement undertaken, only in connection with certain kinds of activities, or certain kinds of music, which some people may consider objectionable and not other kinds of activities or music which may be just as loud. 
E.  A variance procedure can be devised to raise the sound limit or modify the time restrictions upon a showing that a facility, because of its design, location or other characteristics, is capable of handling higher sound levels without substantially increasing the likelihood that violations of the other provisions of this chapter will occur. 
F.  It is unlawful for any person to conduct, or permit to be conducted on its property, any outdoor recreational activity, including, but not limited to, entertainment events and concerts at which amplified noise, amplified music, or amplified sound exceeding the following levels is created: ninety (90) dba leq. The noise, music or sound shall be measured at the sound booth or other reasonable location which is not more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the source. Every person conducting, or permitting to be conducted, on its property, any outdoor recreational activity shall, upon request, permit the City of Metter Police Department, or the chief's designee, to place a sound level monitor (with or without an accompanying staff member) at a location described in this subsection to monitor sound levels. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.120 - Permit to exceed. 
A.  Generally. A person or persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter, upon obtaining a "permit to exceed" from the city. 
B.  Action by the police chief. The police chief or his/her designee shall act upon all applications for permits to exceed. In considering and acting upon such application, the police chief shall consider, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  The nature of the requested activity; 
(2)  The previous experience with the applicant; 
(3)  The time of the event; 
(4)  Other activities in the vicinity of the proposed location; 
(5)  The cultural or social benefits of the proposed activity; 
(6)  The effect of the activity on any adjacent residential property. 
C.  Application and permit fee. An application for a permit to exceed must be submitted to the city at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event for which such permit is needed. A fee in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) must be paid at the time the application is submitted. 
D.  Security deposit. A deposit in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) must be paid at the time an application for a permit to exceed is submitted. The purpose of this deposit is to secure the performance of the party requesting the permit to exceed. Upon the satisfaction of all of the conditions of the permit to exceed, such deposit shall be immediately refunded to the applicant. The application permit fee and security deposit should be submitted to: 
Re: Permit to exceed 
Metter Police Department 
10 Candler Street 
Metter, GA 30439 
(912) 685-5437 
E.  Conditions of permits. A permit to exceed shall specify the date, time period and location to which it applies. The permit shall also prescribe the conditions necessary to minimize the adverse effects the event may have upon the community or surrounding neighborhoods. The police chief may require, but shall not be limited to, the following conditions: 
(1)  No sound speakers shall be set up more than ten (10) feet off the ground. 
(2)  That permit holders change the arrangement of the amplifying equipment or sound instruments upon the request of the city police department so as to minimize the disturbance to others resulting from the position or orientation of the amplifying equipment. 
(3)  Adequate provisions to insure the proper cleanup of any litter resulting from the event for which the permit to exceed was obtained, 
(4)  If over fifty (50) people attend the event for which the permit to exceed was obtained, adequate private security shall be provided for the purpose of crowd and traffic control. The adequacy of such private security shall be determined by the city police department. 
F.  Limit on permits. Permits to exceed shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Permits will only be granted for temporary purposes not to exceed eight continuous hours in any one time period; 
(2)  No more than two permits shall be allowed per address (person or group of persons) during any six-month period. January 1 through June 30 shall constitute one six-month period. July 1 through December 31 shall constitute the second six-month period. 
(3)  No permit shall be granted for the time period between 1:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. 
G.  Cooperation. Permit holder(s) shall agree to cooperate with the city police department in enforcing the Noise Ordinance [this chapter] by having the signer(s) of the permit available at the site of the event during the entire time period for which a permit has been issued and capable of assisting the police in enforcing the Noise Ordinance. 
H.  Enforcement. The permit to exceed shall be revoked and the security deposit forfeited if: 
(1)  The signer(s) of the permit fails to be present during the entire time period for which the permit has been issued; or 
(2)  The signer(s) of the permit fails to assist the police in enforcing this chapter; or 
(3)  The signer(s) of the permit fails to comply with any of the conditions of the permit to exceed. 
I.  Effect of permit revocation. Once the permit to exceed has been revoked, the person or group of persons that obtained the permit shall no longer be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
J.  Limitation on Section 9.20.130. The provisions of this section apply only when a person or group of persons has obtained a permit to exceed, and only on the date and during the time period set forth in such permit. The provisions of this chapter apply at all other times. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.130 - Administration. 
    The enforcement of this chapter shall be the responsibility of the chief of police and/or his or her designee. The police chief shall be responsible for: 
A.  Training his or her staff in the proper use and maintenance of the sound level meter; 
B.  Training field inspectors; 
C.  Procuring measuring instruments and training inspectors in their calibration and operation. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.140 - Variance procedure. 
A.  The owner or operator of a noise source which violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an application with the city manager or his designee for a variance from the provisions thereof. The application shall set forth all actions taken to comply with this chapter, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method for achieving compliance and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. If the applicant determines that compliance cannot be feasibly achieved at all, the application shall also set forth the reasons for such determination, the actions which have been taken to comply with this chapter, a proposed method for complying as nearly as is feasible and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. Said application shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount established by resolution of the city council. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership or several fixed sources on a single property may be combined into one application. 
B.  The city shall hold a public hearing on the application for a variance. Notice of the application for a variance and the hearing shall be given in the same manner as notice is given of a hearing on a variance pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
C.  After the public hearing, the city council may grant a variance if the city manager or his designee finds that strict compliance with the requirement of this chapter will cause practical difficulties, unnecessary hardship or unreasonable expense. A variance may be for a limited period and may be subject to any other terms, conditions and requirements as the city council may deem reasonable to achieve maximum compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such terms, conditions and requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, limitations on noise levels and operating hours. 
D.  Each variance shall set forth the approved method of achieving maximum compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment. The city council shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise, the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise, the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work, the economic factors related to age and useful life of equipment and the general public interest and welfare. 
E.  The city council shall consider all facts relating to whether strict compliance with the requirement of this chapter will cause practical difficulties, unnecessary hardship or unreasonable expense. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.150 - Violations. 
A.  Upon the receipt of a compliant from any person, the chief of police or their duly authorized representatives may investigate and assess whether the alleged noise levels exceed the noise standards set forth in this chapter. If such officers have reason to believe that any provision(s) of this chapter has been violated, they shall cause a citation to be served upon the alleged violator. Such citation shall specify the provision(s) of this chapter alleged to have been violated and the facts alleged to constitute a violation, including dBA readings noted and the time and place of their detection. Upon conviction, the violation shall constitute a misdemeanor. Each such violation committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
B.  The administrative penalty for each violation of this chapter shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) if the violator is an individual and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) if the violator is a firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation of other entity, public or private in nature. 
    In addition to the above penalty, if any firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or other entity is found guilty of violating this chapter twice within a twelve-month period, its occupational tax certificate (business license) shall be suspended for a period of thirty (30) days to begin on the date of the disposition of the second violation. A third violation within a twelve-month period shall result in an occupational tax certificate (business license) suspension for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days. 
C.  Citations issued pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the Magistrate Court of Candler County, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.160 - Other remedies. 
A.  Provisions of this chapter are to be construed as an added remedy of abatement of the public nuisance declared and not in conflict or derogation of any other action, proceedings or remedies provided by law. 
B.  Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the duly constituted authorities of the city shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence actions or proceedings for the abatement or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law and shall take such steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate such nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
9.20.170 - Enactment. 
    This chapter shall be and remain in full force and effect from and after its date and adoption on two separate readings 
(Ord. of 6-11-07) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
10.04 Traffic Code 10.08 Traffic-Control Devices 10.12 Stopping, Standing and Parking 10.16 Alcoholic Beverage Containers in Vehicles 10.20 Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations 10.24 Speed Limits 10.28 Motorized Carts  
Chapter 10.04 - TRAFFIC CODE 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - State law adopted. 
    Pursuant to OCGA Sections 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, OCGA Chapter 40-6 is adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 12-1) 
10.04.020 - Duty to enforce. 
    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Prior code § 12-2 (part)) 
10.04.030 - Direction of traffic by police, firemen. 
A.  Officers of the police department are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
B.  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Prior code § 12-3) 
10.04.040 - Obedience to police and fire department officials. 
    No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order of a police officer or fire department official when directing traffic. 
(Prior code § 12-4) 
10.04.050 - Summons to specify violation charged. 
    Every notice to appear, complaint or summons to a person charged with a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall specify the violation with which such person is charged. 
(Prior code § 12-5) 
Chapter 10.08 - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 

10.08.010 - Authority to place and maintain. 
    The chief of police shall place and maintain, nonelectrically operated traffic-control devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city to make effective the provisions of this chapter and such ordinances and, with the approval of the mayor and council, may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city or under state law, or to guide or warn traffic. 
(Prior code § 12-31) 
10.08.020 - Obedience to official traffic-control devices. 
    The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(Prior code § 12-38) 
10.08.030 - Designation of crosswalks-Establishment of safety zones-Marking of traffic lanes. 
    The chief of police is authorized: 
A.  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where in his opinion there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as he may deem necessary; 
B.  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as he may deem necessary for the protection of pedestrians; 
C.  To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as he may deem advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and the laws of the state, and to indicate by white lines on street pavements parking spaces for vehicles. 
(Prior code § 12-32) 
10.08.040 - Restricted turn signs. 
    The chief of police is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right-turn, left-turn or U-turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. 
(Prior code § 12-33) 
10.08.050 - Turning markers. 
    The chief of police is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. 
(Prior code § 12-34) 
10.08.060 - Stop signs-Reduced speed signs. 
A.  Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the city designates or describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to place and maintain a stop sign on every street intersecting such through street or that portion thereof described and designated as such by this chapter or any ordinance of the city. 
B.  The chief of police is authorized to determine and designate intersections where particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or, in the event the chief of police determines that reduced speed rather than a stop is adequate for safe operation at any such intersection, he shall determine such safe speed by engineering investigation and shall erect signs upon the approaches to such intersection giving notice of such speed. 
C.  Every such stop sign shall bear the word "Stop" in letters of not less than six inches in height. Every stop sign shall be located as near as practical at the property line of the street at the entrance to which the stop must be made. 
(Prior code § 12-35) 
10.08.070 - Limited parking signs. 
    Whenever by this chapter or any ordinance of the city any time limit parking is imposed, it shall be the duty of the chief of police to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. 
(Prior code § 12-36) 
10.08.080 - Manual and specifications for traffic-control devices. 
    All traffic-control devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the Department of Transportation of the state or as provided by the laws of the state or ordinances of the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part); prior code § 12-37) 
Chapter 10.12 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Marked parking spaces. 
    On all streets in the city where parking spaces have been marked, motor vehicles must be parked as indicated by such marking. 
(Prior code § 12-55) 
10.12.020 - Loading and unloading on streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use space on the streets of Metter for the purpose of loading and unloading trucks or for transferring a load from one truck to another truck. 
(Prior code § 12-56) 
10.12.030 - Parking in center of streets. 
    It is unlawful for any person to park any type of vehicle in the center of any of the streets of Metter. 
(Prior code § 12-57) 
10.12.040 - Parking on grass plots. 
    It is unlawful for any person to park any kind of motor vehicle, the body thereof or any part thereof on the grass plot between the streets and sidewalks in Metter. 
(Prior code § 12-58) 
10.12.050 - Parking vehicles overnight. 
    It is unlawful for any person to leave any trailer-truck or other motor vehicle parked overnight on the streets of Metter so as to in any manner interfere with the free use of such streets by other vehicles. 
(Prior code § 12-60) 
10.12.060 - Double parking. 
    It is unlawful for any person to double park on North Broad Street between Kennedy and Terrell Streets, or on South Broad Street, or on Lewis Street, or on Rountree Street between Virtia and Lillian Streets, or on Kennedy Street between Virtia and Lillian Streets, or on College Street between Pine and Candler Streets. 
(Prior code § 12-61) 
Chapter 10.16 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTAINERS IN VEHICLES 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term: 
    "Alcoholic beverage" means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, wine or fortified wine. 
    "Open container" means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
    "Operator" means any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a motor vehicle. 
    "Passenger" means any occupant(s) other than the operator. 
(Prior code § 4-68(2)) 
10.16.020 - Open containers prohibited in vehicles. 
    It is unlawful and punishable as provided in this chapter for any person to posses an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in the city or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated in the city within the area regulated by this chapter, except as provided in this chapter, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not locked in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle. 
B.  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(Prior code § 4-68(3)) 
10.16.030 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to a passenger of the vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's drivers license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state, and provided that the trip does not originate in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 4-68(4)) 
10.16.040 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
B.  Jurisdiction over violations of this chapter shall lie in the municipal court of the city. 
(Prior code § 4-68(5)) 
Chapter 10.20 - MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.20.010 - Driving or riding on sidewalk. 
    No person shall drive any automobile, motorcycle or motor vehicle, or any horsedrawn vehicle, or ride by bicycle, along or across any of the sidewalks of the city, except where it is necessary to cross such sidewalks at intersections of streets or alleys, or at entrances to parking, storing, filling or repairing places. 
(Prior code § 12-11) 
10.20.020 - Clinging to moving vehicles. 
    Any person riding upon any motorcycle, scooter, coaster, sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Prior code § 12-12) 
10.20.030 - Towing. 
    No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed sixteen (16) feet in length. 
(Prior code § 12-13) 
Chapter 10.24 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 

10.24.010 - Speed limits. 
    The following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
Table A
ON-SYSTEM HIGHWAYS 
State Route Within the City/Town Limits of and/or School Name From Mile Point To Mile Point Length in Miles Speed Limit SR 23 Metter 0.01 mi. south of CR 20 Carlton Brown Rd. (S. Metter City Limits) 5.75 SR 404/I-16 6.43 0.68 55 SR 23 Metter SR 404/I-16 6.43 CS 556 Jeanette St. 7.52 1.09 45 SR 23 Metter CS 556 Jeanette St. 7.52 CS 597 Hope Dr. 9.29 1.77 35 SR 23 Metter CS 597 Hope Dr. 9.29 0.10 mi. north of CS 607 Willow Lake Dr. (N. Metter City Limits) 9.87 0.58 45 SR 46 Metter 0.25 mi. east of CR 12 Metter Loop Rd. (W. Metter City Limits) 8.41 CS 606 Leslie St. 8.73 0.32 55 SR 46 Metter CS 606 Leslie St. 8.73 CS 594 Lucky St. 9.14 0.41 50 SR 46 Metter CS 594 Lucky St. 9.14 0.01 mi. east of CS 551 Daughtry St. 9.39 0.25 45 SR 46 Metter 0.01 mi. east of CS 551 Daughtry St. 9.39 SR 23 9.75 0.36 35 SR 46 Metter This segment of roadway runs common with SR 23 from M.P. 9.75 to M.P. 10.00. SR 46 Metter SR 23 10.00 CS 587 MLK Blvd. 10.32 0.32 35 SR 46 Metter CS 587 MLK Blvd. 10.32 CS 636 Wallace St. 11.05 0.73 45 SR 46 Metter CS 636 Wallace St. 11.05 0.14 mi. east of CS 12 Hiawatha Rd. (E. Metter City Limits) 11.40 0.35 50 SR 121 Metter SR 46 8.17 CS 600 Turner St. 8.80 0.63 35 SR 121 Metter CS 600 Turner St. 8.80 CS 607 Willow Lake Dr. 9.33 0.53 45 SR 121 Metter CS 607 Willow Lake Dr. 9.33 0.08 mi. north of CS 632 Greenwood Dr. (N. Metter City Limits) 9.73 0.40 50 SR 129 Metter 0.23 mi. north of CR 238 Harmon Woods Rd. (S. Metter City Limits) 7.29 0.24 mi. south of Lanier St. 7.75 0.46 55 SR 129 Metter 0.17 mi. south of CS 626 Dairy Park Rd. 7.75 CS 556 Jeanette St. 8.44 0.69 45 SR 129 Metter CS 556 Jeanette St. 8.44 End at SR 46 9.08 0.64 35 SR 404 I-16 Metter 1.28 mi. west of SR 23 / SR 121 102.0 0.02 mi. east of SR 129 104.8 2.80 70  
Signs to be erected by the department of transportation. 
TABLE B
OFF-SYSTEM HIGHWAYS 
Road Name Within the City/Town Limits of and/or School Name From To Length in Miles Speed Limit Airport Rd. Metter SR 23 Entrance to Airport 0.60 35 Aline Rd. Metter SR 46 Register St. 0.58 35 Boston St Metter Ellis St. End of pavement 0.21 30 Brannen Dr. Metter SR 23 SR 121 0.60 35 Central Ave. Metter Lucky St. Register St. 0.68 30 Central Ave. Metter Register St. Williams St. 0.20 30 Central Ave. Metter W. City Limits Lucky St. 0.65 45 College St. Metter Jeanette St. Pine St. 0.40 30 College St. Metter Pine St. SR 46 0.40 30 Daniel St. Metter SR 23 SR 121 0.30 30 Ellis St. Metter Central Ave. Huiett St. 0.71 30 Fortner Rd. Metter SR 23 Hiawatha St. 1.30 35 Hiawatha St. Metter College St. Terrell St. 0.40 30 Hiawatha St. Metter Leslie St. College St. 0.85 35 Huiett St. Metter Ellis St. End of pavement 0.25 30 Jeanette St. Metter Leroy St. Williams St. 0.40 30 Kennedy St. Metter Jeanette St. Eldridge St. 1.22 30 Lee St. Metter High St. SR 23 0.25 30 Lee St. Metter SR 121 MLK 0.30 30 Leslie St. Metter Hiawatha St. SR 46 0.45 35 Lillian St. Metter High St. SR 23 0.30 30 Lillian St. Metter SR 23 SR 121 0.24 30 Lillian St. Metter MLK Elmer St. 0.60 30 Lillian St. Metter Elmer St. SR 46 0.60 35 Lillian St. 
* 
School Zone 
* Metter 
Metter Elementary School Bay St. 0.13 mi. west of Elmer St. 0.25 25 Lytell St. Metter SR 129 Fortner Rd. 0.80 30 Mincey St. Metter Ellis St. End of pavement 0.20 30 MLK Jr. Blvd. Metter SR 46 Washington St. 0.30 30 MLK Jr. Blvd. Metter Washington St. Whitaker St. 0.20 35 MLK Jr. Blvd. Metter Whitaker St. Metter N. City Limit 0.80 45 Register St. Metter Pine St. SR 46 0.30 30 Register St. 
* 
School Zone 
* Metter 
Metter Middle School Pine St. Vertia St. 0.20 25 Rountree St Metter Jeanette St. SR 46 0.68 30 Smith St. Metter Ellis St. End of Pavement 0.24 30 S. Terrell St. Metter SR 46 E. Pine St. 0.28 25 S. Terrell St. Metter E. Pine St. E. Hiawatha St. 0.25 30 S. Williams St. Metter W. Pine St. W. Hiawatha St. 0.31 25 Vertia St. Metter Register St. S. Kennedy St. 0.20 30 Vertia St. 
* 
School Zone 
* Metter 
Metter Middle School Register St. S. Kennedy St. 0.20 25 Willow Lake Rd. Metter SR 23 Brannen Dr. 0.30 30 Willow Lake Rd. Metter SR 121 Patterson St. 0.36 30  
*SCHOOL ZONES ARE EFFECTIVE* 
    A.M. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time- SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
    P.M. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time- SCHOOL DAYS ONLY. 
      
    Signs to be erected by the city of Metter. 
(Ord. of 10-15-13; Ord. 01-03; Ord. 97-09) 
Chapter 10.28 - MOTORIZED CARTS 
Sections: 

10.28.010 - Definitions. 
    "Motorized cart" means every motor vehicle having not less than three wheels and an unladen weight of one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds or less and which cannot operate at more than twenty (20) miles per hour, and designed to carry no more than the recommended manufacturing seating capacity, and shall be consistent with the definition as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1(32). This includes golf carts and similar types of self-propelled vehicles. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 1, 9-9-13: Ord. 99-13 § 1) 
10.28.020 - License and registration required. 
    Motorized carts may be operated within the city only by persons sixteen (16) years of age or older and who possess a valid Georgia driver's license and only after the owner has completed the registration process pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-331(b). Registration fees are charged by the city to cover the costs of implementing and maintaining this Article. It shall be the duty of every owner of a motorized cart that is operated on public roads, recreation paths, rights-of-way or other public property in the jurisdiction of the city to register the motorized cart with the city within ten (10) days of the date of purchase/acquisition. There shall be a registration and user fee as set by the mayor and council for such registration. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 2, 9-9-13: Ord. 99-13 § 2) 
10.28.030 - Registration application and fee. 
A.  Registration with the city shall include a record of the model, make, and vehicle identification number or serial number on such motorized cart, the name and address of the owner, a contact phone number, and any other such information as the city shall require, all of which shall be maintained at city hall. A person desiring to register a motorized cart shall bring documentation setting forth a description of such cart to city hall and complete an application of registration of such cart. 
B.  Upon registration, the clerk shall issue a numerical decal to be applied to the rear of such cart so as to be plainly visible. 
C.  Before any motorized cart may be operated within the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. This decal issued shall be nontransferable from the cart for which it is issued. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 3, 9-9-13: Ord. 99-13 § 3) 
10.28.040 - Emblem required. 
    Before any motorized cart may be operated within the city, the cart must have affixed thereto an emblem as required by O.C.G.A. Sec. 40-8-4. 
(Ord. 99-13 § 4) 
10.28.050 - Designated crossing. 
    Motorized carts which are in compliance with Sections 10.28.030 and 10.28.040 may be operated on any city street within the city which are not within the jurisdiction of the Georgia Department of Transportation and may only cross streets or roads within the State Highway System at intersections or crossings designated for that purpose by the Department of Transportation. The designated crossings will be at the following locations: 
A.  State Route 46 at Williams Street; 
B.  State Route 121/23 at Lee Street; 
C.  State Route 129 at Pine Street; 
D.  State Route 121 at Lee Street; 
E.  State Route 23 at Lee Street. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 4, 9-9-13: Ord. 01-04: Ord. 99-13 § 5) 
10.28.060 - General regulations. 
A.  Motorized carts may only be operated on public roads, recreational paths, rights-of-way or other public property which are part of the city's street system during daylight hours unless the motorized cart is equipped with functional headlights and taillights. Additionally, motorized carts must also be equipped with a flashing or rotating yellow or amber light mounted on the top. Motorized carts shall not be operated on public roads, paths, or rights-of-way of the city between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. 
B.  All occupants of a motorized cart must wear seatbelts at all times, if available. 
C.  Motorized carts shall not be operated on the sidewalks. 
D.  Motorized carts will only be operated by individuals who are at least sixteen (16) years of age and possess a valid driver's license. Restrictions placed upon licensed motorists shall apply in the same manner as if operating a motor vehicle. 
E.  The maximum occupancy of a motorized cart traveling on public roads, recreational paths, rights-of-way or other public property shall be one person per designated seat. 
F.  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the designated public roads, recreational paths, rights-of-way, or other public property of the city. 
G.  Temporary suspension of all or part of this section may be granted by the city council for special events. 
H.  A city employee on city business, in a city vehicle, and in the exercise of his/her duties, may operate gasoline, diesel fuel, or battery-operated powered vehicles or motorized carts upon the city's streets, parks, parking lots, and other public properties within the city limits. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 5, 9-9-13: Ord. 99-13 §§ 6-9) 
10.28.070 - Liability. 
    The owner or operator of a motorized cart is liable for his or her own actions. Any person who operates or owns a motorized cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per person for bodily injury, fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per accident for bodily injury to two or more people, and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per accident for property damage. Proof of insurance coverage must be provided at the time of registration and maintained on the motorized cart at all times. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 6, 9-9-13: Ord. 99-13 § 10) 
10.28.080 - Violation-Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for a motorized cart to be operated on the streets of the city except as expressly authorized in this Section and every person convicted of a violation shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than twelve (12) months or both. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 7, 9-9-13: Ord. 99-13 § 11) 
10.28.090 - Effective date. 
    The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become effective immediately upon receiving supplies for registration of carts, but no later than thirty (30) days after passage. 
(Ord. 99-13 § 12) 
10.28.100 - Signs. 
    The city shall post signs giving notice of the existence of operating standards along appropriate public streets. 
(Ord. 13-01, § 8, 9-9-13) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters: 
12.04 Streets and Sidewalks Generally 12.08 Parades, Meetings and Assemblies in Public Places 12.12 Parks and Recreational Facilities 12.16 Urban Forestry  
Chapter 12.04 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

12.04.010 - Street and lanes department to supervise. 
    The streets, sidewalks, bridges and alleys of the city shall be under the general supervision of the chairman of the street and lanes department. 
(Prior code § 21-1) 
12.04.020 - Payment of construction expenses. 
    All expenses paid by the city of working, laying out, opening or bridging, curbing or improving the streets, lanes or alleys of the city, unless otherwise provided for by the council, shall be paid out of the general funds of the city arising from taxation or otherwise, by direction of the council. 
(Prior code § 21-2) 
12.04.030 - Encroachments-Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any building or structure which encroaches upon any public street or property, or to erect any poles or wires or maintain any poles or wires over any public place, street, alley or other public way, without having first secured a permit from the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 21-3) 
12.04.040 - Display of merchandise on sidewalks. 
    It shall be permissible and lawful for merchants and dealers in various and sundry types of merchandise to display their merchandise on the sidewalk in front of their places of business provided such merchandise does not extend more than twenty-four (24) inches from the front wall of the building occupied by the merchant or dealer, and provided the placing of such merchandise or articles for sale on the sidewalk does not interfere with the free and uninterrupted passage by the public along the sidewalk. No merchandise, articles for sale or other items shall be placed on or among any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or passageways within the city if the placing of same will interfere with the free use and passage of the public along said street, alley, sidewalk or passageway. 
(Prior code § 21-4) 
12.04.050 - Excavations-Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to dig up, break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner break up any street, or to make or cause to be made any excavation in or under the surface of any street for any purpose, or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit from the mayor and council. 
B.  The excavation permit fee to be collected by the city clerk shall be in an amount fixed by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 21-5) 
Chapter 12.08 - PARADES, MEETINGS AND ASSEMBLIES IN PUBLIC PLACES* 
Sections: 

12.08.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Activity" means a parade or public meeting or assembly. 
    "Funeral procession" means a single direct movement from a mortuary or church to the place of burial of a human body, under direction of an authorized funeral director. 
    "Parade" means a march or procession of any kind. 
    "Public meeting or assembly" means a planned or organized gathering of a group of persons, or any ceremony, show, exhibition or pageant which may reasonably be expected to result in the gathering of a group of persons, upon any public street, park or other public grounds. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 1) 
12.08.020 - Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, aid, participate in, form, start or carry on any parade or public meeting or assembly, as defined in this chapter, in or upon any public street, park or other public grounds in the city unless and until a permit to conduct such meeting, assembly or parade has been obtained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except as herein provided. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 2) 
12.08.030 - Exceptions. 
    This chapter shall not apply to any of the following: 
A.  Funeral processions; 
B.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
C.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such activity is authorized by the school district and is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise such activity. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 3) 
12.08.040 - Application. 
    Applications for permits under this chapter must be filed with the chief of police not less than five days in advance of the proposed activity. Late applications may be accepted if filed sufficiently in advance of the date of the proposed activity to enable the chief of police to determine that such activity will meet the requirements set forth in Section 12.08.050 of this chapter. This application shall be in writing and shall give the following information: 
A.  The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized head of such organization shall be stated; 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be directly in charge of and responsible for the activity; 
C.  The purpose of the activity; 
D.  The date, time and location or route of the proposed activity; 
E.  The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity and the number and kind of vehicles, equipment and animals which will be used; 
F.  Plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including times and locations thereof; 
G.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
H.  A statement as to whether a permit has been requested or obtained from any other city within which such activity shall commence, terminate or occur in part; 
I.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a determination of the findings required by Section 12.08.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 4) 
12.08.050 - Required findings. 
    The chief of police or his designated representative shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter when from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained he finds that: 
A.  The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic; 
B.  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas where the activity will take place or areas contiguous to such area; 
C.  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire, or the movement of other emergency equipment; 
D.  The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; and 
E.  Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the goods, wares or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 5) 
12.08.060 - Conditions to permit. 
    The chief of police shall have authority to impose such conditions as are necessary to insure that all of the findings mentioned in Section 12.08.050 of this chapter shall exist during the continuation of the activity. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 6) 
12.08.070 - Prior application. 
    If a prior permit application shall have been made for an activity proposed to be held at the same time or place, the chief of police may refuse approval of the later application. In case of such refusal, he shall forthwith send the applicant written notice that he may apply for an alternate time and place. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 7) 
12.08.080 - Notice of issuance or denial. 
    The chief of police shall act upon the permit application within three days of the filing thereof. If he disapproves of the application, he shall mail to the applicant within that three-day period notice of the denial and the reason for it. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 8) 
12.08.090 - Appeal procedure. 
    The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the city council. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within two days after receipt of notice of the denial. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 9) 
12.08.100 - Contents of permit. 
    Conditions to the issuance of any permit shall be set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 10) 
12.08.110 - Duty of permittee. 
A.  A permittee under this chapter shall comply with all terms and conditions of such permit and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  The written permit obtained pursuant to this ordinance shall be carried by the person heading or leading the activity for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 11) 
12.08.120 - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief of police may revoke any permit issued under this chapter upon the failure of the permittee to comply with the terms and conditions of such permit or if the activity, because of the manner in which it is being conducted, or for any other reason, is jeopardizing those elements of the public safety or welfare set forth in Section 12.08.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 12) 
12.08.130 - Public conduct during a meeting, assembly or parade. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to unreasonably obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or public meeting or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in such a parade, meeting or assembly for which a permit has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. 97-6 § 13) 
Chapter 12.12 - PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES 
Sections: 

12.12.010 - Parks designated. 
A.  Central Park. The space surrounding the Central of Georgia Depot and bounded on the north by North Broad Street; on the east by Lewis Street; on the south by South Broad Street; and on the west by Rountree Street shall be designated, named, set apart and known as Central Park. 
B.  East Central Park. The space bounded on the north by North Broad Street; on the east by Leroy Street; on the south by South Broad Street; and on the west by Lewis Street shall be designated, named, set apart and known as East Central Park. 
C.  West Central Park. The space bounded on the north by North Broad Street; on the east by Rountree Street; on the south by South Broad Street; and on the west by Kennedy Street shall be designated, named, set apart and known as West Central Park. 
(Prior code §§ 14-1-14-3) 
12.12.020 - Maintenance of parks. 
    The parks designated and named in this chapter shall be maintained and kept up by the city, aided by such cooperation as may from time to time be given by garden clubs and other civic organizations of the city. 
(Prior code § 14-4) 
12.12.030 - Use of grounds and facilities in general. 
    Each person using the public parks and grounds shall clean up all debris, extinguish all fires when such fires are permitted and leave the premises in good order and the facilities in a neat and sanitary condition. 
(Prior code § 14-5) 
12.12.040 - Prohibited acts generally. 
    It is unlawful for any person using city parks, grounds or facilities to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
A.  Wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any buildings; bridges; tables; benches; fireplaces; railings; paving or paving material; waterlines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; signs, notices or placards whether temporary or permanent; monuments; stakes, posts or other boundary markers; or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal; 
B.  Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in any body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer or drain flowing into such waters, any substance, matter or thing-liquid or solid-which will or may result in the pollution of such waters; 
C.  Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or any part thereof; 
D.  Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; or remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs, nest or young of any other animal; 
E.  Bring in or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where these are provided; and where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for the presence of same, and properly disposed of elsewhere; 
F.  Violate any rule for the use of the park, made or approved by the council; 
G.  Prevent any person from using any park, or any of facilities, or interfere with such use in compliance with this chapter and with the rules applicable to such use; 
H.  Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this chapter or may be hereafter adopted; 
I.  Dress or undress in any place except in such bathing houses or structures as may be provided for that purpose. 
J.  Place any vehicle in any park, grounds, or parking area for the purpose of sale. For the purpose of this section, a vehicle is presumed to be parked for the purpose of sale if there is visibly placed upon it a "for sale" sign, sales price, "as-is" sign, telephone number, window display, dealership tag, or any other tag, sign or marking otherwise indicating that said vehicle is offered or exposed for the purpose of sale, barter, or exchange. 
(Amendment dated 8-9-10: amended by ord. dated 10-12-98; prior code § 14-6) 
12.12.050 - Buildings in parks prohibited. 
    The erection or otherwise placing of any buildings or other structures of any kind or description in or upon any of the city parks is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 14-7) 
12.12.060 - Picnic areas and use. 
    No person in a park shall use any portion of the picnic areas, or of any of the buildings or structures therein, for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(Prior code § 14-8) 
12.12.070 - Games. 
    It is unlawful for any person to take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model air-planes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or potentially dangerous games such as football, baseball and soccer is prohibited except on fields, courts or areas provided therefor. 
(Prior code § 14-9) 
12.12.080 - Fires. 
    It is unlawful for any person to build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the director of public works. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other inflammable material within any park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Prior code § 14-10) 
12.12.090 - Animals. 
    It is unlawful for any person to bring any dangerous animal into any park, and it is unlawful to permit any dog to be in any park unless such dog is on a leash. 
(Prior code § 14-11) 
12.12.100 - Automobiles. 
    It is unlawful to drive or park any automobile except on a street, driveway or parking lot in any park; or to park or leave any such vehicle in any place other than one established for public parking. 
(Prior code § 14-12) 
12.12.110 - Sales. 
    It is unlawful for any person to vend, sell, peddle or offer for sale any commodity or article within any park without a permit from the council. 
(Prior code § 14-13) 
12.12.120 - Alcoholic beverages. 
    It is unlawful for any person within any park to have in his possession, custody or control any alcoholic beverage. 
(Prior code § 14-14) 
12.12.130 - Signs. 
    It is unlawful for any person to paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park, except that these provisions shall not apply to any properly authorized government official in pursuit of any official duty. 
(Prior code § 14-15) 
Chapter 12.16 - URBAN FORESTRY 
Sections: 

12.16.010 - Title and jurisdiction. 
    This chapter shall be known as the urban forest/tree ordinance. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public lands within the City of Metter. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 1; Ord. of 4-10-06, § 1) 
12.16.020 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The intent of this chapter is to: 
1.  Recognize trees to be a valuable asset providing a healthier and more beautiful environment in which to live; 
2.  Recognize that trees are economically beneficial in attracting new residents providing shade and cooling effects as well as preventing air noise and pollution; 
3.  Recognize that trees also prevent erosion and assist in flood control; 
4.  Establish standards limiting the removal of, and insuring the replacement of trees sufficient to safeguard the ecological and aesthetic environment necessary to a healthy happy community; and 
5.  Not be punitive or to cause hardship to any individual, private or public company that uses care and diligence to protect trees within the city. 
B.  The public purpose of this chapter is to: 
1.  Protect the aesthetic quality provided by the natural tree cover on tracts of land being converted to urban development; 
2.  Protect and enhance the aesthetic quality provided by street and park trees; 
3.  Prevent soil erosion and reductions in the drainage holding capacity of land; 
4.  Prevent increases and promote reductions in air pollution and carbon dioxide levels in the air; 
5.  Provide for future planting of trees on city property; 
6.  Provide for penalties for violations of this chapter; 
7.  Establish a board to develop a plan to implement the purposes of this chapter and to study and investigate any matter or subject which will promote the objectives of this chapter, and to make recommendations as may be appropriate resulting from such studies and investigations; 
8.  Establish tree protection regulations and a tree planting program in order to preserve, protect and enhance trees as a most valuable natural resource for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens, thus making Metter a better place to live; and 
9.  Provide for other purposes necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 2) 
12.16.030 - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, unless the context herein specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular include the plural; the word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory; and the masculine includes the feminine. 
    "City" and "city of Metter" mean that area within the corporate boundaries of the city of Metter, Georgia. 
    "Department" means the city's department of public works. 
    "Injure" and "injury" mean any act which damages a tree, including but not limited to impact, cutting, carving, transplanting or knocking over any tree on a public street or right-of-way and as described in this section. 
    "Landmark tree" means a tree so designated pursuant to Section 12.16.080 of this chapter. 
    "Maintenance" means pruning, mulching, clipping, watering, staking, spraying, propping, fertilizing, bracing, treating for disease or injury, and any other acts which promote the life, growth, health or beauty of the city's trees. 
    "Park trees" means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in the city parks and all other areas owned by the city or available to the public as a park provided by the city. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    "Planting" means putting or setting into the ground or into a container to grow. 
    "Removal" means any intentional or negligent act which causes a tree or landscape material to decline and/or die within a period of three years, including but not limited to damage inflicted upon the root system of a tree by the application of toxic substances, the operation of heavy machinery, the change of natural grade above or below the root system or around the trunk of a tree, excessive pruning, or the severing of part or all of the trunk. 
    "Replacement value" means the actual cost to the city of replacing a tree or landscape material removed or destroyed, or if irreplaceable, its value as determined pursuant to the valuation formula adopted by the International Society of Arboriculture, as amended from time to time. 
    "Street" means the vehicular travel-way portion of any public street, avenue, boulevard, land, road, parkway, freeway or other public way. 
    "Tree board" means a board of private and public citizens appointed to perform specific duties as set forth in Section 12.16.070 of this chapter. 
    "Tree" and "street trees" means trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land lying between right-of-way lines on either side of all city streets, avenues or ways within the city. 
    "Urban forest" means all trees on lands within the corporate borders of the city subject to the jurisdiction of the streets and lanes department. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 3) 
12.16.040 - Urban forestry-Powers and duties of the city. 
A.  The city shall encourage and support the efforts of the tree board to include, but not limited to, an active program of plantings within neighborhoods, such plantings to include the voluntary participation of neighborhood children and other residents to the fullest extent possible in both the planning and installation processes. Support may include, but need not be limited to, provision of trees, planting materials, sidewalk cutting and removal, planting labor, technical advice and organizational assistance. 
B.  The city shall be responsible for the maintenance of street trees it has planted or for which the city has assumed maintenance responsibility. A property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of street trees he or she has planted or for which he or she has assumed maintenance responsibility through the purchase of real property or otherwise. Upon a finding by the city, tree board or their designee that a street tree requires major maintenance or is being improperly maintained by the property owner, the city shall assume responsibility to notify the responsible party. 
C.  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said tree(s) is in accordance with this chapter. Trees removed on city property must be replaced at the same location with like species within thirty (30) days or at proper tree planting time as determined by recommendation of the tree board. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 4) 
12.16.050 - Urban forest management. 
A.  The spacing of street trees may be planted no closer together than the following: small trees, fifteen (15) feet; medium trees, thirty (30) feet; large trees, forty (40) feet; except in special planting designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
B.  No street tree shall be planted closer than thirty (30) feet to any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersection of curbs or curb lines; except in special planting designed or approved by the tree board. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet of any utility pole or fire hydrant or within fifteen (15) feet of driveways and alleys. 
C.  It is unlawful as a normal practice for any reason, for any firm, person or city department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the tree board. 
D.  Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection, so that there shall be clear space of ten (10) feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Such owners shall, after consultation with the tree board, remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign. 
E.  All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 5) 
12.16.060 - Protection of trees. 
A.  Injury to or Destruction of Trees Prohibited; Injury Defined. It is unlawful for any person to injure or destroy a tree on any city street or public property unless the city orders removal of the tree. "Injury" includes but is not limited to the following: injurious attachment of any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any public tree; allowing any gaseous, liquid or solid substance that is harmful to trees to come into contact with them; setting fire or permitting any fire to burn when such fire or the heat therefrom will injure any part of any tree. 
B.  Injury to or Destruction of Landscape Materials Prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to injure or destroy any landscape material in any street median, center strip or other publicly landscaped portion of a public right-of-way under the city's jurisdiction, except as authorized by the city. 
C.  Construction Work-Protection of Trees Required. It is unlawful for any person to engage in any construction work on private or public property without first taking steps to protect street trees from damage to trunk, branches or roots, or damage caused by soil compaction or contamination. All trees on any street or other publicly owned property near any excavation or construction of any building, structure or street work shall be adequately protected in accordance with guidelines established by the tree board. At the time of issuing a building permit for any new construction within the city, a copy of this chapter shall be furnished permittee. A consultation between the tree board and the permittee may be requested in order to attempt to protect existing trees that will add to the aesthetic beauty of such property. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 6) 
12.16.070 - Tree board. 
A.  There is established an advisory board to be known as the tree board consisting of six voting members and one public ex officio nonvoting member; also allowing ex officio nonvoting members to be appointed by the board. At least two of the members shall be professionally trained and experienced in a tree-related field. All members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
B.  Appointments shall be made in the following manner: Each of the five council members shall appoint a member, to be approved by the mayor and a majority of council members. The mayor shall make one appointment, to be approved by a majority of council members. Ex officio members shall be appointed and approved by the majority of the tree board. All of the vacancies occurring during a term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as appointments are made. During the first term of the board, appointees were designated from Wards 1 and 3 which served three years and appointees were designated from Wards 2 and 4 which served four years. In addition, the appointees by the mayor and the at large appointee served five years. Following the first term of the board, all appointees shall serve three-year terms, not to exceed three consecutive terms. Wards 1 and 3 shall hereinafter be referred to as District 1, seats 1, 2, and 3. Wards 2 and 4 shall hereinafter be referred to as District 2, seats 4 and 5. One appointee shall fill each seat, including three seats in District 1 and two seats in District 2. There shall be no designated appointees at large. 
C.  The tree board shall meet at least six times a year, choose its own officers, make its own operating rules and procedures and shall keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. The failure of a member to attend at least one-half of the regularly scheduled meetings shall be grounds for removal from the board by majority vote of the members. 
D.  The tree board shall serve in an advisory capacity to the mayor and council on matters relating to the implementation of this chapter and to tree management in the city, including appropriate funding mechanisms. 
E.  The tree board shall use its best efforts to inventory the condition and major-maintenance needs of all street trees in the city, making recommendations to mayor and council. Maintenance recommendations shall be in accordance to species-specific standards issued by the International Society of Arboriculture. Recommendations shall include, but need not be limited to: structural pruning as necessary to maintain public safety and to sustain the health, safety and natural growth habit of the tree; routine adjustment and timely removal of stakes, ties, tree guards and tree grates; watering sufficient to assure the establishment and survival of a tree; fertilizing as needed; pest-and disease-management procedures as needed and in a manner consistent with public health and ecological diversity; and replacement of missing or damaged trees. 
F.  It is unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or otherwise interfere with the tree board, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any trees. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 7; Ord. of 4-10-06, §§ 2, 3) 
12.16.080 - Landmark trees-Designation. 
    With the advice of the tree board, the city shall adopt criteria for the designation of landmark trees, which criteria shall include consideration of the age, size, shape, species, location, historical association, visual quality or other contribution to the city's character. Upon the recommendation of the tree board, mayor and council may designate as a "landmark tree" any tree on city property meeting the criteria adopted by the city, or may rescind such designations. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 8) 
12.16.090 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be chargeable as a misdemeanor. Every violation is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year. 
B.  In addition to the penalty set forth in subsection A of this section, any person who removes, damages or destroys a tree in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall pay a sum of money equal to either the cost of its replacement or the diminishment in its value. Any and all amounts paid or collected pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited into a revolving fund to be used by the city for replacing and planting trees. 
(Ord. dated 6-1-96 § 9) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters: 
13.04 Water and Sewer Lines and Extensions 13.08 Water Service System 13.12 Sewer Service System 13.16 Refuse Collection and Disposal 13.20 User Charge System 13.24 Services Outside the City-Conditions 13.28 Drought Contingency Plan 13.32 Grease, Oil and Sand Control 13.36 Identity Theft Prevention Program  
Chapter 13.04 - WATER AND SEWER LINES AND EXTENSIONS 
Sections: 

13.04.010 - Placement of water and sewer lines. 
    Water and sewer lines shall be placed within public easements established for such purpose or within the right-of-way line of streets which have been dedicated to the city. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(1)) 
13.04.020 - Subdivision developments-Responsibility for cost of improvements. 
    The subdivider and/or property owners are responsible for the costs of water and sewer pipe, fittings, fire hydrants, lift stations and other materials as needed for the development of a subdivision. The city Subdivision Ordinance will apply for these type developments. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(2)) 
13.04.030 - Water and sewer lines-Construction specifications. 
    All pipe, lines, fittings, fire hydrants and connections used in water and sewer lines shall be of size, dimension and specifications as determined by the city water and sewer supervisor or consulting engineers. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(3)) 
13.04.035 - Cross-connections and backflow-prevention. 
A.  The director of the department of public works or his designee is authorized to discontinue water service to prevent contamination/pollution of the public water supply/system due to possible cross-connections or when necessary to protect the water supply/system or individual properties from emergency cross-connections or backflow situations. 
B.  The department of public works and/or building inspections department are further authorized to install, or require to be installed, suitable backflow-prevention device(s) at the customer's/owner's service connection(s) or other areas as needed to prevent contamination or risk thereof for the public water system. 
C.  The department of public works and building inspections department shall reserve the right to periodically inspect and test any backflow-prevention device(s). Installation, testing and repairs shall be in accordance with the department of public works backflow-prevention by containment policy and procedures. Inoperative or faulty device(s) shall be promptly repaired/replaced by the customer/owner or water service shall be terminated. 
(Ord. 00-01) 
13.04.040 - Water and sewer extensions-Feasibility. 
    Where engineering studies determine that water and sewer extensions are impractical either because of excessive costs to the city or unusual conditions, even though other criteria of this chapter can be met, the city shall not extend water and sewer lines until such time as it is more feasible to extend lines. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(4)) 
13.04.050 - Water and sewer extensions-Financing. 
    Whenever water and sewer extensions involve financial participation by the city, the city shall participate in financing the improvements if funds are budgeted for the fiscal year in which the improvements are to be made. All money budgeted for one fiscal year shall not be used on one project. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(5)) 
13.04.055 - Petition for non-existing water and sewer line services. 
A.  A property owner and/or developer who plans or wishes to construct a residential dwelling and/or development on a developable lot which has public frontage but lacks public water and sewer service shall petition the City of Metter with a formal, written letter addressed to the city manager. 
B.  The city manager and staff shall review the petition and determine whether said petition shall be approved or denied based upon numerous factors, including but not limited to the following: (1) the priority of the water and/or sewer line extension, (2) the total cost of the project, and (3) the cost-benefit analysis of implementing the new extension. If the city manager approves the extension, he will authorize the engineering and design of the water and/or sewer line and the formal submittal of plans to the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) for review, approval, and permitting, if necessary. If the city manager denies the proposed extension, the property owner and/or developer can request the city manager to forward this request to the mayor and city council for reconsideration. 
(Ord. of 12-12-05, § 1) 
13.04.060 - Correction of subsurface conditions. 
    Should the city encounter subsurface or latent conditions during the installation of pipe by a subdivider, the city shall give immediate notice to the subdivider and/or property owners of such conditions. Subdivider and/or property owners shall make suitable arrangements as determined by the city water and sewer supervisor, for corrections of subsurface conditions. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(6)) 
13.04.070 - Engineering and surveying fees-Responsibility for costs. 
    Whenever water and sewer extensions are to be installed in areas of unusual topographic features and water bodies, where it is beyond the capabilities of city personnel to install lines properly without the aid of a survey and where subdivider and/or property owners are to pay for extensions then such parties shall also bear the cost of surveying and engineering fees. Where the city is directly involved in paying for lines, then the city shall absorb engineering and surveying fees. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(7)) 
13.04.080 - Improvements property of city when. 
    When water and sewer pipe, materials, fittings, fire hydrants, etc., are purchased by the subdivider and/or property owners and installed in street right-of-way or easements, including when outside of city limits, such pipe automatically becomes city property and the city is responsible for maintenance. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-1(8)) 
Chapter 13.08 - WATER SERVICE SYSTEM* 
Sections: 

13.08.010 - Requirements incorporated in contracts. 
    The rules and regulations contained in this chapter shall be considered a part of the contract with every builder, developer and consumer of city water. Such builder, developer and consumer of city water shall be governed by and subject to such rules and regulations. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-20) 
13.08.020 - Compliance with building regulations prerequisite to issuance of water meter. 
    The city shall not issue any water meter within the city unless all requirements of the building code have been met. The city shall not be authorized to issue any water meter within the city where the same appears to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-21) 
13.08.030 - Connection-Permit required. 
    It is unlawful for one person to connect any pipe to the city system without express permission of the city. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-22) 
13.08.040 - Application for connection. 
A.  Connection with the mains of the city shall be made upon the written application of the owner of the premises to be supplied with a connection, or of the owner's duly authorized agent upon blanks approved by city and upon compliance by the applicant with the rates, rules and regulations of city, and after the approval of the application by the city endorsed thereon. The size of service lines, valves, meters and other fittings, fixtures or appliances necessary to give the service applied for shall be determined by the city water and sewer supervisor. 
B.  Application for water service connections shall be made at the city offices in the city hall by the owner or agent of the property to be served, upon blank forms furnished therefor. Such application shall state the official street number or numbers of the premises, the size of the pipe required and the approximate location where such services shall enter the premises. 
C.  Cross-Connection-Back-Flow. The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipings are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connection or back-flow. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-23) 
13.08.050 - Application-Form and contents. 
A.  Upon the application of the owner, or any authorized agent, or tenant of the owner, premises will be furnished through the connections already made, or applied for by the owner, and upon compliance by the applicant with the rates, rules and regulations of city, as established from time to time as the need requires by resolution, and after approval of the application by the city accounts clerk or water and sewer supervisor. 
B.  The application shall state the name of the owner of the premises, the character and extent of the service desired, a description of the premises, including the name of the street, and house number, the number and kind of fixtures through which water will be supplied, and such other information as may be reasonably required by the city to enable it to give the desired service. 
C.  Any person or any person acting as an agent of an agent of a firm or corporation and applying for services with the city of Metter shall present with the application a copy of a photo identification and a copy of proof of ownership or lease agreement or rent receipt pertaining to the property to which services are going to be provided. 
(Amendment dated 2-16-04; Ord. 97-7 § 12-30) 
13.08.060 - New application required when. 
    A new application shall be made and approved by the city upon any change in ownership or tenancy of the property, or in the service, as described in the application. The city shall have the right to discontinue the water supply until such new application is made and approved. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-31) 
13.08.070 - Installation of service connections. 
    The making of all service connections from the meter to improvements on premises including laying pipes, setting of water service fixtures, whether on private property or public grounds, to be served by city water shall be made by duly licensed plumbers under the supervision of the building official or water and sewer supervisor. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-24) 
13.08.080 - Service taps. 
    No service taps shall be made unless first authorized by the city. All such taps shall be made in accordance with city's specifications or as otherwise directed by the city. All taps will be inspected by the water and sewer supervisor. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-25) 
13.08.090 - Water meter required. 
A.  All water customers of the city residing in single-family dwellings will have a water meter installed to record the amount of water used so as to pay the city for the total amount of water consumed. 
B.  All water customers residing in a duplex or similar place of abode will comply with the rule in subsection (A) of this section unless it is not practical; then the city will determine the disposition of each water customer, if there is a reason to do so. 
C.  Where there are three or more families living in an apartment unit and where the apartment owner charges for water as a part of the cost to the tenants, then the city will be satisfied with one meter and will charge the apartment owner of the total water consumed by the tenants and the owner will either collect a share from each tenant or will absorb the cost personally if this cost is part of the lease agreement, but it will be the owner's responsibility to pay the city for total water registered on the water meter. 
D.  All commercial customers will have a water meter installed to record the amount of water used so as to pay the city for the total amount of water consumed. 
E.  Where there are three or more commercial units, then the city will be satisfied with one meter and will charge the business owner for the total water consumed. It will be the owner's responsibility to pay the city for total water registered on the water meter. 
F.  Water meters shall be installed on all municipal and public buildings, including churches, and any other such buildings that use water. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-28) 
13.08.100 - Connection tap fees-Charges for meters. 
A.  The city council will from time to time set water and sewer rates and connection tap fees. This schedule of fees will be on file in the city clerk's office. 
B.  The cost shall be paid at the time the application for metered service is made to the city. All meters shall remain the property of the city and may be replaced at the discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-26) 
13.08.110 - Deposit for water service. 
A.  All water customers of the city shall deposit with the city the amount established by resolution of the city council for each meter to guarantee the prompt and full payment of all charges imposed by the city for water furnished by the city to the customer. All fees set by council will be kept on file and made available in the city clerk's office. 
B.  After five years, if the account is in good standing and the customer has made timely payments, the deposit will be refunded in full. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-32) 
13.08.120 - Rates and charges. 
A.  The charges for water service from the city shall be based on rate studies conducted every three years or more often; the charges shall be fixed after each study. The charges will be set by resolution of city council and will be kept on file and made available in the city clerk's office. 
B.  1. At the time of making application for connection or service, applicant must make payment to city of the fees, deposits or rates, as the case may be, as fixed by the city council. 
2.  Rates for water service shall be subject to change according to the fiscal needs of the city from time to time as determined by the city council; such rates shall be published in the office of the city hall where utility bills may be paid and in accordance with the most recent resolution by the city council pertaining to such rates. 
3.  The rate shall have a minimum-based charge plus a charge for each one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used. 
(Ord. 97-7 §§ 12-33, 12-34) 
13.08.130 - Water used for swimming pools-Rates. 
    The city shall charge the normal rate for water used for the filling of swimming pools. The amount of water used for the filling of swimming pools shall be deducted from the total number of gallons used for figuring the sewer charge. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-27) 
13.08.140 - Due date-Shut-off for nonpayment-Restoration of service. 
    Utility bills are due on the first day of each month. A penalty charge of ten (10) percent will be added to the bill if the bill is not paid by the tenth day of the month. If the bill is not paid by the twentieth day of the month, water service to the premises for which the bill was rendered may be terminated by the city. Service shall not be restored until the bill has been paid including a reconnection fee. A reconnection fee will be applied to the bill on the day of cut off or the twentieth day. In addition, when a bill is not paid by the twentieth of the month, no water service shall be furnished to the customer responsible for payment of the bill at any other location or to any member of the customer's household. An extension of five days may be requested in writing due to illness or catastrophe, at the office where payments are accepted, and will be granted if customer has good credit history with the city. The accounts clerk is the only person authorized to grant that extension, in their absence the city administrator may grant the extension. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-35) 
13.08.150 - Billing adjustments. 
A.  If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his claim in person to the accounts clerk at city hall before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this chapter. The consumer shall pay such bill under protest and such payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
B.  The city shall make a special water meter reading at the request of a consumer for a fee of five dollars ($5.00) or as set by the city council provided, however, that if such special reading disclosed that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-45) 
13.08.160 - Turning on water after cutoff for nonpayment prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cut on or use any water after such person's water service has been discontinued for nonpayment of bills. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-41) 
13.08.170 - Bypassing meter prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to run any pipe around any meter with intent to defraud the city of water revenue. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-42) 
13.08.180 - Tampering with water service system prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to intentionally injure, destroy or permit to be injured or destroyed any water meter, pipe, conduit, line or other apparatus belonging to or operated by the city. It is likewise unlawful for any person to intentionally prevent a water meter belonging to or operated by the city from duly registering the quantity of water supplied to or in any way interfere with the proper action or just registration of such meters. It is likewise unlawful for any person to intentionally use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city, any water manufactured or distributed by the city. 
B.  The existence of any device by whatever name used for the purpose of diverting any water from any pipe of the city without the consent of the city, shall be prima facie evidence of the intent to defraud by the person receiving the benefits from such diversion. The existence of such a device shall be deemed presumptive evidence of the intention referred to in this section. 
C.  1. It is unlawful for any person to tamper with or deliberately damage a city water meter. Any such tampering or deliberate destruction shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and shall be penalized. 
2.  Any subsequent tampering or deliberate destruction shall result in a citation to appear in municipal court and, upon determination of guilt, to punishment as prescribed in Section 1.12.010. 
(Ord. 97-7 §§ 12-29, 12-43) 
13.08.190 - Temporary water service. 
    A fee shall be paid to the city for temporary water service. No such service shall be continued for a period of time in excess of ten (10) consecutive days. This fee will be set from time to time by resolution of the city control. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-44) 
13.08.200 - Inspection. 
    All pipes, meters and fixtures shall at all reasonable hours be subject to inspection by the city water and sewer supervisor or by his or her duly authorized agent. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-38) 
13.08.210 - Fixtures and equipment. 
    The city will furnish and maintain at its own cost all necessary fittings, pipes, appliances, including all meters and meter boxes, to deliver water to the consumer's pipeline, at a point just inside the curbline of the street and just outside the property line in alleys or other public places; all such fittings, pipes, appliances, meters and meter boxes shall remain the property of the city, and shall at all times be accessible to city and under its control. The service line from the curb box or meter to the consumer's premises shall be laid and maintained by the applicant at applicant's own cost. The line shall be ample size, of standard weight and quality, and all cutoffs, valves, fixtures and appliances furnished by the consumer shall be maintained in good condition. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-36) 
13.08.220 - Leaks. 
    All leaks in the service or any pipe, or fixture, on the premises of the consumer shall be immediately repaired. Upon a failure to repair any such leak the service may be discontinued until repairs are made. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-37) 
13.08.230 - Responsibility for damages and maintenance. 
A.  The city shall in no event be responsible for maintaining any service line owned by the consumer, nor for damage done by water escaping therefrom, nor for defects in lines or fixtures, on the property of the consumer. The consumer shall at all times comply with all regulations of the city and of regulations relating to the service lines, and shall make all changes in the line as required on account of change in grade or otherwise. 
B.  All damage to service pipes or street mains caused by careless or negligent work, or improper filling at excavations, shall be chargeable to the persons causing such damage, and the expense of repairing the same shall be recovered from such persons. 
C.  All service pipes and fixtures from the water meter to the premises, including the corporation cocks at the mains, shall be installed and maintained at the expense of the property owners, and all leaks and other defects in the same shall be promptly repaired by them, or if not promptly repaired, then water will be turned off until such repairs have been made, and the expense thereof shall be charged against the owners, and must be paid before water shall be turned on again. 
D.  The city shall not be held responsible by reason of the breaking of any service pipe or apparatus, water coil, or for failure in the supply of water. 
(Ord. 97-7 §§ 12-39, 12-40) 
13.08.240 - Collection costs for delinquent accounts. 
    Customers that have a past due balance after disconnection are subject to being referred to collection agencies and are required to pay for postage, second notices, collection fees, court processing fees, and attorney fees. 
(Ord. of 4-30-07, § 1) 
Chapter 13.12 - SEWER SERVICE SYSTEM* 
Sections: 

13.12.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "BOD" (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    "Combined sewer" means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    "Departmental head" means the head of the water and sewer department. 
    "Garbage" means solid waste from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    "Industrial wastes" means the liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    "pH" means the logarithm of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    "Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
    "Sewage treatment plant" means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    "Sewage works" means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    "Slug" means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    "Storm drain" (sometimes termed storm sewer) means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    "Suspended solids" means solids that are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-50: prior code § 23-54) 
13.12.020 - Unsanitary deposit of objectionable waste. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-51) 
13.12.030 - Discharge to natural outlet. 
    It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet, within the city or any area under the jurisdiction of the city any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-52) 
13.12.040 - Construction and maintenance of septic tanks, etc. 
    Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any septic tank or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-53) 
13.12.050 - Connection to sanitary sewer required. 
    The owner of all buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is required at such owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and to maintain such connection, provided that public sewer is within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the property line of such owner's property if connection can be made using gravity flow. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-54: prior code § 23-55) 
13.12.060 - Private sewage disposal. 
A.  Where Public Sanitary Sewer is Not Available. Where public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 13.12.050, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this section. 
B.  Permit Required. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Candler County health department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the Candler County health department, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information deemed necessary by the Candler County health department. 
C.  Hookup to Public Sewer. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.12.050, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned. 
D.  Operation at Owner's Expense. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
E.  Additional Requirements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-55: prior code § 23-56) 
13.12.070 - Building sewers and connections. 
A.  Permit Required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb, any public sewer or appurtenance thereof. 
B.  Installation and Connection Costs to be Borne by Owner. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer from the owner's building to the city property line shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may be directly or indirectly occasioned by the connection of the building sewer. Any connection from the city property line into the public sewer shall be made by the city, for which the owner shall pay to the city a standard sewer tap fee. 
C.  Separate Sewer Required for Each Building-Exception. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
D.  Old Building Sewer. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings when they are found on examination and test by the department head to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
E.  Conformance with Building and Plumbing Codes. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and WPCF, Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
F.  Elevation of Building Sewers. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
G.  Connecting Source of Surface Runoff or Groundwater to Building Sewer or Building Drain. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
H.  Connection of Building Sewer into Public Sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes and other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specification of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials shall be approved by the department head before installation. 
I.  Supervision and Inspection of Connection. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the department head when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the department head or the department head's representative. 
J.  Guarding Excavations-Restoration of Public Property. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
K.  Tap Fees. Sewer tap fees shall be set by resolution of the city council and will be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-56: prior code § 23-57) 
13.12.080 - Use of the public sewers. 
A.  Discharge of Stormwater, Surface Water, Groundwater, Etc. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
B.  Designation of Sewers for Discharge of Unpolluted Waters. Stormwater, industrial cooling water, unpolluted process water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
C.  Prohibited Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
1.  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
2.  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or interaction with other wastes, to damage or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
3.  Any waste which will cause corrosion or determination of the treatment system. All wastes discharged to the public sewer must have a pH value in the range of 5.5 to 9 standard units. Prohibited materials include but are not limited to acids, sulfides, concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds and substances which will react with water to form acidic products; 
4.  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc. either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
D.  Department Head to Determine Acceptability of Certain Wastes-Prohibited Substances. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the department head that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property; or constitute a nuisance. In forming an opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the department head will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of the subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, the materials of construction of the sewers, the nature of the sewage treatment process, the capacity of the sewage treatment plant, the degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
1.  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius; 
2.  Wastewater containing more than twenty-five (25) milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or products of mineral oil origin; or wastewater from industrial or commercial plants containing more than one hundred (100) milligrams per liter of floatable oils, fats or grease, or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two (32) and one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit, zero and sixty-five (65) degrees Celsius; 
3.  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers; 
4.  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
5.  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such a degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the department head and/or the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources for such materials; 
6.  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste-producing or odor-producing substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public garbage agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
7.  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the department head in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
8.  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans and animals or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant; 
9.  Materials which exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fullers earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate, 
b.  Excessive discoloration such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, 
c.  Unusual BOD, above three hundred (300) milligrams per liter, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirement in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works. 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs; 
10.  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters; 
11.  Waters or wastes containing suspended solids in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter; 
12.  Wastewaters at a flow rate or containing concentrations or quantities of pollutants that exceed for any period longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five times the average twenty-four (24) hour concentrations, quantities or flows during normal operation and that would cause a treatment process upset and subsequent loss of treatment efficiency. 
E.  Procedure Upon Discharge or Proposed Discharge of Certain Prohibited Wastes. If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (D) of this section, and which in the judgment of the superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the department head may take any action necessary to: 
1.  Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater; 
2.  Require a discharger to demonstrate that in-plant modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances in conformity with this chapter; 
3.  Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or flow equalization, necessary to reduce or eliminate the objectionable characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate these rules and regulations; 
4.  Require the person making, causing or allowing the discharge to pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the city for handling and treating excess loads imposed on the treatment system; 
5.  Take such other remedial action as may be deemed to be desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter. 
    When considering the above alternatives, the department head shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the department head permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the department head. All industrial contributors proposing to discharge other than domestic sanitary wastes to the municipal system shall comply with pretreatment regulations set forth in 40 CFR 128 of the Federal Register, dated November 8, 1973. 
F.  Grease, Oil and Sand Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the department head, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, as specified in subsection (D)(2) of this section, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the department head and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which are subject to review by the department head. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
G.  Information to be Provided to Department Head. The department head may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These requirements may include: 
1.  Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period; 
2.  Chemical analyses of wastewaters; 
3.  Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting wastewater volume and quality; 
4.  Quantity and disposition of specific liquids, sludge, oils, solvents or other materials important to sewer use control; 
5.  A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer pretreatment facility location; 
6.  Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities; 
7.  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
H.  Measurement and Testing Standards. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the department head. 
I.  Compliance with Federal Regulations. All industrial users of the sewer system must comply with the Environmental Protection Agency Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Part 128, concerning industrial pretreatment. 
J.  Sampling Structure. When required by the department head, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with the plans approved by the department head. The structure shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense and shall be maintained by the owner so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
K.  Special Agreements, Arrangements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-57: prior code § 23-58) 
13.12.090 - Protection from damage. 
    No person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently, break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-58: prior code § 23-59) 
13.12.100 - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
A.  Right of Entry for Purposes of Inspection, Observation, Etc. The department head and other duly authorized employees of the city, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing pertinent to discharges to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Inquiry into Processes. The department head or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public might result in an advantage to competitors. 
C.  Observation of Applicable Safety Rules. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (A) of this section, the department head or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
D.  Right of Entry to Private Properties Through Which the City Holds Easements. The department head and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within such easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on such easement shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-59: prior code § 23-60) 
13.12.110 - Authority to disconnect service. 
A.  The city reserves the right to terminate water and wastewater disposal services and disconnect a customer from the system when: 
1.  Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released into the public sewer causing rapid deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater; or 
2.  A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a quality permitted for discharge into a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is discharging wastewater into the public sewer that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment; or 
3.  The customer: 
a.  Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority, or 
b.  Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the wastewater treatment process, or 
c.  Fails to pay monthly bills for sanitary sewer service when due, or 
d.  Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes into public sewers. 
B.  Notification processes for discontinuance of service are presented in Section 13.12.080. 
(Prior code § 23-64) 
13.12.120 - Service rates-Procedure. 
A.  Sewer Service Charge-Surcharge for Certain Polluted Wastes. There shall be established a sewer service charge, generally based on water consumption, the charges for which are fixed as provided in Section 13.08.120, for each connection to the sanitary sewer system of the city, both inside and outside the city limits, and each sewer customer shall pay the appropriate sewer service charge established by resolution of the city council, on file in the city clerk's office. The rates for all sewer service customers shall have a minimum charge. This minimum charge shall be considered a set standby or readiness-to-serve charge and will be charged whether the customer's premises are occupied or not. Wastewater with strengths in excess of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter of suspended solids shall be subject to a surcharge per pound of BOD and per pound of suspended solids in addition to the above-noted charges for domestic waste. Any wastewater with other pollutants above the normal content of domestic wastewater shall be subject to a surcharge for the excessive pollutants as determined by the department head. 
B.  Sewer Service Billing, Collection and Penalties. Bills for the sewer service charge shall be rendered monthly and shall be listed as a separate item on the same bill with the water system charges. Such bills shall set forth thereon the separate charge for water service, the separate charge for sewer service and the total thereof. No payment shall be accepted for the water service unless the sewer charges are paid at the same time. Sewer bills are considered part of the water bill for billing and collection purposes. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-60: prior code § 23-63) 
13.12.130 - Compliance with regulatory requirements. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed as alleviating compliance with applicable state and federal regulations. Specific user charge and industrial cost recovery requirements, promulgated pursuant to Public Law 92-500, shall be considered as a part of this chapter upon official adoption. All nonresidential users will be required to comply with pretreatment standards as outlined in Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403. 
(Prior code § 23-61) 
13.12.140 - Conflict with other ordinances. 
    In the event a wastewater discharge is made to a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) under the jurisdiction of an approved sewer use ordinance for another governing authority, the more restrictive requirement shall prevail. 
(Prior code § 23-65(c)) 
13.12.150 - Violation-Penalty. 
A.  Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except Section 13.12.090 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently, cease all violations. 
B.  Any person who shall violate the provisions of Section 13.12.090 or who shall continue any violation of this chapter beyond the time limit provided for in subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment for each violation. Each day in which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate offense and violation. 
(Ord. 97-7 § 12-61: prior code § 23-62) 
Chapter 13.16 - REFUSE COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ord. adopted Dec. 10, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 13.16, §§ 13.16.010-13.16.100, and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 97-7, §§ 12-69-12-71, 12-74, 12-76-12-78; Ord. 02-02; § 1 of an ord. adopted Nov. 14, 2005; and §§ 1-5 of an ord. dated Oct. 8, 2007. 

13.16.005 - Intent. 
    It is the intention of the mayor and council of the city, to provide for the uniform and proper collection and disposal of common household and commercial waste, inert debris, bulk debris and white goods, on public or private property, and to curb thereby the description of the beauty of the city, and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of all of the citizens of the city, and to assure that all persons, residing, working, traveling, or visiting within the corporate limits of the city, property dispose of garbage and refuse. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them: 
    "Bulk items/bulk waste" means items such as furniture, mattresses, toys, appliances 
    "City" means the City of Metter, Georgia. 
    "Commercial apartment" means a residential apartment, condominium or townhouse complex consisting of twelve (12) or more units which because of size, density, property configuration, or other considerations requires the use of commercial containers to properly manage the collection and disposal of waste in a sanitary manner. 
    "Commercial container" means a steel container having a capacity of two cubic yards or greater which is intended to be mechanically lifted for dumping into a refuse vehicle for collection. 
    "Commercial garbage" means garbage produced by any nonresidential unit or facility or non-industrial facility including stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other similar uses. 
    "Consignee" means one person, a family or a group of persons, to whom a refuse container is assigned. 
    "Construction debris." Construction and demolition (C&D) debris consists of materials generated during the construction, renovation, and demolition of buildings, roads, bridges or any structure. Including, but not limited to: Concrete, wood (from buildings), asphalt (from roads, roofing shingles, or any source), gypsum (the main component of dry wall), metals, bricks, glass, plastics, salvaged building components (doors, windows, and plumbing fixtures), trees, stumps, earth and rock or similar debris from clearing sites, carpet, and any other debris or material from construction, renovation or demolition with nails, staples or other metal left in material. 
    "Household trash" means materials including waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually attendant to housekeeping. 
    "Litter" means all garbage, refuse, waste material, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance, which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
    "Private disposal service" means a private company that has been licensed to remove waste from nonresidential and commercial apartment property within the city. 
    "Refuse" means paper, waste, trash, boxes, garbage, bottles, cans and any other debris, but not tree limbs, cuttings or leaves. 
    "Refuse container" means one of the containers owned by the city and consigned to the owner, tenant or occupant of a private dwelling house or commercial apartment located within the city for the purpose of containing and removing household waste from the consignee; 
    "White goods." Large household appliances such as refrigerators, stoves, air conditioners, and washing machines. 
    "Yard trimmings." Leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and other similar materials resulting from landscaping development and maintenance. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.015 - Collections by city. 
A.  Generally. All solid waste and recyclable materials accumulated in the city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed of by the city, except as otherwise expressly authorized herein or approved by the mayor and city council. No person shall collect, convey over any streets or alleys of the city or dispose of any solid waste or recyclable materials accumulated in the city, except as expressly authorized herein or as allowed by pertinent and appropriate actions of the mayor and city council. 
B.  Fees. Fees, rates and charges for the collection services outlined in this article shall be as determined by the mayor and city council, as amended from time and time, and placed on file in the office of the city clerk. Every residence, dwelling, business establishment or service agency within the limits of the city and to which garbage and solid waste collection and disposal services are available shall pay a fee for the availability of such service, regardless of whether the residence, business or agency used the service, and based upon a fee schedule approved by the mayor and city council. 
C.  Landlord's responsibility. All garbage collection charges to a complex of apartments, houses, mobile homes or businesses may be billed to the landlord of the property, and the landlord shall be responsible to the city for payment of assessed charges. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.020 - Refuse containers to be provided by city-Responsibility of consignee. 
A.  The city shall consign one refuse container to each owner, tenant or occupant of a private dwelling house or commercial business, or apartment located in the city; however, only one refuse container shall be issued per family unit or group of persons occupying a private dwelling house, one refuse container shall be issued for each occupied apartment in a duplex or multiple-family dwelling. The consignee may request additional containers as needed and will be charged for each additional container. 
    The city shall initially provide and bear the cost of the first cart for each single-family and two-family residence. In the event the cart is insufficient to contain the garbage for a residence, the resident shall bear the cost of placement of an additional cart at the residence. In the event a cart is lost, stolen or abused, the resident shall bear the cost of placement of another cart at the residence. 
B.  Each consignee shall be responsible for such refuse container, shall use reasonable care to prevent such refuse container from being mutilated, abused or damaged, and shall return the refuse container to the city when the consignee vacates such dwelling house. Any person who deliberately mutilate, abuses or damages any refuse container shall be punished as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.030 - Placing of refuse and commercial containers for collection. 
    Refuse containers and commercial containers shall be kept in a place selected by consignee, provided such location does not detract from the appearance of the area in which the private dwelling house or commercial apartment is located; and whenever possible, the refuse container shall be kept in the rear of the private dwelling house or commercial apartment, away from the street on which such private dwelling house or commercial apartment fronts. On the day designated by the city as being the pickup day for refuse, each consignee shall be responsible for placing the refuse container adjacent to the street nearest the private dwelling house and used by the city refuse collection vehicle to remove the accumulated refuse. The refuse container shall be placed not less than two nor more than five feet from the curb or road pavement of the street or thoroughfare being used by the city refuse collection vehicle. After the refuse container has been emptied by the city sanitation department, the refuse container shall be removed by each consignee from such street or thoroughfare at the earliest convenience of the consignee; however, under no circumstances shall a refuse container be left adjacent to the street or thoroughfare for more than twelve (12) hours after pickup by the city sanitation department. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.040 - Charges for collection-Use of system required. 
    All occupied residences and commercial businesses shall pay an amount to defray the cost of the city's garbage collection service according to the rate and schedule as may be now or hereafter set and established by the mayor and city council. The charge shall be assessed on a monthly basis against each occupied residence and place of business regardless of whether said residence or place of business utilizes the garbage collection service provided by the city. All residences and businesses are prohibited from disposing of garbage and refuse within the city limits except by way of utilizing the authorized garbage disposal containers provided by the city or by using a private disposal service which has been approved by the city. Any resident or place of business opting to utilize a private disposal service shall still be responsible for paying the above referenced amount to defray the cost of the city's garbage collection service. All garbage and refuse must be disposed of in accordance with all city ordinances, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.050 - Frequency of collection-Disposal of refuse. 
A.  The employees of the city sanitation department shall collect the refuse and dispose of it in the approved landfill not less often than once a week., with the exception of holidays or in times when such collection is impossible, such as in the event of natural disasters. 
B.  All such refuse shall be taken to and deposited in such landfill by the employees of the city sanitation department, and it is unlawful to otherwise dispose of such refuse. 
C.  Commercial garbage collection will be three times per week. All commercial establishments or other entities producing hazardous waste or special waste shall be responsible for the disposal of and provide for the disposal of the hazardous waste or special waste in accordance with all federal and state laws and regulations. 
D.  Bulk waste may be collected at the curbside once every week. 
E.  Yard trimmings/inert waste shall be collected by the city contractor once every week if placed at curbside for collection. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.060 - Burning of trash in city containers prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any person to burn trash in city containers. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.070 - Residential garbage collection. 
    Persons having physical handicaps which prevent them from placing carts at curbsides shall be exempted from the requirement to place the cart at the curbside. Such persons shall provide to the city a written statement from a physician which validates the existence of such a handicap and shall include their physical address. The other requirements for collection and disposal of garbage contained within this Code will nonetheless apply to persons exempted under this subsection. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.080 - Waste generated by contractors, tree surgeons and landscapers. 
    Contractors, tree surgeons, and landscapers providing services and work within the city limits shall be required to haul away and dispose of their own debris, which is larger than eight inches in diameter, in the public landfill provided for use by the city and to pay whatever fees are required for disposal of their own debris and garbage related to this business activity. (Ord. 02-02: Ord. 97-7 § 12-77 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.090 - Yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings. 
    Yard trash, tree and shrubbery trimmings separated from other debris shall be neatly stacked adjacent to the public street or alley used for road purposes which is nearest the property from which removed. No tree trunks, branches, limbs, or shrubbery larger than six inches in diameter, longer than six feet in length, or heavier than sixty (60) pounds shall be collected by the city. Yard trash mixed with other debris will not be picked up. Trash other than yard trash must be in a separate stack. If a residence or business establishment places trash for collection which exceeds these limits, the residence or business shall be in violation of this section and shall be assessed an additional fee in the amount based on the actual cost of equipment, labor and tippage fees needed for collection or as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.100 - Felled trees. 
    The owner of property on which trees are cut down, whether by the owner or another, is required to remove promptly following the cutting at the owner's expense all tree trunks, logs, limbs, tops or other debris resulting therefrom, when such materials are clearly visible from any public street, alley, sidewalk, lane or path from the property of another that adjoins the property on which the materials are located. Such materials shall not be destroyed or removed by burning. All individuals, firms, businesses, partnerships, proprietorships or corporations engaged in the business of trimming or removing trees, shrubbery, or similar growth, who shall contract with the property owner, the owner's agent or occupant to perform services on the property shall remove from the property all sawdust, branches, stumps and all portions of the byproducts of the services performed, as well as all rubbish associated therewith. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.110 - Trees, shrubbery, branches, etc. 
    All individuals, firms, businesses, partnerships, proprietorships or corporations engaged in the business of yard maintenance, landscaping, or nursery operation who shall contract with the property owner, the owner's agent or occupant to perform services on the property shall remove from the property the byproducts of the services performed which is in excess of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.120 - Removal for compensation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, partnership, proprietorship or corporation to fell or trim trees within the city unless the byproduct from those services is immediately removed from the premises and placed or deposited by the contractor in the city designated landfill or hauling station. Compensation shall be interpreted to include receiving as compensation the wood, limbs and other residue from such trimming and cutting. Any form of compensation shall place the burden of disposal directly upon the individual or contractor performing the task. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.130 - Leaves. 
    Leaves shall be neatly piled free of other debris and placed adjacent to the public street or alley used for road purposes which is nearest the property from which removed. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.140 - Household furniture and appliances. 
    The city shall collect normal and intact household furniture and appliances, including sofas, chairs, beds, refrigerators, washers, dryers, hot water heaters and similar items, but not including furnaces, from single-family and duplex (two-family) residential structures only. The type and amount of bulk items and white goods collected shall be within normal and reasonable needs of an occupied residential use. This collection service is not intended to serve eviction, demolition, or commercial purposes. 
    Mayor and council may establish and amend a fee for this service as part of or separate from other fees. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.150 - Exception-Private disposal by landowner. 
    There shall be excepted from the provisions of this chapter pertaining to the municipal pickup of refuse, disposal of trees, limbs, cuttings, leaves and other such refuse that exceed the capacity of one trailer load per week, per land owner, per lot. All landowners disposing of such refuse within the city shall pay for the tonnage over and above one trailer load per week as measured by the landfill utilized by the city and in accordance with the assessments imposed upon disposal by such landfill. For purposes of this section a "trailer load" shall be defined to mean one six-ton dump truck as currently utilized by the city and filled to capacity. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.160 - Private disposal services. 
    All private disposal service companies, individuals, and/or entities shall be required to submit an application to the city for refuse collection within the city limits prior to performing any refuse collection services. Said application shall be submitted with a fee according to the schedule as it may now or hereafter be set and established by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.170 - Exception-Commercial apartments. 
A.  All commercial apartments may submit an application for the approval of a commercial container for disposal by a private disposal service as set for in Section 13.16.090 above. Said application shall be submitted to the city and approved upon a finding that the residential units meet the definition of "commercial apartment" as defined in Section 13.16.010 and the private disposal service company, individual, and/or entity has been approved as required by Section 13.16.090. 
B.  The approval of any application for a commercial container shall not exempt the owner, tenant or occupant of a commercial apartment from the charges of collection set forth in Section 13.16.040. 
C.  All fees, charges, rents, etc. associated with providing a commercial container or private disposal service to the owner, tenant or occupant of a commercial apartment shall be the sole responsibility of said owner, tenant or occupant of the commercial apartment. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.180 - Commercial establishments. 
    All commercial establishments shall store their refuse in containers, as specified in this article, so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about their establishments. Approved methods of containerization shall include refuse receptacles, bulk containers and detachable containers. Any spillage or overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by such establishment. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.190 - Construction sites and demolition sites. 
    All construction and demolition contractors shall use on-site refuse receptacles, bulk waste containers, or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash (no hazardous waste shall be deposited in the containers) produced by those working at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles, bulk containers, or detachable containers (not to exceed four total per site) shall be determined by the size of the job. Receptacles and containers must be promptly collected when maximum capacity has been reached. All construction receptacles and containers must be promptly removed upon completion of construction. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be promptly removed by the owner or contractor. 
    The owner of any commercial establishment serviced by dumpsters which property is adjacent to a residential area or serves a commercial apartment shall cause to be built, around the area in which the dumpster is located, a screened fence of durable quality and construction at least six feet in height which conceals and blocks the container from the view of any public property. The owner of any commercial establishment shall provide to the city or its authorized agent unimpeded access to each dumpster by the collection vehicles on collection days at collection times. No parking or other obstructions shall be permitted in the access area for dumpsters. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.200 - Industrial waste. 
    Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing such waste. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.210 - Contagious disease solid waste. 
    The removal of clothing, bedding or other solid waste from some or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such solid waste shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk container for the city collection until decontaminated. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.220 - Hypodermic instruments. 
    No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of re-use, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by securely placing in plastic container with a sealed lid so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel or general public. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.230 - Cardboard boxes, cartons and tires. 
    All cardboard boxes, cartons and tires are to be disposed of at designated recycling centers. The person disposing of any such boxes or cartons shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.240 - Owner and operator of premises to maintain dumpster site. 
    Persons required to maintain refuse receptacles and collection containers under this chapter shall maintain the containers in a sanitary condition, tightly covered at all times other than filling, emptying and cleaning, and free from odor. Refuse receptacles shall be filled in such a manner as to allow pickup by one person. Refuse receptacles and collection containers shall be further maintained so as to prevent the overflow and scattering of trash, garbage, refuse, other solid waste, or water/rainwater. Building materials and yard trash shall not be placed within refuse receptacles 
    The owner and/or the person in charge of the premises for which a dumpster is permitted shall, at all times, maintain the premises in a state, free and clear of litter, debris, and trash. 
    All refuse receptacles and collection containers, as required by this article, shall be of safe construction and design and shall be maintained in good, orderly and serviceable condition at all times. Any receptacle or container which does not conform to the requirements of this article or which has ragged or sharp edges, or any other defects likely to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents therefrom or the public generally, shall be promptly replaced by the user thereof where such receptacles and containers are not provided by the city. If such container, after appropriate notice, has not been replaced, the director shall have the right to suspend further collection of such waste material until such time as the container is brought into compliance with this article. Where receptacles or containers are provided by the city the user shall promptly notify the director or sanitation superintendent of such sharp edges, defects, or other nonconformities. 
    All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment shall place a sufficient number of containers in such area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment shall be set by the director or his/her designated representative. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular occupant of the premises shall insure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. If the occupant violates this section, collection service may be suspended by the director until such time as the owner or occupant of the premises brings such premises into full compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.250 - Cover required for vehicles hauling garbage, etc. 
    All vehicles used in hauling garbage, trash or refuse of any kind whatsoever on any street or highway within the city shall have beds of tight construction to prevent the contents from falling or sifting onto the streets, highway or ground, and shall be at all times, except when loading or unloading, be covered with a canvas cover or some comparable cover. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.260 - Accumulation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or lessee of any building, yard or lot of ground within the city to allow garbage, trash or refuse of any kind to accumulate or remain in the building, or upon the yard or lot, unless placed in a container as required by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.270 - Uncovered garbage. 
    It shall be unlawful to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any garbage or other material subject to decay, other than yard trimmings, leaves or grass, excepting in a tightly covered container. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.280 - Wind-blown refuse. 
    It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate any dust, or refuse of such a material capable of being blown away by the wind anywhere in the city, other than yard trimmings, leaves or grass, except in a covered container. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.290 - Doors and lids to be kept closed. 
    Except when trash or garbage is being loaded into carts or dumpsters, or pickup of the same is being affected, all doors for screening, doors or lids of carts or dumpsters shall be kept closed. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.300 - Dumping and littering prohibited. 
    All persons, firms, individuals, corporations or associations of individuals are hereby prohibited from dumping or discarding trash, refuse, bulky waste, rubbish, garbage, or discarded articles of all kinds, including but not limited to refrigerators, stoves, furniture, cans, bottles, boxes, sacks, waste paper, tires, batteries, hazardous waste, and all types of articles not suitable for human use, on private or public property in the corporate limits of the city, including streets, alleys sidewalks, highways, parks and recreational areas. 
    Dumping of any of the items referenced in subsection (a) above by any person, firm, individual, corporation, or association (hereinafter "person") in a container not owned by such person or for which such person does not have permission shall be prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse or on any premises in the city without the consent of the owner of such premises. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.310 - Prohibited activities. 
    The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this chapter: 
1.  Certain matters not to be placed in containers. Dead animals, feces, explosives, dangerous and corrosive materials, clothing taken from persons with infectious diseases, heavy metals, bulky waste or any hazardous waste shall not be placed in any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster. Produce, meats, poultry, and food preparation oils shall be placed in sealed bags prior to being placed in any trash or garbage receptacle, cart or dumpster in such a manner as to minimize noxious or offensive odor emanating therefrom. 
2.  Injurious waste items. All waste materials of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes shall be securely packaged or wrapped (used needles shall be placed in hard plastic container with lid and sealed) for the purpose of [sic]. 
3.  Hazardous waste and building materials. No hazardous waste or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle at any time. The city shall not be required to collect any hazardous waste or building material. All hazardous waste shall be secured against the possibility of causing injury to any person and shall not be placed on public property or private property without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
4.  Depositing garbage on the street. It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to fall from any vehicle any garbage, refuse or on any public street, parking area, street median, public space or alley in the city; provided, that this section shall not be construed to prohibit temporarily placing garbage, refuse, trash or recyclable materials in a container at an approved collection point complying with the provisions of this chapter preparatory to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided herein. 
5.  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse, trash or other waste in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property, except with the written consent thereof and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
6.  Blockage of drainage. At no time shall trash be placed in a manner as to obstruct drains, utility meters, walkways or streets. It shall be unlawful to use brooms, rakes, blowers or other sweeping, raking or debris removal tools or equipment so as to sweep, rake, blow or otherwise sediment or debris of any kind in or on city streets, walkways, drains, pipes or gutters. It shall be unlawful to place, accumulate or otherwise deposit any type of the aforementioned debris or material into a city drain, pipe, gutter or other draining conduit or receptacle. 
7.  Impairment of sight distance. At no time shall trash be placed in a manner as to obstruct or impair the sight distance of a driver or operator of a vehicle. 
8.  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article, is hereby declared to be a nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the director shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
9.  Junk. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or leave outside any building or dwelling, except as specified herein, any dilapidated furniture, appliance, machinery equipment, building material, junked motor vehicle, tires or other items which are either in a partially used, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, and which are not completely enclosed within a building or dwelling. 
10.  Sweeping and blowing. It shall be unlawful to sweep or blow with a blower or other machinery, grass clippings, leaves and other debris onto a city sidewalk, street, or gutter. 
11.  Dumping. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this section to dump, place or leave bricks, blocks, rocks, lumber, asphalt, cement, concrete, concrete products or waste, roofing, sheetrock, leaves, limbs, bushes, trees, roots, dead animals, appliances, equipment, bedding, mattresses, furniture, fixtures, clothing, motors, engines' chemical wastes, industrial or commercial waste or rubbish, scrap metal, fence wire, vehicles or parts thereof, tires, building materials or supplies, and inorganic solid material of any type or kind except as authorized herein. 
12.  Container of another. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to dump, place or leave any item at a garbage and/or solid waste collection area or in any collection container unless such person has permission of the owner and/or occupant of the premises on which the area or container is located. 
13.  Billboards and signs. It shall be unlawful for owners to fail to maintain billboards and signs in a manner that prevents loose paper, bills and other litter and debris resulting from the use of such signs and billboards. Any such debris, loose papers, bills and other litter shall be removed by the owners or their agents immediately upon accumulation. 
14.  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof or an agent or employee of the director shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, remove any contents therefrom, or remove such container from its collection. 
15.  Blocked dumpster. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to block or impair access to a dumpster or commercial collection container. 
16.  Building materials. It shall be unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to place building materials in the city right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.320 - Supervision by city. 
    The public works director, his designee, and/or city's code enforcement officer shall be empowered to inspect the manner in which all garbage, refuse or within the city are accumulated or disposed for compliance with this chapter. The public works director, his designee, and/or city's code enforcement officer is empowered to order the discontinuance of actions in violation of this chapter or take any other action authorized to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of this chapter 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.330 - Administrative regulation. 
    The city clerk shall not issue a business license or certificate of occupancy to any person, firm, or corporation which has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. The violation, noncompliance, or other violation of an administrative order issued by city, under this chapter, will be grounds for suspension or revocation of occupation tax certificates. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.340 - Prima facie evidence. 
    Whenever refuse, yard waste, bulk items or similar materials are thrown, placed, deposited, dropped, dumped or cast from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance containing more than one person, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of said conveyance shall have violated this chapter. 
    Wherever any litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, dumped, cast or accumulated on public or private property in violation with this chapter is discovered to contain items which display the name of a person thereon in such a way as to indicate that the item belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this chapter. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.350 - Notification. 
    Notice of a violation of this chapter shall be made by serving a citation by mail or in person by an officer, agent or official of the city empowered by the this Code or by the state to issue citations on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.360 - Penalty. 
    Any person in violation of this chapter, upon conviction, shall be subject to prosecution and fined up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each occasion on which a violation occurs. Each offense and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation continues. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
13.16.370 - Abatement. 
    Whenever any person convicted of violating this chapter shall continue to maintain property in violation of this chapter, an appropriate designee of the city may be empowered to enter upon the property and correct the unlawful condition, and to place a lien against the property for the cost of such litter removal and the cost of preparing and filing the lien, including legal expenses incurred. 
    Any such item or items which remain on the property of the occupant for a period of thirty (30) days after notice of violation of this article shall be presumed to be abandoned and subject to being removed from the property by the city without further notice. The city may charge the owner or occupant a fee for the cost of removing such item or items. This section shall not apply to licensed junk dealers or currently licensed establishments engaged in the repair, rebuilding, reconditioning, or salvaging of equipment or furniture. 
(Ord. of 12-10-18) 
Chapter 13.20 - USER CHARGE SYSTEM 
Sections: 

13.20.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    "Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as PL 92-500 as amended. 
    "BOD 5 (biochemical oxygen demand)" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions in five days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
    "Domestic strength wastes" means any wastes which have an average daily concentration not exceeding three hundred (300) milligrams per liter biochemical oxygen demand or three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter of suspended solids. 
    "EPA user charge" means that portion of the total sewer bill which is attributable to the implementation of the EPA user charge system. Such rates include collection of operation, maintenance and replacement expenses as defined in this section. 
    "Operation, maintenance and replacement costs" means the costs associated with keeping the treatment works in good repair and at design specifications. This includes labor, supplies, utilities, chemicals, billing, administration, and general expenses including installation and/or repair of equipment, accessories, or appurtenances necessary during the service life of the treatment works. 
    "Over-strength wastes" means any wastewater discharged into the treatment works which exceeds a biochemical oxygen demand of three hundred (300) milligrams per liter or a suspended solid of three hundred fifty (350) milligrams per liter. 
    "SS (suspended solids)" means solids that either float on the surface or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquid and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    "Toxic pollutant" means any discharge into the treatment works which interferes with the normal biological process of the treatment works or in some way reduces the efficiency of the treatment works or causes special procedures to be necessary to properly dispose of either effluent or sludge produced by the treatment works so that the cost of such disposal is increased. 
    "User" means any person, business, corporation or other entity which discharges wastes into the treatment works continuously or occasionally. A wastewater customer is a user, but a user does not necessarily have to be a wastewater customer. 
    "Wastewater customer" means any residence, business, industry, school, or other building tied into and receiving services from the treatment works and receiving periodic billing thereof. 
(Prior code § 23-76) 
13.20.020 - EPA user charge system. 
A.  The EPA user charge system shall result in the calculation of three unit charges: 
1.  An administrative charge to be calculated based on the administration costs and the number of wastewater customers to be assessed on a per-meter basis; 
2.  An operation, maintenance and replacement fee calculated based on the volume of wastewater used by wastewater customers and the total operation maintenance and replacement costs incurred by the city to be assessed on a per thousand gallons of water basis; and 
3.  A surcharge rate to be applied to all over-strength wastes to be based on the strength and volume of such wastes and the cost of treatment. 
    The specific calculation of these charges for the city is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
B.  Any user which discharges any toxic pollutants which cause an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge of the treatment works shall be required to pay for all such costs. 
C.  The city shall review not less often than every two years the wastewater contribution of users, the total costs of operation and maintenance of the treatment works, and the approved user charge system. The city shall revise the charges for customers to accomplish the following: 
1.  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users; 
2.  Generate sufficient funds to pay the total operation and maintenance costs necessary to proper operation and maintenance (including minor replacement) of the treatment works; and 
3.  Apply excess revenues collected to adjust future rates accordingly. 
D.  The city will notify each user at least annually in conjunction with a regular bill or other mailing, of the rate attributable to the user charge system. 
E.  The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions or contracts between the city and users which are inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)-(1)(A) of the Act and 40 CFR Part 35, dated September 27, 1978. 
(Prior code § 23-77) 
13.20.030 - EPA user charge rates. 
    The EPA user charge, which includes charges for operation, maintenance, and replacement expenses, will be assessed for all contributions to the treatment works. These rates will be established by resolution of city council and will be on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Amended during 1997 codification: prior code § 23-78, 23-79) 
Chapter 13.24 - SERVICES OUTSIDE THE CITY-CONDITIONS 
Sections: 

13.24.010 - Definition. 
    "Utility service" means the city's water, sewage collection and disposal or solid waste collection and disposal systems or services, or any combination of same. 
(Ord. 00-02 (part)) 
13.24.020 - Conditions. 
A.  Water-Sewer. No water or sewer shall be furnished to property outside the city until the following items have been complied with and approved by the mayor and council: 
1.  Approval of Preliminary Plans. Approval of preliminary plans for subdivision by the appropriate governmental authority which plan shall include the following: 
a.  Water system including size of main; 
b.  Sanitary sewer system including all trunk lines and lateral lines; 
c.  Proposed street names; 
d.  Type of street paving; 
e.  Provision for adequate curbs and gutters; 
f.  Installation of storm sewers where needed; and 
g.  Proposed playground or park area; if any. 
2.  Contract Required. Before any water or sewage utilities will be furnished to properties outside the city, it shall be necessary that the city and contractor enter into a contract relative to the accomplishment of the items heretofore outlined. 
B.  Utilities. 
1.  When a property owner requests utilities services to property not within the corporate limits of the city, at the discretion of the city, the owner will be required to: 
a.  Petition for annexation (if any property is contiguous to the existing limits of the city) prior to commencement of construction of utility lines; or 
b.  Execute a restrictive covenant consenting to annexation of such property into the city when the property becomes contiguous. 
2.  When such property is not contiguous and execution of the covenant is required, the owner will also be required to submit a certificate of title to the city attorney's office to verify ownership of the property. The covenant will be recorded in the property records at the county courthouse and will stipulate that if the property becomes contiguous in the future and the property owner refuses to petition for annexation, the city will have the authority to terminate utility services. 
3.  Construction of utility lines will not begin until the requirements of this chapter are met, which shall be indicated by authorization of the mayor. 
(Ord. 00-02 (part)) 
Chapter 13.28 - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN 
Sections: 

13.28.010 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter: 
    "Address" means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even-numbered address" means a house number ending with the number) 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. "Odd-numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7 or 9. 
    "Affected citizens" means any citizen living within the corporate city limits of the city of Metter whether they are connected to the city's water system or have their own well and/or both, and any citizen that is connected to the city of Metter's water system who lives outside of the corporate city limits of Metter. 
(Ord. dated 10-14-04 § 1) 
13.28.020 - Minimum measures for nondrought periods. 
    The city has established minimum measures to promote reductions in the daily water demands of our water customers as follows: 
A.  No outdoor water use from ten a.m. to twelve midnight; 
B.  Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of twelve midnight to ten a.m.: 
1.  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays and Sundays, 
2.  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays and Saturdays, 
3.  No watering on Fridays, 
4.  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
5.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks and driveways except when necessary for public health and safety. 
(Ord. dated 10-14-04 § 2) 
13.28.030 - Critical emergency for declared drought levels. 
    The city has established the following uniform requirements for the critical emergency situation of the city's water supply, the health and safety of the city water users, and the state-declared drought response levels three and four: 
A.  No outside water of any kind, including street flushing, public fountains, park irrigation, watering lawns, gardens, shrubbery, etc.; 
B.  No commercial and/or private water uses such as swimming pools, and motor vehicles washing of any kind including car washers; 
C.  No commercial and home laundry use except during the hours of seven p.m. to seven a.m.; 
D.  No watering of golf courses. 
(Ord. dated 10-14-04 § 3) 
13.28.040 - Enforcement. 
    The enforcement actions shall be taken on those users not complying with this water conservation chapter in the following manner: 
A.  Inspection by duly authorized employees of the water department bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any person found to be violating the provisions of this chapter shall be served written notice stating the nature of the violations and shall be issued a warning ticket for this violation. 
C.  On second violation, water service will be terminated and a reconnect fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be charged. 
D.  All such subsequent violations shall be charged a reconnect fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. dated 10-14-04 § 4) 
Chapter 13.32 - GREASE, OIL, AND SAND CONTROL 
Sections: 

13.32.10 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to control discharges into the public sewerage collection system and wastewater treatment plant that interfere with the operations of the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines, interfere with normal operation of pumps and their controls, and contribute waste of a strength or form that either causes treatment difficulties or is beyond the treatment capability of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.20 - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Grease. Material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease (FOG) from animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil, and, grease shall be deemed as grease by definition. Grease does not include petroleum based products. 
    Grease trap. A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settlable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
    Food service establishments. Those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. 
    These facilities include restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants, or any other sewer users as determined by the city's public works director. 
    User. Any person or establishment including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the city's wastewater collection or treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
    Oil/water separator. An approved and industry standard system that is specifically designed and manufactured to separate oil from water. The system shall allow the oil to be collected and removed on a regular basis as to prevent it from being discharged into the wastewater collection system. Only oil/water separators manufactured for that specific operation will be approved. Adequate support literature from the manufacturer will be required so as to allow a proper review by the public works director. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.30 - General criteria. 
A.  Installation requirements. All existing, proposed, or newly remodeled food service establishments inside the City of Metter wastewater service area shall be required to install, at the user's expense an approved, properly operated and maintained grease trap, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  Sanitary sewer flows. Sanitary sewer flows from toilets, urinals, lavatories, etc. shall not be discharged into the grease trap. These flows shall be conveyed separately to the sanitary sewer service lateral. 
C.  Floor drains. Only floor drains which discharge or have the potential to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease trap. 
D.  Garbage grinders/disposers. It is recommended that solid food waste products be disposed of through normal solid waste/garbage disposal means. If a grinder/disposal is used it must be connected to the grease trap. The use of grinders is discouraged since it decreases the operational capacity of the grease trap and will require an increased pumping frequency to ensure continuous and effective operation. 
E.  Dishwashers. Commercial dishwashers must be connected to the grease trap. Dishwashers discharge soap and hot water which can melt grease and allow it to pass through an undersized grease trap. Traps must be sized accordingly to allow enough detention time to allow water to cool and grease to solidify and float to the top of the trap. 
F.  Location. Grease trap shall be installed outside the building upstream from the sanitary sewer service lateral connection. This will allow easy access for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at any time. A grease trap may not be installed inside any part of a building without written approval of the public works director. 
G.  Pass through limits. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the city's sanitary sewer system any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the city's waste system whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.40 - Implementation. 
A.  New plumbing systems. Notwithstanding other respectable authority, and unless otherwise exempted in this section, this chapter shall apply to all food service establishments that discharge to the sewers of the city. 
B.  Altered or remodeled plumbing systems. Notwithstanding other respectable authority, all existing food service establishments servicing users other than individual residential users that are altered or remodeled as to the requirements of this chapter, and which discharge into the sewers of the city shall be in compliance with this chapter. 
C.  Existing installations. The city may require, at the user's expense, the installation of exterior or interior grease interceptors for existing plumbing installations where the capacity of the sewer system is reduced due to congealed grease, or where congealed grease otherwise impairs the proper functioning of the sewer system. 
    All existing food service establishments, determined by the public works director to have a reasonable potential to adversely impact the city's sewer system will be notified of their obligations to install a grease interceptor within the specified period set forth in the notification letter. 
D.  Variance from requirements. Grease interceptors required under this chapter shall be installed unless the public works director authorizes the installation of an indoor grease trap or other alternative pretreatment technology and determines that the installation of a grease interceptor would not be feasible. The food service establishment bears the burden of demonstrating that the installation of the interceptor is not feasible. The public works director may authorize the installation of an indoor grease trap where the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible due to space constraints or other considerations. If an establishment believes the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible, because of documented space constraints, the request for an alternate grease removal device shall contain the following language: 
(1)  Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available exterior space outside building. 
(2)  Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all services. 
Alternative pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to, devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into the sanitary sewer collection system. All alternative pretreatment technology must the appropriately sized and approved by the public works director. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.50 - Design criteria. 
A.  Construction. All tanks shall be either interior or exterior sealed concrete construction, or fiberglass construction or its equivalent. All grease removal devices or technologies shall be subject to the written approval of the public works director. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology. 
B.  Access. Access to grease traps shall be available at all times, to allow for their maintenance and inspection. Access to trap shall be provided by two manholes (one on each compartment) terminating at finished grade with cast iron frame and cover. 
C.  Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the grease trap shall be designed to have adequate load- bearing capacity. (Example: vehicular traffic in driving or parking areas) 
D.  Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to a grease trap shall enter only through the inlet pipe of the trap. Each grease trap shall have only one inlet and one outlet pipe. 
E.  Grease trap sizing. All grease traps shall have a capacity of not less than one thousand (1,000) gallons, nor exceed a capacity of three thousand (3,000) gallons. If the calculated capacity exceeds three thousand (3,000) gallons, multiple units plumbed in series shall be installed. All grease traps shall be designed as to sizing as follows: 
(1)  Restaurants and cafeterias: 
(S) x (GS) x HR/(12) x (LF) = Interceptor capacity, where: 
S = Number of seats in dining area 
GS = Gallons of wastewater per seat (25 gallons per seat) 
HR = Number of hours open 
LR = Loading factor: 
(a) 1.25 = Interstate freeways 
(b) 1.0 = Recreational areas 
(c) 0.8 = Main highways 
(d) 0.5 = Other highways 
(2)  Hospitals, nursing homes, hotels, motels, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers, and similar commercial kitchens with varied seating capacity: 
(M) x (GM) x (LF) = Capacity in gallons, where: 
M = Meals per day 
GM = Gallons of wastewater per meal (5 gallons per meal) 
LF = Loading Factor: 
(a) 1.0 = with dishwater 
(b) 0.5 = without dishwater 
13.32.60 - Grease trap maintenance. 
A.  Cleaning/pumping. The user at the user's expense shall maintain all grease traps to assure proper operation and efficiency and maintain compliance with the city's pass through limits. Maintenance of grease trap shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludge and solids. This work shall be performed by a qualified and licensed hauler. 
    Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the trap from which it was removed or any other grease trap, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is prohibited. This service shall also include a thorough inspection of the trap and its components. Any needed repairs shall be noted. Repairs shall be made at user's expense. 
B.  Cleaning/pumping frequency. The grease trap must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every four months, or more frequently, as determined by the public works director, as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the sanitary sewer system. 
C.  Disposal. All waste removed from each grease trap must be disposed of at a facility approved to receive such waste in accordance with the provisions of this program. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any private or public portion of the city's sanitary sewer collection system. 
    All pumpage from grease traps must be tracked by a manifest, which confirms pumping, hauling, and disposal of waste. The customer must obtain and retain a copy of the original manifest from the hauler and provide a copy of the same to the public works director after each pump. 
D.  Maintenance log. A grease trap cleaning/maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous twenty-four (24) months shall be maintained by each food service facility. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler, and disposal site and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection. Said log shall be made available to the public works director or his representative upon request. 
E.  Submittal of records. Each user shall submit all cleaning and maintenance records to the public works director. The maintenance records shall include the following information: 
(1)  Facility name, address, contact person, and phone number. 
(2)  Company name, address, phone number, and contact name of person responsible for performing the maintenance, cleaning, pumping, or repair of grease trap. 
(3)  Types of maintenance performed. 
(4)  Dates maintenance was performed. 
(5)  Date of next scheduled maintenance. 
(6)  Copies of manifests. 
    The user shall be required to submit maintenance records to the public works director on a biannual basis (twice per year). Records shall be submitted by March 1 and September 1 of each year. The records shall be submitted to: 
City of Metter 
Attn. Public Works Director 
P.O. Box 74 
Metter, Georgia 30439 
    The public works director or his duly authorized agent will perform monthly inspections of these facilities and shall notify the user of any additional required maintenance or repairs. Upon written notification by the public works director, the user shall be required to perform the maintenance and records of said maintenance within fourteen (14) calendar days. Upon inspection by the public works director the user may be required to install, at his expense, additional controls to provide a complete system which prevents discharges of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.70 - Additives. 
    Any biological additive(s) placed into the grease trap or building discharge line including but not limited to, enzymes, commercially available bacteria, or other additives designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat, or otherwise eliminate fats, oils, and grease shall require written approval by the public works director prior to use. The use of such additives shall in no way be considered as a substitution to the maintenance procedures required herein. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.80 - Chemical treatment. 
    Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, acid, or other chemical solvents designed to dissolve or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease trap. All such chemicals shall meet the required effluent quality parameters as stated in Section 13.12.080 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.90 - Sand, soil, and oil interceptors. 
    All car washes, truck washes, garages, service stations, car and truck maintenance facilities, fabricators, utility equipment shops, and other facilities (as determined by the public works director) that have sources of sand, soil, and oil shall install effective sand, soil and oil traps, interceptors, and/or oil/water separators. These systems shall be sized to effectively remove sand, soil, and oil at the expected flow rates. These systems shall be, at the user's expense, cleaned or pumped on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the wastewater collection and treatment systems. Users whose systems are deemed to be ineffective by the public works director shall be asked to change the cleaning frequency or to increase the size of the system. Owners or operators of washing facilities will be required to prevent the inflow of detergents and rainwater into the wastewater collection system. 
    Oil/water separator installations shall be required at facilities that accumulate petroleum oils and greases and at facilities deemed necessary by the public works director. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.100 - Control equipment. 
    Underground equipment shall be tightly sealed to prevent inflow of rainwater and shall be easily accessible to allow regular maintenance and inspection. Control equipment shall be maintained by the owner and/or operator of the facility as to prevent a stoppage of the wastewater collection system, and the accumulation of FOG, food waste, sand, soil, and lint in the collection lines, pump stations, and wastewater treatment plant. 
    If the city is required to clean out the wastewater collection lines, as a result of a stoppage resulting from poorly maintained control equipment (or lack thereof) the owner or operator shall be required to refund the labor, equipment, materials, and any overhead costs to the city including any fines incurred due to any sanitary sewer overflow due directly to the stoppage. 
    The city retains the right to inspect and approve any and all installations of control equipment. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.110 - Alteration of control methods. 
    The City of Metter, through the public works department, reserves the right to request additional control measures if existing control equipment is shown to be insufficient to protect the wastewater collection system and wastewater treatment plant from interference due to the discharge of FOG, sand, soil, lint, or any other undesirable materials. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.120 - Enforcement and penalties. 
    Any person who violates this chapter, in part or whole, shall be guilty of a civil violation punishable under and according to the general penalty provision of the City of Metter's Municipal Code of Ordinances. Each day's violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
13.32.130 - Severability. 
    Each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, and clause of this ordinance is declared to be separable and severable. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
Chapter 13.36 - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 
Sections: 

13.36.010 - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the Identity Theft Prevention Program. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.020 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.030 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply: 
    "City" means the City of Metter. 
    "Covered account" means: 
(i)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and 
(ii)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    "Credit" means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
    "Creditor" means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    "Customer" means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    "Identity theft" means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    "Person" means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    "Personal identifying information" means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    "Red flag" means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    "Service provider" means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.040 - Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water, sewer, sanitation, and yard waste. 
(3)  The city's previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts is as follows: City has no previous experience with identity theft. 
(4)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(5)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. 
(6)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
a.  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
b.  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
c.  Use of another person's bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
d.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.050 - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. 
(2)  Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique to that account. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.060 - Access to covered account information. 
(1)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the city clerk on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. 
(3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.070 - Credit card payments. 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.080 - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(2)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer. 
c.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
d.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
e.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
f.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
g.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(3)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
i.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
i.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
ii.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns; 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(4)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.090 - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
a.  Contact the customer; 
b.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
i.  change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
ii.  close the account; 
c.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
d.  Notify a debt collector within twenty-four (24) hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
e.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
f.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city clerk. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
a.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
b.  Deny the application for the new account; 
c.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
d.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.100 - Updating the program. 
    The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.110 - Program administration. 
    The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
13.36.120 - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. dated 11-10-08) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters: 
15.04 General Provisions 15.08 Building Code 15.12 Electrical Code 15.16 Gas Code 15.20 Plumbing Code 15.24 Water Conservation Construction Requirements 15.28 Building Numbering 15.32 Abatement of Unsafe Buildings and Structures 15.36 Flood Damage Prevention 15.40 Standards for Telecommunications Antennas and Towers 15.44 Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance 15.48 Recreational Vehicle Parks 15.52 Pre-Owned Manufactured Homes  
Chapter 15.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

15.04.010 - Definitions. 
    In the technical codes adopted in this title: 
    Wherever the word "municipality" is used it shall be held to mean the city of Metter. 
    Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used it shall be held to mean the attorney for the city of Metter. 
(Prior code § 7-2) 
15.04.020 - Enforcement. 
    The codes adopted by the provisions of this title shall be enforced by the building official. 
(Prior code § 7-3) 
15.04.030 - Modifications. 
    The building official shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the codes adopted in this title upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the building official thereon shall be entered upon the records of the building official and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Prior code § 7-4) 
15.04.040 - Appeals. 
    Whenever the building official shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of a code adopted in this chapter do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the code has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the building official to the mayor and council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed. 
(Prior code § 7-5) 
15.04.050 - Conflicts. 
    In the event of any conflict between the provisions of a code adopted in this title and applicable provisions of this code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations, the provisions of this code, state law or city ordinances, rules or regulations shall prevail and be controlling. 
(Prior code § 7-6) 
15.04.060 - Fence permit. 
    All persons desiring to erect any type of fence in the city shall first obtain a permit from the city clerk and pay the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for such permit. 
(Prior code § 17-1) 
Chapter 15.08 - BUILDING CODE 
Sections: 

15.08.010 - Adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and structures, including permits and penalties, that certain building code known as the Standard Building Code, recommended by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc., being particularly 1991 Edition thereof, including Chapter 1, and Appendix H as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, and the whole thereof, of which a copy has been and now is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions of said code shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and other structures contained within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 (part): prior code § 7-24) 
15.08.020 - Building permit fees. 
    Building permit fees shall be set by city council and will be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part): Ord. dated 9-20-93 (part): Ord. dated 3-25-92 (part): prior code § 7-25) 
Chapter 15.12 - ELECTRICAL CODE 
Sections: 

15.12.010 - Adopted. 
    All electric construction, all material and all appliances used in connection with electrical work, and the operation of all electrical apparatus within the city, shall conform to the National Electrical Code, 1990 Edition, recommended by the National Fire Protection Association, which is adopted as the official electrical code of the city. A copy of such code is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 (part): prior code § 7-60) 
15.12.020 - Permit required. 
    No alteration shall be made in the wiring of any building for light, heat or power, or increase in the load carried by such wires, nor shall any building be wired for electric lights, motors or heating devices, without a written permit therefor from the building official. 
(Prior code § 7-61) 
15.12.030 - Failure to correct defects-Denial of permits-Forfeiture of license. 
    Any person who shall fail to correct any defects in his work, after having been duly notified for ten (10) days by the building official, shall not receive any further permit until such defect or defects have been corrected: and in any case in which any person shall continue to or persistently violate any ordinance of the city in regard to electrical affairs or the orders of the building official touching the same, the license of such person shall be forfeited. 
(Prior code § 7-62) 
15.12.040 - Inspection of wiring and appliances. 
    Upon the completion of the wiring of any building for light, heat or power, it shall be the duty of the company, firm or individual doing the same to notify the building official, who shall at once inspect such wiring and appliances, and if approved by him, he shall issue a certificate of satisfactory inspection, which shall contain the date of such inspection and an outline of the results of his examination, but no such certificate shall be issued unless such electric wiring and appliances are in strict conformity to the rules and regulations prescribed or required by this chapter, nor shall current be turned on at such installation until such certificate is issued. 
(Prior code § 7-63) 
15.12.050 - Electrical inspection fees. 
    The electrical inspection fees shall be set by city council and will be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part): Ord. dated 9-20-93 (part): prior code §§ 7-64, 7-65) 
15.12.060 - Right of entry. 
    The building official shall have the right in the discharge of his duties to enter any building, manhole or subway, or to climb any pole for the purpose of examining and testing the electrical appliances therein or thereon contained. And for that purpose he shall be given prompt access to all buildings, public and private, and to all manholes, subways or poles, on application to the individual or company owning or in charge of same. 
(Prior code § 7-66) 
15.12.070 - Removal of defective wire or appliance. 
    Whenever an electric wire or appliance shall be defective through improper or insufficient insulation, or for any other reason the building official shall at once cause the removal of such defect or defects at the expense of the owners of such wires or appliances. 
(Prior code § 7-67) 
15.12.080 - Poles and wires in streets. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official to so direct the placing of poles and wires in the streets, alleys and public places of the city that the same shall cause as little obstruction as possible, either to public travel on such thoroughfares or to the private use and enjoyment of adjacent property. It shall also be his duty, and he shall have authority, to compel the removal of unsafe or superfluous poles. 
(Prior code § 7-68) 
15.12.090 - Use of poles by city and utility companies. 
    On any poles of any electric light, power, telephone or telegraph company, used jointly by two or more such companies, each company shall be allotted a special zone and shall confine its wires to that zone. Spaces shall be measured from the tops of poles downward, and a suitable zone of every pole shall at all times be reserved for the free use of the city. 
(Prior code § 7-69) 
15.12.100 - Removal of poles. 
    No person owning or using a utility pole shall fail or refuse, after five days' notice from the building official, to remove any pole or poles deemed by him unsuitable, unsafe or improperly located, or the location of which he may require to be changed. The erection or use of any poles rejected or condemned by the building official is prohibited. 
(Prior code § 7-70) 
15.12.110 - Removal of wires for painting or repair of buildings. 
    Whenever builders or persons engaged in repairing, painting, etc., find it necessary to remove wires from buildings in prosecuting their work, the owner of such building or the contractor engaged thereon shall serve the building official with written notice twenty-four (24) hours before such contemplated work is begun, and the building official shall have authority in his discretion to direct the owners of such wires to remove the same. 
(Prior code § 7-71) 
15.12.120 - Removal of dead wires. 
    The building official shall cause all wires, except telephone wires, that have not been used for thirty (30) days, and which are known as dead wires, to be removed at once at the expense of the owners of such wires. All dead wires of telephone companies shall be detached from the buildings with which they have been connected. 
(Prior code § 7-72) 
15.12.130 - Discontinuance of electrical service. 
    In case of failure to comply with this chapter, the building official shall have the authority, after due notice, to cut lights or current in any locality concerned and to enforce discontinuance of the same until such requirements are complied with. 
(Prior code § 7-73) 
15.12.140 - Compliance with orders required. 
    No person shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any order of the building official given in pursuance of and by the authority of this chapter and the rules embraced therein. 
(Prior code § 7-74) 
Chapter 15.16 - GAS CODE 
Sections: 

15.16.010 - Adopted. 
    There is adopted by and for the city the Standard Gas Code, 1991 Edition including Chapter 1, recommended by the Southern Building Code Congress with revisions as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, which is incorporated in this section, and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which is filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 (part): prior code § 7-44) 
Chapter 15.20 - PLUMBING CODE 
Sections: 

15.20.010 - Adopted. 
    There is adopted by and for the city the Standard Plumbing Code recommended by the Southern Building Code Congress, 1991 Edition, including Chapter 1, with revisions as adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, which is referred to, incorporated in this section and made a part hereof for all purposes, a copy of which code is filed of record in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 (part): prior code § 7-42) 
15.20.020 - Inspection fees. 
    Plumbing inspection fees shall be set by city council and will be kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. dated 5-12-97 (part): Ord. dated 9-20-93 (part): Ord. dated 3-25-92 (part): prior code § 7-43) 
Chapter 15.24 - WATER CONSERVATION CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS 
Sections: 

15.24.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Commercial" means any type of building other than residential. 
    "Construction" means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
    "Residential" means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 § 1: prior code § 23-38 (part)) 
15.24.020 - Residential water conservation restrictions. 
    On or after April 1, 1992, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
A.  Employs a gravity tank-type, flush-ometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one piece toilets until April 1, 1992; 
B.  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
C.  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
D.  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
E.  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 § 2: prior code § 23-38 (part)) 
15.24.030 - Commercial water conservation restrictions. 
    On or after April 1, 1992 there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (A) through (E) of Section 15.24.020. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 § 3: prior code § 23-38 (part)) 
15.24.040 - Applicability. 
    The requirements of Section 15.24.020 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after April 1, 1992 and to any commercial construction initiated after April 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 § 4: prior code § 23-38 (part)) 
15.24.050 - Exemptions. 
A.  Exemptions. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of Sections 15.24.020 through 15.24.040 when: 
1.  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; or 
2.  Such plumbing or sewerage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this chapter were installed; or 
3.  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
4.  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped, 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution, or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
B.  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (A)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 § 5: prior code § 23-38 (part)) 
15.24.060 - Enforcement. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the building inspector of the city. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 § 6(a): prior code § 23-38 (part)) 
15.24.070 - Violation-Penalty. 
    Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this chapter shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this chapter may be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred thirteen dollars ($113.00) or imprisonment not to exceed eleven (11) days. 
(Ord. dated 3-25-92 § 6(b): prior code § 23-38 (part)) 
Chapter 15.28 - BUILDING NUMBERING 
Sections: 

15.28.005 - Purpose. 
    This chapter is for the purpose of public safety for the citizens and residents of the city so as to facilitate the location of buildings by safety and emergency personnel, including police, fire and EMS personnel. 
(Ord. 01-01 (part)) 
15.28.010 - Placement of numbers on buildings. 
    All entrances from the public streets of the city to buildings fronting thereon shall be numbered as provided in this chapter. All numbers shall be placed upon, or immediately above or to one side of the door or gate or post of such entrance or shall be otherwise conspicuously located near such entrance so that the same shall be in plain view. All numerals in the number shall be at least three inches in height, and placed to read from left to right. 
(Ord. 97-4 § 1) 
15.28.020 - Numbering system-Zero points designated. 
A.  For all streets running north and south and crossing Broad Street, Broad Street is the zero point and north of Broad Street and designated as "North Lewis," "North Kennedy," etc., and south of Broad they are "South Lewis," "South Kennedy," etc. 
B.  For all streets running east and west and crossing Rountree Street, Rountree Street is the zero point, and east of Rountree the streets are designated as "East Lee Street," "East Vetia Street," etc. and west of Rountree they are designated as "West Lee Street," "West Vertia Street," etc. 
C.  Starting at the zero points, all numbers on the right-hand side of the street will be even numbers and on the left hand side of the street will be odd numbers. 
(Ord. 97-4 § 2) 
15.28.030 - Numbers designated by city clerk. 
    It shall be the duty of the city clerk to designate the respective numbers for buildings or parcels of land fronting on streets heretofore laid out or extended. 
(Ord. 97-4 § 3) 
15.28.040 - Display of numbers required. 
    No owner, occupant, lessee, tenant or subtenant of any building having an entrance which fronts on a public street shall display any number of such building or entrance thereto other than the proper number designated by the city clerk and shall within thirty (30) days after receiving notice of such designated number from the city clerk place the same upon or immediately above or to one side of the door, gate, post or entrance to such building or in some other conspicuous location as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 01-01 (part); Ord. 97-4 § 4) 
15.28.050 - Responsibility of owner and occupant to place numbers. 
    It shall be the responsibility of both the owner and occupant of any building, at his expense, to cause the same to be numbered in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. 97-4 § 5) 
15.28.060 - Failure to display street addresses-No city services. 
    All new residences and businesses must display correct street addresses as provided by this chapter. No services (water, sewer, sanitation, etc.) will be extended to these premises until such numbers are correctly and properly displayed or affixed. Any residence or business failing to display or affix numbers as contemplated herein shall be subject to the penalty set out in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. 01-01 (part): Ord. 97-4 § 6) 
Chapter 15.32 - ABATEMENT OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
Sections: 

15.32.010 - Scope and applicability. 
A.  Authority and Scope. This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Title 41, Chapter 2, Sections 7 through 17, as amended, of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (OCGA) and referenced in this chapter as the "statute." OCGA Section 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this chapter. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to both residential and nonresidential property whether being occupied or not and whether being developed or not. (Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Specific Terms Defined. As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply. 
    "Parties in interest" means the persons defined in OCGA Section 41-2-8(7). 
    "Person" means any natural person, corporation, partnership (general or limited), estate, trust, or other entity or artificial person, or combination thereof. 
    "Public authority" means such agency or official(s) as defined in OCGA Section 41-2-8(8). 
    Public Officer. The manager, or designee, shall be the public officer who shall exercise the primary responsibilities prescribed by this chapter and shall be the "public officer" defined in OCGA Section 41-2-8(9). 
    "Undesirable vegetation" means plants, which due to natural growth characteristics, constitute a negative effect on public safety, public health or public welfare. 
B.  Definitions Incorporated by Reference. To the extent not stated above, the definitions set forth in OCGA Section 41-2-8 are incorporated in this section by reference. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.030 - Unsafe buildings and structures prohibited. 
    Any building or structure that has any of the following conditions, such that the life, health, property or safety of its occupants or the general public are endangered, is declared illegal and shall be abated by repair or rehabilitation or demolition or qualify for a secured building status in accordance with this chapter. Such conditions are as follows: 
A.  Any means of egress or portion thereof is not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; 
B.  Any means of egress or portion thereof, such as, but not limited to, fire doors, closing devices and fire-resistive gratings, which is in disrepair or in a dilapidated or nonworking condition such that the means of egress could be rendered unsafe in case of fire or panic; 
C.  The stress in any material, member or portion thereof, due to all imposed loads including dead load, exceeds the stresses allowed in the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings; 
D.  The building, structure or portion thereof has been damaged by fire, flood, earthquake, wind or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings; 
E.  Any exterior appendage or portion of the building or structure that is not securely fastened, attached or anchored such that it is capable of resisting wind, seismic or similar loads as required by the Georgia State Building Code for new buildings; 
F.  If for any reason the building, structure or portion thereof is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used; 
G.  The building, structure or portion thereof as a result of decay, deterioration or dilapidation is likely to fully or partially collapse; 
H.  The building, structure or portion thereof has been constructed or maintained in violation of a specific requirement of the standard codes or of a city, county or state law; 
I.  Any building, structure or portion thereof that is in such a condition as to constitute a public nuisance; 
J.  Any building, structure or portion thereof that is unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise a danger to human life, or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.040 - Buildings or structures unfit for present use-Determination. 
A.  The public works director and/or building official, as designated by the city council and/or city manager, may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, structure or lot which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure or the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
1.  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire accidents or other calamities; 
2.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanity facilities; 
3.  Dilapidation; 
4.  Disrepair; 
5.  Structural defects; 
6.  Uncleanliness; 
7.  Unsafe buildings; 
8.  Stagnant water on premises; 
9.  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to inhabitants of the city; 
10.  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal, fowl, or reptile (domestic or otherwise); 
11.  The external or outdoor storage or use of refrigerators, freezers, stoves, air conditioners, and any other appliances held in connection with licensed commercial established operated in an appropriately zoned district, or the residential use of one such appliance operated in an appropriately zoned district, or the residential use of one such appliance operated externally by the residents of the premises. All such appliances permitted to be stored externally shall be of the type that does not close or lock automatically; 
12.  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
B.  The public works director and/or building official, as designated by the city council and/or city manager, may determined, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, buildings or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Added during 1997 codification; Ord. of 7-11-05, § 1) 
15.32.050 - Securing of unsafe buildings and structures-Permit required. 
    The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to secure buildings and structures: 
A.  The owner must apply for a secured building/structure permit and pay the required fees and the public officer and/or building official shall then inspect such structure. 
B.  To qualify for secured building status, the building must be structurally sound (walls and roof); otherwise the secured building permit will be denied. 
C.  If the building is structurally sound, nonstructural interior portions (electrical wiring, plumbing, etc.) need not comply with appropriate codes while in secured status. 
D.  Building or structure must remain vacant while in secured status. 
E.  All utilities must remain turned off while in secured status. 
F.  Building must be secured, windows and doors covered and secured. 
G.  Structures (referenced in Georgia State Building Code) other than buildings must be repaired, rehabilitated, secured or demolished. 
H.  Buildings or structures on secured status shall be placed on a special routing slip for fire and police departments. 
1.  It is unlawful for any person to enter or be inside a secured building or structure, except for the owner or duly authorized agent. 
2.  It is unlawful for any person to remove securing material on a secured building or structure. 
I.  The building or structure must be annually reinspected by a public officer and/or building official. A report detailing the inspector's findings shall be included in the case file. If compliance is not present at this time, renewal of the secured building/structure permit will be forfeited and abatement of the nuisance will be referred to the city chief of police for necessary action. 
J.  A secured building permit may be renewed annually on payment of fee by owner. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.060 - Reoccupying a secured building or structure. 
    Before a building or structure can be reoccupied: 
A.  The building or structure must be fully returned to compliance with building/fire code; 
B.  The building or structure must be reinspected by the public officer and/or building official; 
C.  Approval of required plans, if applicable; historic preservation, if applicable; request and purchase of all required building permits, subtrade permits, etc., as may be required, for compliance with construction code; 
D.  No utilities shall be turned on until full compliance with construction codes (temporary service is permitted if necessary for construction work to bring building back into compliance with construction codes). 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.070 - Complaint and inspection. 
A.  Complaint. Whenever a request is filed with the public works director by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit or human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use, or whenever it appears to the public works director (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the public works director shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building or structure a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held in the city's municipal court, fixed not less than thirty-one (31) nor more than forty-five (45) days after the serving of such complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint prior to the hearing and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlled in hearings before the municipal court. 
B.  If, after such notice and hearing, the municipal court determines that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the municipal court shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order: 
1.  Requiring the owners or parties in interest, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to render it fit for human habitation or for current commercial, industrial or business use or to vacate and close dwelling, building or structure as a human habitation; or 
2.  If the repair, alteration or improvement of such dwelling, building or structure cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, building or structure requiring the owner or parties in interest within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure. 
C.  The owner or parties of interest may be entitled to seek an appeal of the municipal court's decision in accordance with the appellate procedures as defined by the laws of the state. 
D.  In no event shall the city require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building or structure, except upon a finding that the cost of required alteration or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value that such dwelling, building, or structure will have when the required alterations and/or improvements are completed to satisfy the minimum requirements of this chapter. 
E.  Records. The public works director shall be the supervisor and custodian of the records on each property against which a complaint is issued, including, but not limited to, the investigation findings course of action required, and, if applicable, citation and court findings. Such records shall be public records and made available to any party in interest and copies thereof provided upon the payment of such reasonable costs as may be incurred in duplicating or otherwise providing them. The records shall be preserved for not less than four years after the proceedings and action, if any, regarding, the property are concluded. 
(Added during 1997 codification; Ord. of 7-11-05, § 2) 
15.32.080 - Undesirable vegetation. 
    It is unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of any occupied lot of land in the city, or the owner of any unoccupied lot in the city, or for any agent or representation of any such occupant or owner, to permit or maintain on such lot any growth of undesirable vegetation. The complaint and inspection of undesirable vegetation shall be as set forth in Section 15.32.060. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.090 - Placarding. 
A.  When any owner or parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate, secure, and close or demolish the dwelling, building or structure, the administrative hearing officer may cause such dwelling, building or structure to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated, secured, and closed or demolished, and that the administrative hearing officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building, dwelling or structure so closed a placard with the following words: 
    "This building/structure is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or other use. The use or occupation of this building/structure for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or other use is prohibited and unlawful." 
B.  The placard shall bear the date posted, street number of the building involved and the signature of the director of the building inspection department, it shall thereafter be unlawful for such placard to be mutilated or removed or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.100 - Failure to comply with notices and orders. 
    Should the owner and parties in interest fail to comply with any order to remove or secure or demolish or vacate a dwelling, building or structure or to abate a nuisance, the complaint case file will be transferred to the city of chief of police for issuance of a citation and prosecution. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.110 - Demolition-Requirements. 
    No person shall begin demolition until a permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level, fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than twenty-five (25) percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas as determined by the director of the building inspection department. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.120 - Costs to be lien on property. 
    The cost of vacating, securing, removing, closing, demolition and/or the cutting of undesirable vegetation by the city shall be a lien of such amount against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of action against the property by the city and the filing of an itemized statement of the total sum of such costs by the director of the building inspection department in the office of the clerk of superior court of the lien docket(s) maintained for such purposes. If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished as directed by the director of the building inspection department, he shall sell the materials of such dwelling, building or structures and shall credit the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the director of the building inspection department, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of such court. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.130 - Procedure for collection of amount due on lien. 
    The city shall enforce the collection of any amount due on a lien arising under this chapter in the following manner: 
A.  Amount. The amount of the lien shall be established as follows: The cost of a ministration to be assessed against properties and service shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). The cost of vacating, securing, removal, closing or demolition shall be the cost paid or incurred by the city in effecting action against any property. 
B.  Notice of Lien. The owner, and/or parties if they possess a recorded interest in the property, shall be served with a copy of the lien and shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within thirty (30) days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total due on such lien, and by further paying the remaining balance due, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per year, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
C.  Transfer of Property. Should the property upon which such lien is perfected be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner and/or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year payment period, the entire balance due on such lien with earned interest, shall be due and payable to the city. 
D.  Nonsatisfaction. Should the amount due on the lien or any portion thereof, be unpaid after it is due, or upon the occurrence of the situation provided for in subsection (C) of this section, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in OCGA Section 48-5-358 and other applicable statutes, which shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property; all as provided by OCGA Section 48-4-40. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.140 - Service of notices and orders. 
A.  Service Effected per State Law. Service of complaints shall be effected as provided in OCGA Section 41-2-12. 
B.  Costs. The costs of service pursuant to this chapter shall be included in the sums otherwise due under the chapter. 
C.  Service. Such person(s) as designated by the city who are of legal age may be authorized to perform the service of all documents pursuant to this chapter in the manner usually performed by the sheriff, provided they follow the procedures established by statute for those officials and a fee may be assessed against the property so long as it does not exceed the fee currently imposed by the sheriff of Candler for that activity. Any notices or orders affecting property may be reserved upon the owner and parties in interest by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the address specified in OCGA Section 41-2-12, as applicable, and to the address of the property, if it is occupied on the date of inspection, care of "occupant." 
D.  Failure to Answer Notice or Order. If the owner and the parties in interest neither file an answer to the complaint or cause compliances and a decision is rendered which affects the property, an advertisement shall be published in the newspaper utilized for Candler County sheriff's tax sales for two consecutive weeks. The advertisement shall include the action required as pertaining to the property and the consequences which may result from noncompliance with the code or notice. A notice may identify more than one property. (Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.150 - Eminent domain. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state of Georgia or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures under this chapter shall not constitute the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.160 - Right to enter and inspect. 
    The public officer, or designee, or any person authorized to enforce this chapter, and any sworn officer of the police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.170 - Powers of public officer. 
    The public officer is authorized to exercise the following powers in addition to the other powers granted and set forth in this chapter: 
A.  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
B.  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
C.  To enter upon premises for the purposes of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
D.  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and 
E.  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter of such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
15.32.180 - Code of Georgia. 
    Any reference to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or OCGA shall include any amendment to a cited section as subsequently adopted. 
(Added during 1997 codification) 
Chapter 15.36 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Sections: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Ord. No. 2010-08, adopted Aug. 9, 2010, amended Ch. 15.36 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said chapter to read as herein set out. The former Ch. 15.36 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 98-12. 

Article 1. - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives 

15.36.010 - Authorization. 
    Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Metter, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.020 - Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of Metter, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.030 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.040 - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
Article 2. - General Provisions 

15.36.050 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Metter, Georgia. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.060 - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. 
    For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated December 17, 2010, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Candler County are hereby adopted by reference. 
    The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Metter City Hall/49 South Rountree Street/Metter, GA. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.070 - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.080 - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.100 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of Metter or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.120 - Penalties for violation. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than one hundred eighty (180) days (six months), or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Metter from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
Article 3. - Administration 

15.36.130 - Designation of flood ordinance administrator. 
    The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.140 - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
    Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application Stage. 
(a)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(b)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
(c)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of Section 15.36.150B(2); 
(d)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development; and 
(2)  Construction Stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.150 - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 15.36.060, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Article 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Section 15.36.140(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 15.36.140(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Section 15.36.140(1)(c) and Section 15.36.170(2) or Section 15.36.190(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
Article 4. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 

15.36.160 - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated Buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
(a)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(i)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(ii)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(iii)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
(b)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
(c)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.170 - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New Construction and/or Substantial Improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.36.160(4), "elevated buildings." 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-Residential Construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in Section 15.36.150(6). 
(3)  Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
(a)  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(b)  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
(c)  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. Section 15.36.160(6) above.) 
(d)  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
(iii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction," including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 15.36.170(3)(a)(c), above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.36.060 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
(b)  Only if Section 15.36.170(4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article 4. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.180 - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.36.060 where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 15.36.060 then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 4. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one-foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.36.160(4), "elevated buildings." 
(a)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
    The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.190 - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.36.060, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
1.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
2.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with Section 15.36.170. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.200 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.36.060, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.36.160(4), "elevated buildings." 
    The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in Section 15.36.140(1)(c) and Section 15.36.140(2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.210 - Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
15.36.220 - Standards for critical facilities. 
(1)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the one-hundred-year floodplain or the five-hundred-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the five-hundred-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
Article 5. - Variance Procedures 

15.36.230 - Variance procedures established. 
(A)  The mayor and city council (appeals board) shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(B)  The appeals board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(C)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the building official may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Candler County, as provided in OCGA § 5-4-1. 
(D)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(E)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(F)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(G)  In reviewing such requests, the appeals board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(H)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
i.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(I)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the appeals board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
Article 6. - Definitions 

15.36.240 - Defined. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "Accessory structure" means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in Section 15.36.060. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    "Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Building" means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    "Critical facility" means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(b)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(c)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(d)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
    "Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    "Existing construction" means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before December 17, 2010. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 9, 1998. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood insurance study" means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    "Flood proofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
    "Manufactured home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    "New construction" means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after December 17, 2010 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after March 9, 1998 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after March 9, 1998. 
    "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle, which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements). For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    "Subdivision" the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. Note: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
    For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    "Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. 2010-08) 
Chapter 15.40 - STANDARDS FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 
Sections: 

15.40.010 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of the ordinance codified in this chapter are to: 
A.  Provide for the appropriate location and development of communication towers and antennas to serve the residents and businesses of the city of Metter; 
B.  Minimize adverse visual impacts of towers and antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging techniques; 
C.  Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; 
D.  Lessen traffic impacts on surrounding residential areas; 
E.  Maximize use of any new and existing communication towers so as to minimize the need to construct new towers and minimize the total number of towers throughout the city; 
F.  Maximize and encourage use of alternative tower structures as a primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers; and 
G.  Encourage and promote the location of new communication towers in areas which are not zoned for residential use. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    "Alternative tower structure" means manmade structures such as clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, water towers, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and towers. 
    "Antenna" means an exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    "Director" means the Metter building inspector. 
    "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    "Governing body" means the city council for the city of Metter. 
    "Guy towers" means a communication tower that is supported, in whole or in part, by guy wires and ground anchors. 
    "Height," when referring to a tower, antennas or other structure, means the distance measured vertically from the highest point when positioned for operation to the lowest point which is defined as the bottom of the base of the structure being measured at either roof or ground level, whichever is applicable. The height of a tower shall include the height of any antennas positioned for operation attached or which may be attached to the highest point on the tower. 
    "Lattice" or "self-supporting tower" means a communication tower that has open-framed supports on three or four sides and is constructed without guy wires and ground anchors. 
    "Monopole tower" means a communications tower consisting of a single pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors. 
    "Tower" means a structure, such as self-supporting lattice tower, guy tower or monopole tower, constructed as a freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent structure or equipment, on which is located one or more antennas intended for transmitting or receiving television, AM/FM radio, digital, microwave, cellular, telephone, or similar forms of electric communication. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carriers towers, and cellular telephone towers. The term excludes any tower and antenna under seventy (70) feet in total height and owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission, and satellite earth station antenna one meter in diameter or less, any receive-only home television antenna, and any satellite earth station antenna two meters or less in diameter which is located in a commercial or industrial zoning district. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.030 - Permitted uses. 
A.  Upon receipt of an appropriate building permit, freestanding communication towers may be located in the following zoning districts of the city: 
1.  Light industrial (LI) and heavy industrial (HI) zoning districts as a permitted use; provided, however, such towers satisfy all of the conditions in Sections 15.40.040 and 15.40.050 and do not exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet in height; 
2.  Central business district (CBD), highway oriented commercial district (HOC), commercial planned unit development (PUD), park, education and health zone (PEH), public works zone (PW), neighborhood and general commercial zone (CR) and highway oriented commercial zone (HOC-I-A) as a permitted use; provided, however, such towers shall satisfy all of the conditions of Sections 15.40.040 and 15.40.050 and do not exceed the following height limitations: 
a.  For a single user, no more than seventy (70) feet in height, 
b.  For two users, no more than one hundred (100) feet in height, and 
c.  For three or more users, no more than one hundred fifty (150) in height; 
3.  Central business district (CBD), highway oriented commercial (HOC), commercial planned unit development (PUD), light industrial (LI), heavy industrial (HI), park, education and health zone (PEH), public works zone (PW), neighborhood and general commercial zone (CR) and highway oriented commercial zone (HOC-I-A) as a conditional use when such towers do not exceed the tower heights permitted in Section 15.40.030(A)(1) and (2) of this section; provided, however, such towers also satisfy all of the requirements of Sections 15.40.040 and 15.40.050; 
4.  Guy towers shall not be permitted within the central business district (CBD) zoning district. 
B.  Rooftop mounted communications towers and antennas may be located on any nonresidential buildings and alternative tower structures in the city so long as: 
1.  Such tower or antenna is set back from any existing or planned off-site residence and separated from any residentially zoned property at least a distance equal to two times the full height of the tower and antenna, but in no event less than one hundred (100) feet; 
2.  The existing freestanding nonresidential structure other than a tower on which such tower or antenna will be placed is fifty (50) feet in height or greater and the tower and antenna will add no more than twenty (20) feet total to the height of such existing structure; 
3.  No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower; 
4.  No signs or illumination are permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction in which case the director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views; and 
5.  The number and location of antennas, communication towers or other receiving or transmitting devices located on a single structure is not excessive and does not adversely affect properties and views. 
C.  Prohibitions. No new cell may be established if there is a technically suitable space available on an existing tower within the search area that the new cell is to serve. For the purpose of this chapter, the search area is defined as the grid for the placement of the antenna. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.040 - General requirements. 
    The requirements set forth in this section shall govern the location and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this chapter. 
A.  Building Codes-Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of communication towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. Tower owners shall conduct periodic inspections of communication towers at least once every three years to ensure structural integrity. Inspections shall be conducted by a structural engineer licensed to practice in Georgia. The results of such inspection shall be provided to the director. 
B.  Regulatory Compliance. 
1.  All towers and antennas must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate communications towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the communications towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such communications towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. 
2.  Tower owners shall provide documentation showing that each communication tower is in compliance with all federal requirements. Evidence of compliance must be submitted every twelve (12) months. 
C.  Security. Communication towers shall be enclosed by decay-resistant security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, the director or the governing body may waive such requirements for alternative tower structures. 
D.  Lighting. No illumination is permitted on an antenna or tower unless required by the FCC, FAA or other state or federal agency of competent jurisdiction, in which case the director may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding uses and views. 
E.  Advertising. No advertising is permitted on an antenna or tower. 
F.  Visual Impact. 
1.  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA or other applicable federal or state agency, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
2.  At a tower site the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. 
3.  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
4.  Towers clustered at the same site shall be of similar height and design. 
5.  Towers shall be the minimum height necessary to provide parity with existing similar tower supported antenna, and shall be freestanding where the negative visual effect is less than would be created by use of a guyed tower. 
G.  Landscaping. Landscaping shall be used to effectively screen the view of the tower compound from adjacent public ways, public property and residential property and shall be as follows: 
1.  For towers one hundred fifty (150) feet tall or less, a buffer area no less than six feet wide shall commence at the property line. 
2.  For towers more than one hundred fifty (150) feet tall, a buffer area not less than ten (10) feet wide shall be provided at the property line. 
3.  The buffer zone is to consist of materials of a variety which can be expected to grow to form a continuous hedge at least five feet in height within two years of planting. 
4.  Trees and shrubs in the vicinity of guy wires shall be of a kind that would not exceed twenty (20) feet in height or would not affect the stability of the guys, should they be uprooted, and shall not obscure visibility of the anchor from the transmission building or security facilities and staff/maintenance. 
5.  Native vegetation on the site shall be preserved to the greatest practical extent. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
6.  In lieu of these standards, the director may allow use of an alternate detailed plan and specifications for landscape and screening, including plantings, fences, walls and other features designed to screen and buffer towers and accessory uses. The plan shall accomplish the same degree of screening achieved by the provisions of this section, except as lesser requirements are desirable for adequate visibility for security purposes and/or for continued operation of existing bona fide agricultural or forest uses such as farms, nurseries and tree farms. In certain locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, such as remote agricultural or rural locations or developed heavy industrial areas, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived by the director. 
H.  Maintenance Impacts and Parking Requirements. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector and local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector street. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided on each site; an additional parking space for each two employees shall be provided at facilities which require on-site personnel. 
I.  Principal, Accessory and Joint Uses. 
1.  Accessory structures used in direct support of a tower shall be allowed but not be used for offices, vehicles storage or other outdoor storage. Mobile or immobile equipment not used in direct support of a tower facility shall not be stored or parked on the site of the tower, unless repairs to the tower are being made. 
2.  Towers may be located on sites containing another principal uses in the same buildable area. As long as all of the other siting, setback, separation and general requirements of this chapter are met, towers may occupy a parcel meeting the minimum lot size requirements for the zoning district in which it is located. The minimum distance between a tower and other principal use located on the same lot shall be for a monopole or lattice tower the greater of twenty (20) percent of the tower height or twenty-five (25) feet and for a guy tower the greater of one hundred (100) breakpoint or twenty-five (25) feet. This separation is required to assure compatibility of land uses and to provide for the health, safety and welfare of individuals and structures occupying the same site. 
3.  Joint use of a site is prohibited when a proposed or existing principal use includes the storage, distribution or sale of volatile, flammable, explosive or hazardous materials such as propane, gasoline, natural gas and dangerous chemicals. 
J.  Tower Lot Size, Setbacks and Separation. 
1.  The site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide an adequate setback from the base of the tower to any property line abutting a residential district, public property or public street. Such setback shall be sufficient to: 
a.  Provide for an adequate vegetative, topographic or other buffer as required in Section 15.40.040 (F) and (G); 
b.  Preserve the privacy of surrounding residential property; 
c.  Protect adjoining property from the potential impact of tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in Section 15.40.060. 
2.  A site is presumed to be of sufficient size when it: 
a.  Meets the requirements of the subsection (J)(1) of this section; 
b.  Provides a setback equal to two times the height of the tower failure by being large enough to accommodate such failure on the site, based on the engineer's analysis required in Section 15.40.060; 
c.  Provides a setback equal to or exceeding the rear yard setback required for the adjoining property where the adjoining property is not in a residential district nor a public property or a public street. 
3.  Placement of more than one tower on a lot shall be permitted; provided, all setback, design and landscape requirements are met as to each tower. Structures may be located as close to each other as technically feasible; provided, tower failure characteristics of the towers on the site will not lead to multiple failures in the event that one fails. 
4.  For a guyed structure, the site shall be of a size and shape sufficient to provide a setback equal to at least the height of the tower from a guy anchor to any property line abutting a residential district, public property or public street in addition to the size required to comply with subsection (J)(2) of this section. Such setback shall be adequate to provide a vegetative, topographic or other buffer sufficient to obscure view to the anchor from such adjoining properties. 
5.  All structures and uses associated with the transmission use other than the transmission tower shall be located to meet the setbacks required in the zoning district where the tower is to be located. To encourage and accommodate shared use of a tower, the director may waive or reduce setback requirements by up to twenty-five (25) percent to accommodate the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment at a tower site. 
6.  No freestanding communication tower shall be allowed within a five thousand (5,000) foot radius of an existing tower within a residential area. 
7.  In no case shall a tower be located in the required front yard of a residential district. 
8.  All freestanding towers constructed after April 12, 1999, shall conform to the following minimum tower separation requirements: 
TOWER 
HEIGHT <50 feet 50-100 feet 101-150 feet >150 feet <50 feet 300' 500' 750' 1,000' 50-100 feet 500' 750' 1,000' 1,500' 101-150 feet 750' 1,000' 1,500' 2,000' >150 feet 1,000' 1,500' 2,000' 2,500'  
    Towers and antennas mounted on rooftops or alternative tower structures shall be exempt from these minimum separation distances. 
K.  Be it ordained that the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter also includes the adoption of Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations and that all placement of towers and antenna must be approved by the FAA before a building permit or placement is allowed. This approval is generally granted by the completion of form "FAA Form 7460-1" or its equivalent. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.050 - Shared use. 
    All new towers shall be designed to structurally accommodate the maximum number of additional users technically practicable. 
A.  1. Once a new tower is approved, additional antennas and accompanying accessory uses may be added to it in accordance with the approved share plan if the director finds that the standards of this chapter are met; or 
2.  To encourage shared use of towers, no building permit or special use permit shall be required for the addition of antenna(e) to an existing tower so long as the height of the tower or structure on which the antenna is placed is not increased and the requirements of Sections 15.40.030(B) and 15.40.040 are met. 
B.  If a new tower is approved, the owner shall be required as conditions of approval, to: 
1.  Record the letter of intent required by Section 15.40.060(J) in miscellaneous deed records of the office of the county clerk of superior court where the tower site is located; 
2.  Respond in a timely, comprehensive manner to a request for information from a potential shared use applicant; 
3.  Negotiate in good faith for shared use by third parties; and 
4.  Allow shared use where the third party seeking such agrees in writing to pay reasonable, pro rata charges for sharing, including all charges necessary to modify the tower and transmitters to accommodate shared use, but not total tower reconstruction, and to observe whatever technical requirements are necessary to allow shared use without creating interference. 
C.  Wilful, knowing failure of an owner whose tower was approved after the effective date of this chapter, to comply with the requirement of subsections (B)(1) through (B)(4) shall be grounds for withholding approval of any application by such owner for a building permit or special use permit for any tower or antenna. 
D.  Such conditions shall run with the land and be binding on subsequent purchasers of the tower site. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.060 - Conditional zoning. 
A.  A request for a conditional zoning shall be initiated by application to the director and handled in accordance with the conditional zoning provision of Article XII, Board of Zoning Appeals, in the zoning regulations. The city council may grant a conditional zoning under this section; provided, it shall have determined that all of the general requirements of Section 15.40.040 have been satisfied and, further, that the benefits of and need for the proposed tower are greater than any possible depreciating effects and damage to the neighboring properties. 
B.  In granting a conditional zoning, the city council may impose additional zoning conditions to the extent determined necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize adverse effects of the proposed tower or antenna on surrounding properties. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part), 1999) 
15.40.070 - Application procedures. 
    Application for a building permit for any communication tower or use of an alternative tower structure shall be made to the director. An application will not be considered until it is complete. A complete application must contain the following: 
A.  Inventory of Existing Sites. An inventory of the applicant's existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the governing authority or within one mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height and design of each tower. The director may share information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special use permits under this chapter or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however, that the director is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable; 
B.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of tower(s), guy anchors (if any), transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses; 
C.  Landscape plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in Section 15.40.040(G); 
D.  Utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power lines impacting the proposed tower site; 
E.  An environment impact statement fully describing the effect that the proposed tower and/or antenna will have on the environment and surrounding area including the radiological impact on human health, impacts on adjacent residential structures and districts, impacts on structures and sites of historic significance and impacts on streetscapes; 
F.  A certified statement prepared by an engineer licensed to practice in Georgia that the construction of the tower, including reception and transmission functions, will not interfere with the usual and customary transmission or reception of radio, television, etc., service enjoyed by adjacent properties; 
G.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
H.  Report from a professional structural engineer licensed in the state of Georgia, documenting the following: 
1.  Tower height and design, including technical, engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design. A cross-section of the tower structure shall be included, 
2.  Total anticipated capacity of the structure, including number and types of antennas which can be accommodated, 
3.  Evidence of structural integrity of the tower structure, 
4.  Failure characteristics of the tower and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; 
I.  Written statements from the FAA, FCC and any appropriate state review authority stating that the proposed tower complies with regulations administered by that agency or that the tower is exempt from those regulations; 
J.  Letter of intent to lease excess space on the tower structure and to lease additional excess land on the tower site when the shared use potential of the tower is absorbed, if structurally and technically possible; 
K.  A reasonable pro rata charge may be made for shared use, consistent with an appropriate sharing of construction, financing and maintenance costs. Fees may also be charged for any structural or RF changes necessitated by such shared use. Such sharing shall be a condition of approval as granted. 
1.  The applicant shall describe what range of charges are reasonably expected to be assessed against shared users, 
2.  The applicant shall base charges on generally accepted accounting principles and shall explain the elements included in the charge; 
L.  The applicant shall quantify the additional tower capacity anticipated, including the approximate number and types of antennas. The applicant shall also describe any limitations on the ability of the tower to accommodate other uses, e.g., radio frequency interference, mass height, frequency or other characteristics. The applicant shall describe the technical options available to overcome those limitations and reasons why the technical options considered were not chosen to be incorporated. The director shall approve those limitations if they cannot be overcome by reasonable technical means; 
M.  Evidence of the lack of space on all suitable existing towers to locate the proposed antenna and of the lack of space on existing tower sites to construct a tower for the proposed antenna; 
N.  Each applicant must make a good faith effort to substantially demonstrate that no existing or planned towers can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna/transmitter as described below: 
1.  The applicant shall contact the owners of all existing or planned towers of a height roughly equal to or greater than the height of the tower proposed by the applicant. A list shall be provided of all owners contacted, the date of such contact, and the form and content of such contact, 
2.  Such contact shall be made in a timely manner, that is, sufficiently before the filing of an application for a building or conditional zoning to include a response into the application when filed. 
a.  Failure of a listed owner to respond shall not be relevant if a timely, good faith effort was made to obtain one. However, where an existing or planned tower is known to have capacity for additional antennas of the sort proposed, based on the decision regarding such tower, that application for a new tower shall not be complete until the owner of the existing or planned tower responds. Such response is to be required as a condition of approval; 
b.  The director shall maintain and provide, on request, records of responses from each tower, 
c.  Once an owner demonstrates an antenna of the sort proposed by the applicant cannot be accommodated on the owner's tower as described below, the owner need not be contacted by future applicants for antennas of the sort proposed; 
3.  The applicant shall request the following information from each tower contacted: 
a.  Identification of the site by location, tax lot number, existing uses and tower height, 
b.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the antenna proposed by the applicant without requiring structural changes be made to the tower. To enable the owner to respond, the applicant shall provide each such owner with the height, length, weight, and other relevant data about the proposed antenna, 
c.  Whether each such tower could structurally accommodate the proposed antenna if structural changes were made, not including totally rebuilding the tower. If so, the owner shall specify in general terms what structural changes would be required, 
d.  If structurally able, would shared use by such existing tower be precluded for reasons related to RF interference. If so, the owner shall describe in general terms what changes in either the existing or proposed antenna would be required to accommodate the proposed tower, if at all, 
e.  If shared use is possible, the fee an owner of an existing tower would charge for such shared use; 
4.  Shared use is not precluded simply because a reasonable fee for shared use is charged, or because of reasonable costs necessary to adopt the existing and proposed uses to a shared tower. The director and the governing body may consider expert testimony to determine whether the fee and costs are reasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed unreasonable; 
O.  Any other information which may be requested by the director to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed tower and/or antenna. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.080 - Appeals. 
    Appeals from any decision of the director shall be to the mayor and city council. Appeals from any decision of the governing body shall be made to the superior court within thirty (30) days of the decision. Any decision on a request to build a tower or for a conditional zoning for a tower shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence in a written record. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.090 - Removal of antenna and towers. 
    All towers and antennas shall be maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable building and technical codes so as to ensure the structural integrity of such towers. If upon inspection by the director such tower is determined not to comply with the code standards or to constitute a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower and the owner of the property if such owner is different, such owners shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance. In the event such tower or antenna is not brought into compliance within thirty (30) days, the city may provide notice to the owners requiring the tower or antenna to be removed. In the event such tower or antenna is not removed within thirty (30) days of receipt of such notice, the city may remove such tower or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that communication towers and antenna not in compliance with the code standards or which constitute danger to persons or property are brought into compliance or removed. The city may seek to have the tower or antenna removed regardless of the owners' or operator's intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.100 - Abandoned towers. 
A.  Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, whether or not the owner or operator intends to make use of the tower. The owner of an abandoned antenna or tower and the owner of the property where the tower is located shall be under a duty to remove such a tower or antenna. If such antenna and/or tower is not removed within sixty (60) days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner(s) of such abandonment, the city may remove such tower and/or antenna and place a lien upon the property for the costs of removal. The city may pursue all legal remedies available to it to insure that abandoned communication towers and antenna are removed. Delay by the city in taking action shall not in any way waive the city's right to take action. The city may seek to have the communication tower or antenna removed regardless of the owners or operators intent to operate the tower or antenna and regardless of any permits, federal, state or otherwise, which may have been granted. 
B.  If the owner of an abandoned tower or antenna wishes to use such abandoned tower or antenna, the owner first must apply for and receive all applicable permits and meet all of the conditions of this chapter as if such tower or antenna were a new tower or antenna. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.110 - Pre-existing towers-Nonconforming uses. 
A.  All communications towers operative on April 12, 1999 shall be allowed to continue their present usage as a nonconforming use in accordance with the zoning regulations. Routine maintenance, including replacement with a new tower of like construction and height, shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction other than routine maintenance on an existing communication tower shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  A communication tower that has received city approval in the form of either a building permit or conditional zoning exception, but has not yet been constructed or placed in operation, shall be considered an existing tower so long as such approval is current and not expired. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
15.40.120 - Public property. 
    Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the governing authority shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter; provided, a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the governing body. 
(Ord. 99-14 (part)) 
Chapter 15.44 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL ORDINANCE* 
Sections: 

15.44.010 - Title. 
    This chapter will be known as the city of Metter soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. 
(Amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    "Best management practices (BMP's)" means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. 
    "Board" means the board of natural resources. 
    "Buffer" means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and equatic habitat. 
    "Commission" means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
    "CPESC" means a certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc., a corporation registered in Georgia, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    "Cut" means a portion of land surfaces or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    "Department" means the department of natural resources. 
    "Design professional" means a professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
    "Director" means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    "District" means the Ogeechee River soil and water conservation district. 
    "Division" means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    "Drainage structure" means a devise composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
    "Erosion" means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    "Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan" means a plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. Chapter 12-7, which includes, as minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements of this chapter. 
    "Fill" means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    "Final stabilization" means all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that have been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    "Finished grade" means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    "Grading" means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stock piling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    "Ground elevation," means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    "Land disturbing activity" means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state water or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land but not including agricultural practiced as described in Section 15.44.030(E). 
    "Larger common plan of development or sale" means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this section, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    "Local issuing authority" means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to subsection (a) OCGA 12-7-8. 
    "Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA)" means a state law referenced as OCGA 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basis. 
    "Natural ground surface" means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    "Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU)" means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which collodially dispersed particles are present. 
    "NOI" means a notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
    "NOT" means a notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    "Operator" means the party or parties that have: 
A.  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
B.  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    "Outfall" means the location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    "Permit" means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperation, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    "Phase" or "phased" means subparts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    "Project" means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    "Properly designed" means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    "Qualified personnel" means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of OCGA 12-7-19. 
    "Roadway drainage structure" means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    "Sediment" means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    "Sedimentation" means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    "Soil and water conservation district approved plan" means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Ogeechee River soil and water conservation district. 
    "Stabilization" means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover by vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
    "State general permit" means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30. 
    "State waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    "Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices" means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. 
    Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    "Trout streams" means all streams of portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provision of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self sustaining population of rainbow, brown, or brook trout. Steams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are steams into which no other streams flow, except springs. 
    "Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures" means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
A.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long term vegetative cover; 
B.  Temporary seeding, producing short term vegetative cover; or 
C.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod forming grass. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    "Watercourse" means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any adjacent area subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    "Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Amendment dated 8-9-10: amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.030 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
A.  1. Surface mining, as same is defined in OCGA 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; 
    2. Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
    3. Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
    4. The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in Section 15.44.040 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5, of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of Section 15.44.040 and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
    5. Agricultural operations as defined in OCGA 1-3-3, "Definitions," to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
    6. Forestry land management practices including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in Sections 15.44.040(C)(15) and 15.44.040(C)(16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
    7. Any project carried out under technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agricultural; 
    8. Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" exclude channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events, and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, than any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" exclude channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events, and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment form moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided; further, that nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (A)(1)-(A)(10) of this section; 
    9. Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of Department of Transportation or State Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land, shall be subject to provisions of OCGA § 12-7-7.1; and except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in OCGA § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
    10. Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership cooperation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in OCGA 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership cooperation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in OCGA 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in OCGA 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
    11. Any public water system reservoir. 
(Amendment dated 8-9-10: amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.040 - Minimum requirements for the erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
A.  General Provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities, which are not excluded by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (B) and (C) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this chapter and the NPDES general permit. 
B.  Minimum Requirements. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in this section shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (B)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in OCGA 12-7-6 subsection (b). 
2.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) of Code Section 12-5-30, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to subsection (f) Code Section 12-5-30, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
C.  The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1st of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following. 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of OCGA 12-7-1 et seq. 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means or bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (B)(2) of this section; 
15.  Except as provided in subsection (C)(16) of this section, there is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to OCGA 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers are at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to Part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act" shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructed a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
i.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
ii.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; 
16.  There is established a fifty (50) foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act," except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five (25) foot buffer or they may be paid, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer with the requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance form such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer; 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
i.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
ii.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
c.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent a local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions, which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (A) and (B) of this section. 
d.  The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Amendment dated 8-9-10: amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.050 - Application/permit process. 
A.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, the ordinance codified in this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdiction boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city of Metter without first obtaining a permit from the building inspector in the public works department to perform such activity and provide a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the public works department and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (C) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of Sections 15.44.040(B) and (C) will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
3.  A fee, in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) shall be charged for the first five acres or less. An additional five dollars ($5.00) per acre will be charged for the remaining acres in the project area. 
4.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to paragraph (5) subsection (a) of OCGA 12-5-23, provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to subsection (a) of OCGA 12-7-8 half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of OCGA 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
5.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by Sections 15.44.040(B)(15) and (B)(16) and bonding, if required as per Section 15.44.040(B)(5)(b), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
6.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
7.  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
C.  Plan Requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in Sections 15.44.040(B) and (C) of this chapter. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide; or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterway sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
2.  Data Required for Site Plan. The following data shall be required: 
a.  Narrative or notes and other information: notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes; 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project; 
c.  Name, address and phone number of the owner; 
d.  Name and phone number of twenty-four (24) hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls; 
e.  Size of project or phase under construction, in acres; 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, that "installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities"; 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas; 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding; 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia; 
j.  Maintenance statement as follows; "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." 
3.  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to OCGA 12-7-20. 
The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north; 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets; 
c.  Boundary line survey; 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary; 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following; 
MAP SCALE: 1 inch-100 ft. or 
larger scale GROUND SLOPE: Flat 0-2% Rolling 2-8% Steep 8%+ CONTOUR: 0.5 or 1 INTERVAL, ft: 1.0 or 2 1, 5 or 10  
f.  Adjacent areas and feature areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected, should be indicated on the plan; 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas; 
h.  Delineate the twenty-five (25) foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas; 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable; 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
4.  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by Section 15.44.050 are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (B)(5)(b) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this chapter relating to land development, as are applied to private person and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
5.  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of OCGA § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Amendment dated 8-9-10: amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.060 - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The building inspector working under the public works department will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If through inspection it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined in this chapter has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
B.  The public works department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
C.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who represents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the purpose of carrying out his official duties. 
D.  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of municipalities, which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to OCGA 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission on both may provide technical assistance to any municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
E.  The board, on or before December 31, 2003, shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of municipalities, which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to OCGA 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinances and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any municipality certified pursuant to OCGA 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to OCGA 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the municipality in writing. The governing authority of any municipality so notified shall have thirty (30) days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the municipality does not take necessary corrective action within thirty (30) days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Amendment dated 8-9-10: amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.070 - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to Obtain a Permit for Land Disturbing Activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of this business license, work permit or authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
B.  Stop-Work Orders. For the first and second violations of the provisions of this chapter, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director of the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning: 
1.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
2.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
3.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond Forfeiture. If through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 15.44.050(B)(5)(b). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary Penalties. 
1.  Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this chapter under county ordinances approved under this chapter shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.080 - Education and Certification. 
A.  After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to OCGA 12-7-20. 
B.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  If a state general permittee who has operation control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of OCGA § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in OCGA § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Amendment dated 8-9-10: amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.090 - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
A.  Administrative Remedies. The suspension, revocation, modifications or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within fifteen (15) days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial Review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of Candler County. 
(Amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
15.44.100 - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
A.  Effectivity. This chapter shall become effective on the seventeenth day of July, 1995. 
B.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not effect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
C.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuance authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof or nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this chapter shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Amendment dated 6-14-04 (part)) 
Chapter 15.48 - RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
Sections: 

15.48.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: 
(a)  Provide adequate sites for temporary parking of recreational vehicles whose occupants are visiting or passing through the area of Metter, Georgia. 
(b)  Minimize the adverse impacts between a recreational vehicle park and surrounding land uses. 
(c)  Provide health and safety standards to protect both the users of the park and the community. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.020 - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Building inspector acts as the zoning administrator for the City of Metter. This person shall be responsible for administering this chapter. 
    Recreation vehicle is a vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be either pulled by another vehicle or self-propelled, to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreation purposes. The term "recreational vehicle" includes the terms "RV," "motor home," "travel trailer" and related wheeled recreational equipment not designed for year-around occupancy. 
    Recreational vehicle park is any property where one or more lots are rented to users of recreational vehicles and which occupied for temporary purpose. 
    Recreational vehicle site is a plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park for one recreational vehicle, automobile and camping party. 
    Travel trailer, self contained is a trailer, which can operate independently of connection to sewer, water and electric systems. It contains a water-flushed toilet, lavatory, shower or bath and kitchen sink, all of which are connected to water storage and sewage holding tanks located within the trailer. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.030 - Administration. 
    The building inspector shall be responsible for the general administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.040 - Permitted land use districts. 
    Recreational vehicle parks are permitted in the HOC, HOC-1A Districts. They may be permitted in the PEH, CR, and L-1 Districts with a conditional use permit, if granted from the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.050 - Review process. 
    All new recreational vehicle parks or developments on any recreational vehicle park, new or pre-existing, must submit all plans and specifications in detail for such development to the City of Metter Building Official. No construction or development shall be commenced until a building permit is issued upon approval by the building official and planning commission verifying that said plans and specifications are in compliance with this title. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.060 - Site plan requirements. 
A.  Plan submission. Before any permit is issued for construction and/or operation of any recreation vehicle park, a site plan and required documentation shall be submitted to and approved by the building inspector and the planning commission. The plan shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor or a registered professional engineer, shall be drawn to a scale of no less than 1" = 100', and shall include as a minimum the following: 
1.  Name, address and telephone number of applicant. 
2.  Location, address and legal description of the entire proposed recreation vehicle park site. 
3.  Existing zone of subject property and all adjacent properties. 
4.  Names and addresses of adjacent property owners. 
5.  Complete engineering plans and specifications of the proposed recreational vehicle park showing: 
a.  The area and dimensions of the entire tract of land. 
b.  The land uses occupying the adjacent properties. 
c.  The number, size and location of the proposed vehicle sites and other parking areas. 
d.  The location, right-of-way and surfaced roadway width, surfacing material of roadways and walkways. 
e.  The location of service buildings, sanitary stations, and any other existing or proposed structure. 
f.  The location of water and sewer lines pipes. 
g.  Plans and specifications of the water supply, sewage disposal and refuse facilities. 
h.  The locations and details of lighting and electric systems. 
i.  Plans for drainage, flood control, and landscaping. 
j.  Plans and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the recreation vehicle park. 
k.  Letters of review from utility agencies stating whether they can provide services to the recreational vehicle park. 
l.  Preliminary plan shall be drawn on twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheet size in blue or black ink. 
m.  An Application fee per the City of Metter fee schedule. 
B.  Phased approached. Where a recreational vehicle park development is proposed for construction in a series of stages, a master plan for the development of the entire tract shall be submitted along with the detailed plans and specifications for the initial stage, as well as any subsequent stages. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.070 - Site restrictions. 
A.  Floodplain. No RV park or any structures in any RV park shall be located within a one hundred (100) year flood plain area as defined by FEMA or identified by the City of Metter Flood Plain Map, unless in compliance with all applicable local ordinances. 
B.  Illumination. All RV parks shall be furnished with lighting standards so spaced and equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will provide adequate levels of illumination for the safe movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. 
C.  Site conditions. Conditions of soil, groundwater level, drainage and topography shall not create hazards to the property or the health or safety of the occupants. The site shall not be exposed to objectionable smoke, noise, odors or other adverse influences. 
D.  Signage. All signage for the site will comply with the City of Metter's Sign Ordinance. 
E.  Soil and groundcover. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the recreational vehicle park shall be paved, or covered with stone screening or other solid materials, or protected with a vegetative growth (grass) that is capable of preventing soil erosion and of eliminating objectionable dust. 
F.  Stormwater/drainage. A storm drainage plan shall be developed for the RV park and approved by the city. These plans shall insure that all surface water is drained in a safe and efficient manner away from recreation vehicles sites. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.080 - Park size and density. 
A.  Park size. The minimum area for a recreation vehicle park is five acres. The maximum area allowed is ten (10) acres. 
B.  Park density. The maximum density shall not exceed twelve (12) RV's per acre. 
C.  Minimum site size. Each RV site shall contain a minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet and shall have a minimum width of twenty-five feet (25). 
D.  Site pads. Each site shall contain a vehicle-parking pad of concrete or asphalt paving. Minimum length of the parking pad shall be thirty-five (35) feet. No part of the RV or other unit placed on the lot pad shall be closer than five to the edge of the lot. 
E.  Required separation between RV vehicles. RV's shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at least ten (10) feet. Any accessory structure such as attached awnings for the purpose of this separation requirement shall be considered to be part of the RV. 
F.  Site identification. Each site for the parking of the RV's shall be identified by numbers, a minimum of four inches in height, posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the site. This shall be done in a logical sequence. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.090 - Roadways and parking. 
A.  Interior roads. All interior two-way roads shall be twenty-eight (28) feet minimum width in right-of-way. The pave area on all two-way roads shall be a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet wide, with eleven-foot lanes. All interior one-way roads shall be twenty (20) feet minimum width. The pave area on all one-way roads shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width. All roads shall be paved with asphalt and crowned to facilitate drainage. Roadways shall be designed for the safe and convenient movement of vehicles. 
B.  Parking requirements. At least one off-road parking space shall be provided in the park per each recreation vehicle site. Off-street common parking areas for additional vehicles of park occupants and guest shall be provided at a rate of not less than one and one-half spaces per five sites. 
1.  No on-street parking will be permitted on roads or drives within the RV park. 
2.  Sites and parking spaces shall not front or have access directly to public roads or streets or to private roads. 
3.  No part of any RV park shall be used for the parking or storage of any heavy equipment or trucks exceeding one-ton capacity. 
4.  No RV shall be parked anywhere but in an RV space, and only one RV shall be located within any RV space. 
C.  Vehicular circulation. One-way drive aisles must originate and terminate at two-way drive aisles. Individual sites and parking spaces shall have direct access to the interior park street system. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.100 - Entrances and exits. 
A.  Locations and access. No entrance or exit from a RV park shall be permitted through a residential district nor require movement of traffic from the park through residential district. 
B.  Design of access to park. All RV parks shall have separate entrance and exit roadway, each of which shall be not less than twenty-eight (28) feet wide, from flow line to flow line and shall be hard surfaced with asphalt or concrete. 
C.  Distances from intersections. Entrance driveways shall be located not closer than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the intersection of public streets. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.110 - Accessory uses. 
A.  Service building and other uses. Management headquarters, toilets, showers, coin-operated laundry facilities and other uses and structures customarily incident to operation of a recreational vehicle park and campground are permitted as accessory uses to the park. 
B.  Dumping stations. Trailer sanitation stations designed to receive the discharge of sewage holding tanks for self-contained vehicles shall be installed in an accessible location in every RV park in which there are sites not provided with drain inlets designed to receive the discharge of toilets. 
C.  Recreational facilities. A recreational area of at least five thousand (5,000) square feet shall be provided in addition to the required landscaping. Recreation equipment, such as a pool, playground, and picnic tables and a service building, including toilets, showers, and laundry, can be located within the recreation area. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.120 - Buffering, setbacks, screening and landscaping. 
A.  Yards and setbacks. Within an RV park, minimum setbacks shall be as follows: 
1.  Front yard setback. The minimum front yard setback is fifty feet (50). 
2.  Side yard setback. The minimum side yard setback when abutting residential districts is fifty feet (50); when abutting a dedicated public right-of-way, it shall be fifty feet (50); and when abutting any other zoning district, the side yard setback is twenty-five feet (25). 
3.  Rear yard setback. The minimum rear yard setback is twenty-five (25) feet; unless it abuts a residential district, then the rear yard setback is fifty (50) feet. 
B.  Landscaping. A landscaping plan illustrating the placement and type of trees and shrubs must be submitted as part of the park development plan. The design of the landscaping must mitigate the visual impact of the RV park on the surrounding area. 
1.  No building or structure may be erected or placed within a buffer area, except a fence or wall. 
2.  No RV may be located within a buffer area. 
C.  Boundary fencing. Except for the front boundary, each recreation vehicle park shall be enclosed by attractive fencing. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.130 - Occupancy/length of stay. 
A.  Length of stay. Length of occupancy for any recreational vehicle shall not exceed ninety (90) continuous days or one hundred eighty (180) days in any one-year period. 
B.  Home occupation. No home occupation or business shall be operated from an RV park. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.140 - Water and sewer services. 
    All RV parks will be served by the City of Metter's water and sewer system if available. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.150 - Other utilities and public services. 
A.  Underground utilities. All utilities, including electrical power and telephone lines, shall be installed underground. 
B.  Refuse disposal and collection. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be performed so as to minimize accidents, fire hazards, air pollution, odors, insects, rodents or other nuisance conditions. 
1.  The City of Metter's Sanitation Department shall serve RV parks. 
2.  Polycarts will be provided by the City of Metter at the current monthly rate as set by city council for businesses. No refuse-disposal area shall be located within a buffer area. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.160 - Fire prevention and protection. 
A.  Hand fire extinguishers of type approved by the Metter Fire Department shall be maintained ineffective working order and located in convenient places in the ratio of one to eight vehicle sites. 
B.  No outdoor fires will be allowed except in grills, ovens, stoves or park-provided fireboxes. 
C.  Fire hydrants shall be so that every site within the park can be reached within one thousand (1,000) feet of the hose. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.170 - Service building. 
    A service building shall be constructed of easily cleanable, nonabsorbent materials, maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
1.  Restroom facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one lavatory for each sex shall be provided for the exclusive use of the park occupants. An additional toilet and lavatory for each sex shall be provided for each fifteen (15) sites or fraction thereof which is not provided with a water connection and a three-inch drain inlet for connection to a vehicle equipped with a toilet. 
2.  Showers. A minimum of one shower for each sex is required. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.180 - Licensing and inspection. 
A.  Licensed required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any recreational park within the city limits unless they hold a valid occupational tax certificate (business license) issued annually by the City of Metter in the name of such person for the specific RV park. The license certification shall be conspicuously posted in the office of the RV park at all times. 
B.  Registration. All recreational vehicles in the park must have a current valid registration. 
C.  Inspection. The building official shall inspect the RV park at least once annually to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations or codes. Such official shall have the authority to enter upon the premises for the purpose of such inspections at any reasonable time without notice to the owner or manager. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
15.48.190 - Responsibilities of management. 
A.  Maintenance and enforcement of regulations. A responsible caretaker, owner, or manager shall be placed in charge of any RV park to keep all grounds, facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, and shall be answerable to the owner for any violation of the provisions of this or any ordinance. The facility shall have an on-site manager. 
B.  Office. In every recreational vehicle park, there shall be a designated office building in which shall be located the office of the manager of said park. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07, § 1) 
Chapter 15.52 - PRE-OWNED MANUFACTURED HOMES 
Sections: 

15.52.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
    "Applicant" means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the city limits of the City of Metter. 
    "Building inspector" means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the municipal building official or any of his or her assistants. 
    "Certificate of occupancy" means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a pre-owned manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this chapter, and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
    "Guarantee of condition bond" means a surety bond to guarantee that the affidavit and photographs required by subsections A.1. and A.2. of Section 15.52.030 reasonably portray or represent the existing condition of the pre-owned manufactured home proposed for relocation. In lieu of the bond, a cash deposit may be deposited with the city. 
    "Install" means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. Such term includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
    "Jurisdiction" means the areas within the city limits of the City of Metter, Georgia. 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary of housing and urban development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401 et seq. 
    "Pre-owned manufactured home" means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Ord. of 3-12-12) 
15.52.020 - Conditions. 
    All pre-owned manufactured homes located in the jurisdiction shall bear a label certifying it was constructed in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 U.S.C. Section 5401, et seq. (the HUD Code) and shall be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq. 
(Ord. of 3-12-12) 
15.52.030 - Permitting, inspection, certificate of occupancy, and fees. 
    A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. 
A.  Permit. To obtain a permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
1.  An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this chapter; 
2.  Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that home meets the minimum health and safety standards of Section 15.52.040; 
3.  A two-hundred-dollar, refundable cash deposit; and 
4.  The permit and inspection fee required by subsection D. of this section. 
B.  Inspection. Upon receipt of a permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home on a residential site for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held once the installation of the manufactured home is complete. 
C.  Certificate of Occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this chapter have been met. 
D.  Fee. A permit and inspection fee shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to the city to process the permit application and inspect the pre-owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one followup inspection. The applicant shall be charged for each additional followup inspection that may be necessary. 
E.  Alternative Inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his or her discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city. If the home is located outside the city, the applicant may choose to pay the city a fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per hour required to inspect the home and reimburse the city for any expense, including, but not necessary limited to, mileage at a rate equivalent to that set by the Internal Revenue Service for that particular year. The city, prior to inspecting a home located outside its jurisdictions, will provide the applicant with an estimated cost of such inspection. 
(Ord. of 3-12-12) 
15.52.040 - Minimum health and safety standards. 
    All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
A.  HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. 5401-5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
B.  Foundations. The foundations upon which pre-owned manufactured homes are affixed shall be in compliance with Permanent Foundations Guide for Manufactured Housing, 1996, as the same may be amended and/or modified from time to time. 
C.  Interior Condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
D.  Exterior Condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
E.  Sanitary Facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected, and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
F.  Heating Systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
G.  Electrical Systems. Switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc. shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to assure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain a water heater in safe and working order. 
H.  Hot Water Supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
I.  Egress Windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary. 
J.  Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
K.  Smoke Detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable electric or battery-powered smoke detector, with battery-powered back-up power, in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 
L.  Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Each pre-owed manufactured home shall be equipped with a carbon monoxide detector that is battery operated or AC powered with a battery backup. 
(Ord. of 3-12-12) 
15.52.050 - Enforcement. 
A.  Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
B.  Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
C.  The guarantee of condition bond or cash deposit will be forfeited after ninety (90) days from the date of inspection, unless all conditions and standards are met prior to the end of the ninety (90) days or an extension has been issued in writing by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 3-12-12) 
15.52.060 - Penalties. 
    Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1000.00) and a jail sentence not to exceed thirty (30) days. Each day any violation under this chapter continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-12-12) 
Title 18 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
Chapters: 
18.04 General Provisions  
Chapter 18.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

18.04.010 - Title. 
    This title shall be known and may be cited as the "Development Agreement Ordinance" of the City of Metter. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
18.04.020 - Findings. 
    The need for a development agreement arises in instances where a landowner generally wishes to guarantee that a local government's land use regulations will remain fixed during the life of a prospective land development on a subject parcel. The local government, on the other hand, seeks as many concessions and land development conditions as possible beyond what it could reasonably require through subdivision regulations under the normal exercise of its authority or police power. 
    Developers have an incentive to voluntarily enter into a development agreement with the city that will limit the property use(s), because the prospects exist that the local government will adopt and apply land use restrictions to said property in the future. Hence, a development agreement would benefit a developer by locking in the development regulations that apply to a particular development, even if the local government subsequently adopts land use regulations. 
    Developers also have an incentive to voluntarily enter into a development agreement with the city for two other important reasons, even if no land use regulations currently apply to a proposed development. First, the developer may need the cooperation of the city in extending infrastructure (e.g., water and sewer lines, drainage facilities, roads, utilities, etc.), and such cooperation may not be forthcoming in the absence of concessions voluntarily submitted to by the developer in the form of a development agreement. Second, knowledge of a pending development may stir citizen controversy, and even if the city has no land use regulations, the development agreement becomes a flexible negotiating instrument whereby the developer can submit to certain concessions (i.e., limits on land uses) that will satisfy neighborhood concerns. 
    The city similarly has interests in voluntarily entering into a development agreement in certain instances. As just noted, the city may have an interest in limiting land uses in a given area because of citizen opposition. Without the mechanism of a voluntary development agreement and in the absence of land use regulations, the city has virtually no control over the quality, extent, and location of a proposed development. The city will also support entering into development agreements in cases where infrastructure is needed to serve the development but no existing regulation exists to require such improvements. 
    The mayor and city council of the City of Metter, Georgia, therefore finds that a negotiated development agreement, voluntarily submitted by a development applicant and involving infrastructure improvements and limits on land use regulations, can be in the best interests of the city and the development community and within the proper scope of the city's police powers. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
18.04.030 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of a development agreement is to vest certain development rights in the landowner/developer in exchange for construction and dedication of public improvements, certain restrictions on land uses, and other concessions on the part of developer. A development agreement allows a developer who needs additional discretionary approval now or in the future to acquire long-term project approval, regardless of any local regulations that may be subsequently adopted. Development agreements will provide assurances to the applicant for a particular development project, that upon approval of the project, the applicant may proceed with the project in accordance with all applicable local statues, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and policies in existence at the time the development agreement is executed and that the project will not be restricted or prohibited by the city's subsequent enactment or adoption of laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, or policies. Public benefits derived from development agreements may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land uses, limits on development intensity and location, affordable housing, design standards, and on- and off-site infrastructure and other improvements. The local government needs a mechanism for negotiating such benefits in return for the vesting of development rights for a specific period. It is therefore the specific purpose of this chapter to authorize the local governing body to exercise its police powers to enter into individual development agreements and to specify the content and procedures for such development agreements. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
18.04.040 - Authority to enter into development agreements. 
    The mayor and city council of the City of Metter, Georgia, hereby exercises its police powers to negotiate and enter into a voluntary development agreement upon application of a developer. The procedure for entering into a development agreement, and the contents of any development agreement, shall be consistent with the requirements of this title. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
18.04.050 - Application. 
    Any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property may make application to enter into a development agreement with the city. Applications shall be made to the city on forms furnished by city and according to specifications. The city may establish an application fee to recover from applicants the direct costs associated with holding a public hearing on the application and providing notice thereof. Such application fee, if adopted by the city, shall be submitted along with said application. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
18.04.060 - Required contents of a development agreement. 
    Any application for a development agreement, and any development agreement itself, shall at minimum contain the following provisions: 
A.  Definitions. All technical terms to be used in the development agreement shall be precisely defined. Terms that have been defined in any applicable statute or ordinance should be defined the same way in the agreement. 
B.  Parties. All parties to the agreement shall be named and their capacities to enter into the agreement clearly stated. In the case of developer/owners, their equitable or legal interests in the property must be stated. 
C.  Relationship of the parties. The relationship between the parties to the agreement shall be stated clearly. Typically, the statement will specify that the relationship is contractual and that the owner/developer is an independent contractor, and not an agent of the local government. 
D.  Property. The property to be subject to the agreement shall be clearly and thoroughly identified. An attachment, preferably with a map, specifically describing the property shall be provided and incorporated into the agreement by reference. Specifically, the agreement shall provide that the property is located in the City of Metter, more particularly described in Exhibit "A" (attached hereto and incorporated herein), which real property is the subject matter of this agreement, and that said property consists of ____ acres of property. 
E.  Intent of the parties. The intent of the parties to be bound by the terms of the agreement should be clearly stated. The agreement shall specifically include a statement that the property owner represents that it has an equitable or a legal interest in the real property and that all other persons holding legal or equitable interests in the real property are to be bound by the agreement. The development agreement may provide for the rights and obligations of the property owner under the agreement to be transferred or assigned. 
F.  Recitation of benefits and burdens. The agreement shall recite the benefits each party expects to gain from entering into the agreement, as well as the burdens each party agrees to bear. Because the agreement will be treated as a contract, the consideration each party is to receive from the other should be stated clearly in order to ensure enforceability. The benefits to the local government and community must be expressed in terms that exhibit the agreement as consistent with (or as an exercise of) the police power. 
G.  Notice and hearings. In the case of application for a development agreement affecting zoning, a public hearing must be held. The date upon which the public hearing was held shall be noted, as well as all relevant findings resulting from such hearing. All other pertinent notice and hearing requirements should be recited. It shall not be necessary to have a public hearing with respect to development agreement applications that do not in anyway restrict, limit, compromise, or otherwise affected the city's zoning ordinance. 
H.  Applicable land use regulations. The agreement shall contain a precise statement of all land use regulations to which the development project will be subject. The agreement should specify precisely which regulations will apply to the project regardless of future changes, or otherwise be affected by the agreement. The statement shall clearly state that regulations not specifically so identified will not be affected by the terms of the agreement, and will be subject to enforcement and change under the same criteria that would apply if no agreement were in effect. The development agreement shall specify that, unless otherwise provided by the development agreement rules, regulations, official policies governing permitted uses of the land, governing density, governing design, improvement and construction standards and specifications applicable to the development of the property subject to a development agreement, shall be those rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement. The agreement should also specify that the city hereby agrees that it will accept from the property owner for processing and review all development applications for development permits or other entitlements for the use of the real property in accordance with this agreement, provided that said applications are submitted in accordance with city rules and regulations and fees, if any, have been paid. 
I.  Approval and permit requirements. The agreement shall specify all discretionary approvals and permits that will have to be obtained before the development can proceed beyond its various stages. All conditions precedent to the obtaining of the permits and approvals should be listed. 
J.  Uses permitted under the agreement. The agreement must specify: (1) the permitted uses of the property; (2) the density or intensity of use; and, (3) the maximum height and size of proposed buildings. 
K.  Uses prohibited by the agreement. The development agreement may establish limits to permissible uses or prohibit certain uses on the subject property. 
L.  Dedications and reservations. The agreement should provide, where appropriate, a statement of any land or improvements to be dedicated to the city or land reservations made by the developer for public purposes, and the specific time period for such dedications and reservations as they relate to the date of entering into the agreement. 
M.  Utility connections. All water and sewer service, either to be provided by the developer or by the local government, shall be described in detail, together with schedules of construction completion, cost allocation (between or among developers and government and later developers), hookup or connection schedules, and parameters for permitting, including fees for utility provision and service. 
N.  Duration of the agreement. The agreement shall state a termination date. It should also specify project commencement and completion dates, either for the project on the whole, or for its various phases. The agreement should specify that the termination date can be extended by mutual agreement, and that commencement and completion dates may also be extended. 
O.  Amendments and termination. The development agreement shall provide that it may be amended, or canceled in whole or in part, by mutual consent of the parties to the agreement or their successor in interest. The agreement shall include the conditions under which the agreement can be amended, canceled, or otherwise terminated. The agreement shall specifically include that in the event that state or federal laws or regulations, enacted after a development agreement has been entered into, prevent or preclude compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, such provisions of the agreement shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such state or federal laws or regulations. The development agreement shall also specifically state that if the local government finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant or successor in interest thereto has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the local government may terminate or modify the agreement. 
P.  Periodic review. The agreement should provide for periodic reviews of the project in order to determine compliance with the terms of the agreement. Unless otherwise negotiated, the city building official shall be responsible for performing such reviews. 
Q.  Remedies and enforcement. Remedies for breach on the part of either party shall be provided, and the agreement shall provide for enforcement of its provisions. 
R.  Approval and signature block. The agreement shall specifically provide signature blocks for execution upon approval by ordinance, preceded by the following statement: 
AGREEMENT 
THIS DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT (hereinafter referred to as "Agreement") is made and entered into this _____ day of __________, _____ by and between THE CITY OF __________, and __________, a __________ corporation [partnership, etc.] (hereinafter referred to as "Property Owner"). On __________, _____, the Mayor and City Council adopted a Resolution approving the development agreement with the Property Owner. The Resolution thereafter took effect on __________, _____. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
18.04.070 - Adoption by ordinance after public hearing. 
    The mayor and city council of the City of Metter shall only enter into a development agreement pursuant to the ordinance if a developer has made application for a development agreement, the mayor and city council has held a public hearing after which adequate notice was given in compliance with the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66), and if a particular development agreement is adopted by ordinance of said mayor and city council. Furthermore, a development agreement shall not be approved unless the legislative body finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
18.04.080 - Administration. 
    The city building official shall administer the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 08-01) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Zoning Ordinance of the city, as adopted by the City Council on Dec. 10, 2018. Amendments to the ordinance subsequent to Dec. 10, 2018, are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the Dec. 10, 2018 ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - TITLE 

Section 1.00. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as Zoning Ordinance of Metter, Georgia. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 2.00. - Interpretation of certain terms or words. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein are defined as follows: 
    Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
    The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    The word "may" is permissive. 
    The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel." 
    The word "structure" includes the word "building." 
    The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual. 
    The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building shall be construed to include the words "intended", "arranged", or "designed to be used or occupied." 
    The word "map" or "zoning map" shall mean the Official Zoning Map of Metter, Georgia, and may include a series of maps in sections. 
    The term "planning commission" refers to the Metter planning commission. 
    The term "building inspector" refers to the person subsequently and specially designated by the City of Metter and so employed as the building inspector for Metter, or authorized representative of that office, and shall include chief building inspector. 
    The term "city clerk" refers to the City Clerk of Metter, Georgia, or authorized representative of that office. 
    The terms "council" or "city council" refer to the legally constituted and elected governing body of Metter, Georgia. 
    The term "R-X" zone refers to zones R-1, R-2, R-3, and/or R-4. 
    2.01 Accessory. A use or building subordinate to the principal building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal use or building and located on the same lot herewith. 
    2.01a: Adult Entertainment Establishment. This term is defined in the Metter Adult Entertainment Establishment Ordinance. 
    2.02 Alcohol, Off-site. The sale of alcohol for off-site consumption. 
    2.03 Alcohol, On-site. The sale of alcohol for on-site consumption. 
    2.04 Alcohol, Incidental. The sale of alcohol at a business where eighty (80) percent of revenues are not alcohol based. 
    2.05 Alley. A secondary way, which affords vehicular service access to the side or rear of abutting property. 
    2.06 Alteration of Building. Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, columns, or girders); an addition or reduction to a building; any change in use; or any relocation of a building from one location or position to another. 
    2.07 Boarding, Lodging or Rooming House. A dwelling in which meals or lodging or both are provided. 
    2.08 Building. A structure which is completely enclosed by a roof and by exterior walls which is moveable or permanently affixed to a lot, and used or intended for the shelter, support, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
    2.09 Building, Agricultural. An accessory building such as a silo, barn, etc. used for agricultural purposes. 
    2.10 Building, Principal. A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
    2.11 Building Line. That line which represents the distance a building or structure must be set back from a lot boundary or a street right-of-way line according to the terms of this ordinance. In all cases, the building lines of a lot shall be determined to run parallel to and set back the appropriate distance required within the district in which the lot is located from street right-of-way lines, street center lines, or other lot boundary lines measured to the building wall, not roof overhang. 
    2.12 Canopy, Freestanding. No limitation to visibility. Front, side and corner yard offsets to be minimum of fifteen (15) feet. 
    2.13 Conditional Use. A use (sometimes called a "special exception," but not to be confused with a " variance" that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout a zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood, would not be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted only in zoning districts listed in Article VI upon appeal, if conditional use permits are granted by the board of appeals. 
    2.14 Clinic. An establishment where medical or dental patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination or treatment. 
    2.15 Cluster Development. A change from the conventional pattern of subdivision development, which groups housing units into relatively tight units while providing a unified network of open space. A variety of housing types may be utilized in clusters, including single-family, town houses, apartments, and condominiums. 
    2.16 Day Care Facilities. This zoning ordinance refers to three different kinds of day care facilities. Each type of facility cares for and supervises children under eighteen (18) years of age less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. The allowed location of a day care facility is defined in Article VI. 
    2.16a. Day Care Home refers to a private residence that provides care for up to six children. This ordinance treats a day care home as a home occupation. The home occupation regulations apply to a day care home. 
    2.16b. Day Care Group refers to a facility that cares for up to eighteen (18) children. If the Day Care Group is in a residential zone, the regulations of Section 8.09 apply. 
    2.16c. Day Care Center refers to a facility that cares for over eighteen (18) children. 
    2.17 District. The term applied to various geographical areas for purposes of interpreting the provisions of this ordinance. The districts are designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map. Regulations controlling land use in the various districts are set forth in Article V, Zoning District Schedule. The terms "district" and "zoning district" are synonymous and are used interchangeably throughout this ordinance. 
    2.18 Dwelling. A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families. The terms "dwelling", "dwelling unit," and "residence" are synonymous. (See definition of "family," 2.25). 
    2.19 Dwelling, One-Family. A detached dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by one family on a single lot. 
    2.20 Dwelling, Two-Family. A dwelling arranged or designed to be occupied by two families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other on a single lot. 
    2.21 Dwelling, Group. A building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by a number of unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. The term "group dwelling" includes but is not limited to the terms rooming house, apartment, hotel, retirement home, nursing home, fraternity or sorority house, Y.M.C.A., Y.W.C.A., and similar organizational or institutional group. A transient hotel, motel, or tourist home shall not be deemed to be a group dwelling as herein defined. 
    2.22 Dwelling, Multiple-Family. A building or series of buildings on the same lot or portions thereof used or designed and rented as dwellings for three or more families living independently of each other, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. The terms "multiple-family" and "multi-family" are synonymous. 
    2.23 Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for use on a basis involving owner occupancy or rental (lease) on a weekly, monthly, or longer basis with provision for cooking, eating, and sleeping and physically set apart from any other dwelling units in the same structure. 
    2.24 Drive-In. A retail or service enterprise oriented to automobile driving patrons wherein service is provided to the consumer on the outside and/or inside of the principal building. 
    2.25 Family. One or more persons with the generic character of a family unit occupying a single dwelling unit and using common cooking facilities. 
    2.26 Garage, Public. Any garage other than a private garage which is used for storage, repair, rental, servicing, washing, adjusting, or equipping of automobiles or other vehicles. 
    2.27 Garage, Private. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use. 
    2.28 Garage, Repair. Building and premises designed or used for repairing motor vehicles, trailers, and related transport carriers, provided that body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that trailers and self-propelled vehicles in process of repair shall be stored in a fully enclosed and screened area. 
    2.29 Home Occupation. Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and meeting the requirements of Section 8.00. 
    2.30 Junk or Salvage Yards. The use of any part of a lot, whether inside or outside of a building, for the storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk, salvage, or scrap materials, or the dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of buildings, automobiles, or other vehicles, machinery, equipment, or parts thereof, 
    230a Licensed for distilled spirits, beer, wine, malt liquor. These terms are defined in the Metter Alcoholic Beverages Ordinance. 
    2.31 Loading Space, Off-Street. Space logically and conveniently located for pickups and deliveries off public rights-of-way, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles at all times. 
    2.32 Lot. An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plot or in a legally recorded deed as filed in the official city records. 
    2.33 Lot, Corner. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. 
    2.34 Lot, Double Frontage. A lot which has frontage on more than one street, provided, however, that no corner lot shall qualify as a double frontage lot unless said corner lot has frontage on three or more streets. 
    2.35 Lot Width. The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
    2.36 Manufactured Home. A generic term for a factory-built dwelling unit transportable in one or more sections totaling no less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet and meeting the construction and safety standards of the national code administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The term "manufactured home" is synonymous with the term and also includes the terms "modular," "double wide" and "prefabricated" home when built to comply with the HUD Code or latest edition of the International Building Code. The term "manufactured home" does not include "recreation vehicles" - see Section 8.04a. (Ord. dated 2-21-08) 
    2.37 Manufactured Home Park. A parcel of land which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more manufactured homes or recreational vehicles. A conditional use permit shall be required for the establishment of a manufactured home park; the term "park" includes the term "community," see Section 8.04b. (Ord. dated 2-21-08) 
    2.38 Motel. A building or buildings in which lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation, which is open to transient or permanent guests. The word "motel" includes the terms "motor hotel" and "tourist court". 
    2.38a Neighborhood Commercial Use. This use is intended to provide for the continued use and expansion of small scale, low-intensity neighborhood commercial use types, which serve and are in proximity to residential neighborhoods and is intended to ensure compatibility with adjacent residential and commercial uses. This designation is only for property that was grandfathered as a prior commercial use. 
    Neighborhood commercial use is defined as the following retail establishments: apparel store, book store, craft store, florist, video rental store, beauty salon, barber shop, business and professional office, copying shop, blue-print shop, shoe repair shop, tailor/seamstress shop, bakery, fruit stand, and a rental/lease facility. No use can exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet. 
    2.39 Nonconforming Use. A structure or land lawfully occupied by an existing use which does not conform with the permitted uses for the zoning district in which it is situated, either at the effective date of this ordinance or as the result of subsequent amendments to this ordinance. 
    2.40 Parking Lot. Any public or private open area used for the express purpose of parking automobiles and other vehicles with the exception of areas on the premises of single-family dwellings used for parking purposes incidental to the principal use. Parking lots may be the principal use on a given lot or an accessory use. 
    2.41 Parking Space. A space not less than nine by eighteen (18) feet plus maneuvering space within a parking lot or on a single-family dwelling lot expressly provided for purposes of parking an automobile or other vehicle. 
    2.42 Patio House. A single-family dwelling in which most, or all, of a lot is used with yard space combined instead of divided. Front, rear and side yards are consolidated into one garden area, either partially or completely bordered by rooms or enclosed by walls. 
    2.42a Professional Office. An office used to provide professional services in the fields of architecture, accounting, insurance, law, engineering, real estate, or similar profession. 
    2.43 Recreational Vehicles. A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be either pulled by another vehicle or self-propelled, to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational purposes. The term "recreational vehicle" includes the terms "RV", "motor home," "travel trailer" and related wheeled recreational equipment not designed for year-round occupancy. 
    2.44 Sign. The term "sign" shall mean and include every outdoor advertising device, billboard, poster, panel, freestanding ground sign, roof sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, illuminated sign, sign painted on a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration, or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed in view of the general public traveling along a public street or road right-of-way. 
    2.45 Signs, Number and Surface Area. For the purpose of determining number of signs, a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device-containing elements organized, related, and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign. The surface area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular geometric form or combinations of regular geometric forms comprising all of the display area of the sign and include all of the elements of the matter displayed. Frames and structural members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area. 
    2.46a Sign, On-Site. An outdoor advertising device relating in its subject matter to the premises on which it is located, or to products, accommodations, services, or activities on the premises. The terms "point of sale" sign and "on-premises" signs are synonymous with "on-site" signs. 
    2.46b Sign, Off-Site. An outdoor advertising device other than an on-site sign including those erected by the outdoor advertising industry. 
    2.47 Signs, Miscellaneous Definitions. The following definitions apply to signs: 
    2.47.01. Animated sign. Any sign that uses movement or change of lighting to depict action or create a special effect or scene. 
    2.47.02. Air and gas filled device. Any sign using, either wholly or in part, forced air or other gas as means of supporting its structure. 
    2.47.03. Beacon. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
    2.47.04. Banner. Any lightweight fabric or similar material (with or without frames) that is mounted on a pole or building. An advertising banner contains a commercial message. A non-advertising banner does not contain a commercial message. A banner used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity is a flag. For example, a banner that says, "Close out Sale" is an advertising banner. A banner with pictures of springtime flowers is a non-advertising banner. A banner representing the Georgia Tech football team is a flag. 
    2.47.05. Building marker. Any sign displaying the name of a building and date and other incidental information about its construction. Such a sign is cut in a masonry surface, bronze or permanent material. 
    2.47.06 Building sign. Any sign attached to any part of a building. 
    2.47.07 Canopy or awning. A structure made of cloth, metal, or other material affixed to a building and/or supported by the ground. 
    2.47.08. Canopy sign. Any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or other structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy. 
    2.47.09. Changeable copy sign. Any sign or portion of [a] sign with illustrations or letters, which can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. A sign on which the only copy which changes is an electric or mechanical display of the time and temperature shall be considered the "time and temperature" portion of the sign and not a changeable copy sign. 
    2.47.10. Commercial message. Any sign wording or other representation that directly or indirectly advertises, names, or calls attention to a business, service, or other commercial activity. 
    2.47.11. Construction sign. A sign identifying individuals or companies involved in design, construction, wrecking, financing, or development when placed upon the premises where work is under construction, but only for the duration of construction or wrecking. 
    2.47.12. Flag. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
    2.47.13. Freestanding sign. Any sign supported by structures or supports permanently affixed to or anchored in the ground is wholly independent from any building or other structure. 
    2.47.14. Identification sign. Any sign displaying identification or historical information and [which] contains no commercial message of any kind. 
    2.47.15. Incidental sign. Any sign, generally informational, which has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which [it] is located (i.e., "no parking", "loading only", and other similar directives). No sign with a commercial message legible from a position off the lot on which it is located shall be considered incidental. Also, this refers to any sign conveying social greetings or congratulations. 
    2.47.16. Lot. Any piece of parcel of land, the boundaries of which has been established by a legal instrument of record and meets the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
    2.47.17. Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, but not supported by the ground, and constructed of durable material to provide protection from the weather. 
    2.47.18. Nonconforming sign. Any sign, which does not comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
    2.47.19. Normal grade. The lower of existing grade prior to construction, or the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating for the purpose of locating the sign. 
    2.47.20. Outdoor advertisement (billboard). A sign which directs attention to a business commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered at a location other than upon the premises on which the sign is located. 
    2.47.21. Pennant. Any lightweight fabric or other similar material, message or no message, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in a series, designed to move in the wind. 
    2.47.22. Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization, singular or plural, of any kind. 
    2.47.23. Portable signs. Any sign which is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported by wheels or trailer; signs converted to A-frames or T-frames. 
    2.47.24. Political sign. A sign identifying and urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party, or candidate for public office and which is no larger than six square feet. Any sign identifying and urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party or candidate for public office and which is larger than six square feet shall not be considered a political sign but shall be subject to the requirements of this ordinance for a sign of similar size and location. 
    2.47.25. Principal building. The main or principal building located upon a lot; the building in which the principal use of the premises is conducted. Lots with multiple principal uses may have multiple principal buildings. However, storage buildings, garages, and other clearly additional uses shall not be considered principal buildings. 
    2.47.26. Projecting sign. Any sign, which is affixed, to a building or wall and its leading edge extends beyond the line of such building or wall or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or wall to which it is affixed by more than twelve (12) inches. 
    2.47.27. Real estate directional signs (temporary). A nonpermanent directional sign pertaining to the sale, rent, or lease of property. 
    2.47.28. Real estate sign (temporary). A nonpermanent sign pertaining only to the sale, rent or lease of the property on which it is located. 
    2.47.29. Residential (Home Office) sign. Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods and services legally offered (i.e. home occupation)-conforming to the requirements of the zoning ordinance [this appendix]-on the premises where the sign is located. 
    2.47.30. Roof sign. Any sign erected, constructed, or maintained in whole or a part upon, against, or directly above the roof or parapet line by a space of no more than six inches. 
    2.47.31. Setback. The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
    2.47.32. Sign. Any fixture, placard, structure, or device illuminated or non-illuminated that uses any color, form, graphic, symbol, or writing which is visible to the general public, announcing a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, solicitation, or to convey information of any kind. 
    2.47.33. Spectacular sign or device or special event sign. A sign or device including, but not limited to any piece or strip of cloth, paper, canvas, plastic or similar material, which is affixed to the principal building or the curtilage thereof, on which a message, slogan or emblem is painted, drawn or otherwise projected, colored or shaped for the purpose of advertising or drawing public attention; (ii) balloons; or (iii) vehicles, trailers, and other mobile devices which are parked or placed in a stationary position and which have a sign mounted on the vehicle or are painted to display a message and whose primary function is to act as a sign or attention getting device; (iv) other attention-getting devices, but not including banners, fluttering ribbons, flags or streamers. 
    2.47.34. Street. A strip of land or way, subject to vehicular as well as pedestrian traffic, that provides direct or indirect access to property, including, but not limited to, alleys, avenues, lanes, highways, roads, or other thoroughfares. 
    2.47.35. Street frontage. The distance, for which a lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street to the furthest distant lot line intersecting the same street. 
    2.47.36. Suspended sign. Any sign, which is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
    2.47.37. Temporary sign. Any sign, which is not permanently erected, affixed, or maintained on a premise for a long period of time (e.g., political signs). 
    2.47.38. Wall sign. Any sign attached parallel to, but within twelve (12) inches of a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only on one sign surface. 
    2.47.39. Window sign. Any sign, pictures, symbols, or combination thereof, designated to communicate information about an activity, business, sale, event, commodity, or service, which is attached to, placed upon, or painted on the interior of a door or window or upon the windowpanes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window or door. 
    2.48 Street. A dedicated, deeded and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular traffic, which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
    2.49 Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a fixed location on the ground, or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. 
    2.50 Tourist Home. A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in less than ten (10) rooms are provided or offered for the use of guests in return for compensation for a maximum thirty (30) days tenure. Any dwelling in which such accommodations are offered in ten (10) or more rooms shall be deemed to be a hotel as herein defined. The use of a dwelling as a tourist home shall not be considered an accessory use or a customary home occupation. 
    2.51 Tract. See "Lot," 2.32. 
    2.52 Use, Accessory. See "Accessory" 2.01. 
    2.53 Use, Conditional. See "Conditional Use," 2.13. 
    2.54 Use, Principal. The primary purpose for which a lot is occupied and/or used. 
    2.55 Variance. A modification of the strict terms of this ordinance granted by the city council where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest, and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property such as irregular lot size, topographic or other characteristics of the land and not as the result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. Such modification shall not authorize a principal or accessory use of the property, which is not permitted within the zoning district in which the property is located. 
    2.56 Yard. A required space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments of accessory buildings and other structures are expressly permitted. Required parking spaces may occupy yard areas if the provisions of screening are met, see 8.024. 
    2.57 Yard, Front. A yard situated between the front building line and the front lot line and extending the full width of the lot. 
    2.58 Yard, Rear. A yard situated between the rear building line and the rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot. 
    2.59 Yard, Side. A yard situated between a side building line and a side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
    2.60 Zoning District. See "District," 2.17. 
ARTICLE III. - ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

Section 3.00. - Certification by planning commission. 
    For the purposes of this ordinance, Metter, Georgia, is hereby divided into districts as shown on the official zoning map dated August 11, 1996 as certified by the planning commission to the city council. Said map is hereby made a part of this ordinance, made a public record, and shall be kept permanently in the office of the building inspector, where said map will be accessible to the general public. 
Section 3.01. - Map amendment. 
    If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes are made in the district boundaries or other information portrayed in the official zoning map, changes shall be made effective immediately after the amendment has been approved by the city council of Metter. A numerical entry shall be made by the city clerk on the official zoning map referring to the application on file which states the date of the official action and description of the nature of the changes approved by city council. No changes of any nature shall be made on the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change of any kind by any person or persons shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and is punishable as provided by law. 
    Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the official zoning map, which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map located in the office of the building inspector shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land in the city. 
Section 3.02. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
    3.021. Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundary lines are center lines of streets or blocks or such lines extended, lot or property lines, corporate limit lines, the center line of the main tracks of a railroad, a line lying in the center of a stream or drainage way, or city limits. 
    3.022. Where district boundary lines parallel street rights-of-way or other discernible cultural or topographical features, the distance shall be scaled from the map. 
    3.023. Where a district boundary line divides a lot, which is a single ownership at the time of this enactment, the use classification of the larger portion may be extended to the remainder without recourse to amendment procedure except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than twenty-five (25) feet beyond the district boundary line. 
    3.024. In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the city council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary. 
    3.025. Where a public road, street, alley, or other right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street, alley, or right-of-way. 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
    The regulations set by this ordinance within each district shall be the minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure of land, except as hereinafter provided. 

Section 4.00. - Use of land or buildings. 
    4.001. No land or building shall hereinafter be used or occupied, and no building or parts shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered, or moved, unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
    4.002. No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
a.  To exceed the original size or bulk; 
b.  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
c.  To occupy a greater percentage of the area; 
d.  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required or in any other manner contrary to the provision of this ordinance. 
    4.003. No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading required about or in connection with any building for the purpose of complying with this ordinance shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
    4.004. Right-of-way easements for streets and roads shall not be considered a part of a lot or open space, or front, rear, or side yard for the purpose of meeting yard requirements. 
Section 4.01. - Lot reduction prohibited. 
    No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
Section 4.02. - Use of substandard lots of record. 
    Where the owner of a lot at the time of the adoption of this ordinance does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this ordinance, such lot may nonetheless be used as a building site provided that said lot requirements are not reduced below the minimum specified in this ordinance by more than twenty (20) percent. If, however, the owner of two or more adjoining lots with insufficient land dimensions decides to build on or sell off these lots, he must first combine said lots to comply with the dimensional requirements of the ordinance. Any lot requiring dimensional waivers below the twenty (20) percent minimum set forth in this section may be approved by the city council provided that further decreased dimensional requirements shall conform as closely as possible to the required dimensions. 
Section 4.03. - Reserved. 
Section 4.04. - One principal building on a lot. 
    Only one principal building and its customary accessory buildings may hereafter be erected on any one lot. 
Section 4.05. - Planted buffer strips. 
    Where commercial or industrial districts abut residential districts, a ten-foot wide buffer strip shall be provided along the abutting property lines, and the ten (10) feet shall be added to the side or rear yard requirements as well as the lot width unless specified otherwise in this ordinance. Such buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
Section 4.06. - Vision clearance. 
    In all districts no fence, wall, shrubbery or other obstruction to vision between the heights of two and one-half feet and ten (10) feet above the finished grade of streets shall be erected, permitted, or maintained within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets or of streets and railroads. 
Section 4.07. - Access to public streets. 
    Access to public streets shall be maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
    4.071. Each principal use shall be located on a lot or parcel which provides frontage on a public street having a right-of-way of not less than thirty (30) feet. 
    4.072. Any additional dwelling shall have access to a public street by means of a passageway open to the sky at least fifteen (15) feet in width. 
    4.073. Local streets which will carry less than six hundred (600) vehicles per day may have access points as needed to fit the development. Collector streets and arterial streets which are projected to carry more than six hundred (600) vehicles per day shall have a minimum distance between access points equal to seven times the speed limit for that street. 
    4.074. For all developments fronting on a state highway, no land use permit or sign permit shall be issued until the appraisal of the Georgia Department of Transportation (DOT) has been obtained regarding access points, curb radii, drainage and related engineering design of concern to the DOT as well as the planning commission and the city council. 
Section 4.08. - Corner lots. 
    On lots having frontage on more than one street at an intersection, the minimum front yard requirement may be reduced to one-half the regulated distance on the portion of the lot fronting on the street or streets of lesser importance. However, in no case shall the setback be reduced to less than fifteen (15) feet. The minimum front yard for the portion of the lot fronting on the street of greater importance shall be provided in accordance with the provisions established by this ordinance for the district in which the lot is located. 
Section 4.09. - Double frontage lots. 
    On lots having frontage on two streets, but not located on a corner, the minimum front yard shall be provided on each street in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. On lots having frontage on more than two streets, the minimum front yard shall be provided in accordance with the regulations set forth in this ordinance on at least two of the street frontages. The minimum front yard on the other frontage or frontages may be reduced along the other streets in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.08. 
Section 4.10. - Front yard requirements. 
    The setback requirements of this ordinance shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on already built upon lots located wholly or in part within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot and within the block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback of said lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. However, in no case shall setbacks be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
Section 4.11. - Code requirements and state regulations. 
    All structures shall meet the requirements of all adopted codes in effect including, but not limited to department of transportation and state fire marshal regulations, building codes, plumbing code, electrical code, fire prevention code, and housing code. Where such codes exceed the minimum requirements of this ordinance, the stricter provisions shall apply. 
ARTICLE V. - ZONING DISTRICT SCHEDULES 
Districts Definition Examples of Basic 
Intent and Uses PEH Park, Education and Health Parks, education, public and private schools, hospitals, office buildings. Private day care centers, clinics, cemeteries. PW Public Works Utilities, maintenance facilities, public garages, fire stations. Radio, TV, transmitting tower, waste disposal treatments. R-1 One-Family Residential Low-density single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. Churches. R-2 One-Family Residential Medium density single-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. Churches. R-3 One- and Two-Family Residential Medium density one- and two-family dwellings, excluding manufactured homes. Churches and health care facilities. R-4 Multiple-Unit Residential Medium-high density residential, multiple-family units. Manufactured home parks, churches, day care, and health care. R-5M One-Family Residential Medium density single-family dwellings Churches, home occupations, and parks and playgrounds (conditional use approved by the ZAB). R-O Residential-Professional Offices Single-family dwellings and professional offices, excluding manufactured homes. Residences, professional offices. CR Neighborhood and General Commercial Convenience stores and service stations. Retail, wholesale, storage and services. Auto service stations. Off-site signs, repair garages. HOC Highway Oriented Commercial Highway oriented establishments. Off-site signs, repair garages. HOC-1-A Highway Oriented Commercial Highway oriented with restrictions. Alcohol sales incidental. Restriction on repair facilities. CBD Central Business District Shops, services, and offices serving regional trade area. Downtown core area. Drive-in services. LI Light Industrial Limited manufacturing, warehouses, repair garages, industrial parks. CR uses. HI Heavy Industrial General manufacturing, large space users. LI uses. CR uses. Junk, salvage yards.  
Zone Dwelling Family Size R-1 
one R-2 
one R-3 
one R-3 
two R-4 
one R-4 
two R-4 
multi R-5M 
one R-O 
one Minimum Requirements Lot Area (sq ft) 20,000 15,000 10,000 15,000 10,000 15,000 5,000 plus 5,000/unit 10,000 15,000 Lot Width (ft) 100 80 80 100 80 100 200 80 80 Front Yard Setback (ft) 40 40 25 25 25 25 50 25 40 Side Yards (ft) 10 10 10 10 10 10 25 10 10 Aggregate Side Yards (ft) 30 30 30 Corner Side Yards (ft) 40 40 25 25 25 25 25 25 40 Rear Yards (ft) 40 30 25 25 25 25 25 25 40 Side Rear Yards adjacent to Residential (ft) 50 Dwelling Width (ft) 15 25 20 20 12 12 12 20 25 Dwelling Length (ft) 50 40 40 40 60 60 60 40 40 Dwelling area (sq ft) 1,500 1,300 1,100 1,100 800 800 800 1,100 1,300 Maximum Limitations Total Building Coverage (%) 10 20 25 25 25 25 15 25 15 Height (ft) 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 35 Height/ 
(stories) 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 Accessory Bldg Height (ft) 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 15 Accessory Bldg Height (stories) 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Accessory Bldg Side Yards (ft) 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 10 Accessory Bldg Rear Yards (ft) 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 Access Bldg Corner Yards (ft) 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 40 Agricultural Bldg Height (ft) 40 40 40  
Zone PEH PW CBD CR HOC L-I H-I Minimum Requirements Lot Area (sq ft) 6,000 7,500 ** 15,000 1 acre 80,000 Lot Width (ft) 60 75 100 200 250 Front Yard Setback (ft) 50 25 15 15 40 50 50 Side Yards (ft) 25 15 5 5 25 30 30 Corner Side Yards (ft) 35 25 Rear Yards (ft) 25 15 20 20 25 30 30 Side Yards adjacent to R-x (ft) same as R-x same as R-x 35 200 200 Between Buildings *** Maximum Limitations Total Building Coverage (%) 25 35 80 85 30 40 40 Uses per 100 ft Road Frontage 1 1 Height (ft) (max1/ 
max2) * 35/50 25/40 35/65 40/65 Height (stories) 3 2 4 4 4 4 4  
NOTES 
*With no planning commission approval, height can go to max 1. 
With planning commission approval, height can go to max 2. 
But each yard requirement goes up one foot for each height foot over max 1. 
**Five acres for a planned center. 
***Height of taller building. 
ARTICLE VI. - LIST OF PERMISSIBLE AND CONDITIONAL USES 
    On the following table, a "CU" means the uses will be permitted in that district only if a conditional use permit is granted by the city council. An "X" means that the use is permitted in the zone district subject to the general provisions of the zoning ordinance. For uses not included on this list, where the building inspector is unable to determine placement, application shall be made to the planning commission for interpretation. Symbols may be added or removed from this table only by following Article XIII, Amendments. 
Permissible and Conditional Uses R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-O PEH PW CBD CR HOC HOC- 
I-A L-I H-I Advertising display mfg., sales CU CU CU CU Airport, Public & Private X X X Alcohol, Off-sale X X X CU CU Alcohol Off-sale, incidental X X X X CU CU Alcohol, on-sale X X X CU CU Alcohol, on-sale, incidental X X X X CU CU Amusement center, pvt ent operated X X X X CU CU Amusement park, race track CU CU CU CU CU Animal hospital, Veterinarian CU X X X X Association (clubs, lodges) X X X X X Athletic club CU X X X Athletic field CU X X X X Auditorium, assembly hall X X X X X X X X Auto/truck sales, repair parts X X X X X Auto/truck salvage, scrap yard CU CU Bait sales X X X X X Baked goods-large scale CU CU CU X X X X X Banks, savings & loan X X X X X Barber CU CU X X X X X Bar, cocktail lounge, tavern, nightclub X X X CU CU Beauty shop CU CU X X X X X Boarding, rooming house CU X X X X Boat, mobile home, farm/heavy equip sales X X X X X Bottle gas, storage & distribution X X X X X Bowling alley X X X X X X Broadcast studio (radio, TV) X X X X X X Builder's equipment-material storage CU X X X X X Campground, public-private CU X X Carnival X X X Carpentry shop, woodworking X CU X X X X Carpet & rug sales, storage X X X X X X Cemetery CU Cesspool builder, sales-service CU CU CU X X Church, synagogue CU CU CU CU CU X X X X X Circus X X X Clinic, public-private CU X X X X X Community center CU X X X X X X Contractor equipment-material storage O X X X X X Country club CU X Crematorium CU CU CU Curio and souvenir shops CU X X X X X Day care home See home occupation Day care group CU CU X X X X X X Day care center X X X X X X Disposal plant, sewage X CU CU CU CU CU Drive-in restaurant CU X X CU CU Driving range, golf CU X X CU CU Dump (solid-liquid waste disposal) CU CU Dwelling, single-family X X X X X CU CU CU CU Dwelling, two-family X X CU X X X Dwelling, multi-family group X CU X X X Eggs, poultry fair, processing CU Electric, power yards, substation CU CU CU CU CU CU X CU CU X X X X Fairs X X X Farmlands (except livestock) CU CU CU CU CU X X X X X Farmlands (include livestock) CU CU CU CU CU Fire station; fire tower CU CU CU CU CU X CU X X X X X X Fish-meat; wholesale, cure, store X X X X X X Fish hatchery X X Florist, green house CU CU X X X X X X X Forest land, tree farm, plant nursery CU CU CU CU CU X X X X X X X Frozen, cold storage locker X X X X X X Fruits CU CU X X X Funeral home CU X X X X X X Garage, public, repair CU X CU CU X X X X Gasoline; service station X X X X Gasoline, oil fuel; bulk storage tank X X X Golf, miniature, driving range X CU X X X X Golf course CU X Go-cart, motorbike track CU CU CU CU CU Gravel pit CU CU CU X Grocery store X X X X X Historic site, marker, display X X X X X X X X X X X X X Home-elderly, children, nursing CU X CU CU X X Home occupation X X X X X X X X X X Hospital, health care facility CU X CU X X Hotel, motel X X X X X Housing, multi-family project X CU X X X Ice, mfg, sales CU CU X X X X Imported good, warehouse-sales X X X X X Junk and salvage CU CU Kennel CU X X X X Laboratory, research-commercial CU X X X X X Laundry; self-serve X X X X CU CU Laundry, dry cleaning: pickup station X X X X X Laundry, dry cleaning plant X X X X X X Livestock sale barn CU X Machine shop, metal fabrication X CU CU CU CU X Manufactured home X Manufactured home park CU CU CU Manufacturing, heavy, general CU X Manufacturing, light, limited CU X X Mining, quarry-equipment storage CU CU X X Museum, historical display CU X X X X X X X Office building X X X X X X X Parking lot CU X X X X X X X X Park and playground CU CU CU CU CU X X X X X X X CU Paving, temporary batch plant X CU CU CU CU X Personal services (tailor, etc.) CU CU X X X X X Police, sheriff, highway patrol CU X X X X X X X Printing, photo-engraving X X X X X X Produce X X X Professional Office CU CU CU X X X X X X Public building, utility plant CU X CU CU CU CU X X Public service-except utility plant X X X X X X X X Radio-TV, transit; station-studio X CU X X X X Real estate office CU X X X X X CU Religious tents X X X Restaurants, cafés X X X X X X Retail store CU CU X X X X X CU Roadside park, wayside CU CU X X X X X X X Sawmill lumber yard CU X School, public-private CU CU CU CU CU X CU School, commercial (beauty-business) CU X X X X X X X Sewage disposal plant X CU CU CU CU CU Sign, on-site See Article IX Sign, off-site CU CU Skating rink, roller and ice CU CU X X X CU CU Storage warehouse CU X X X X X Storage yard, equipment X CU CU CU CU X X Swimming pool, private X X X X X X X X X X X Swimming pool, public X X X X X X Taxidermist X X X X X X Tire repairing-supplies CU X X X X X Telephone, tower, substation CU X CU X X X X X Theater X X X X X X Timber harvesting-logging X X X X Tourist home, bed & breakfast X X X CU Travel trailer, RV park CU CU X X CU Vegetables X X X Water reservoir facilities CU X X X Welding Shop CU CU X X X X Wholesale distribution CU X X X X X  
for see for see apparel store retail sales oil gasoline agriculture farm lands plant nursery forestland assembly hall auditorium play school child care batch plant paving playground park bed & breakfast tourist poultry eggs beer alcohol power electric cafe restaurant quarry mining car auto race track amusement park children home radio broadcast club association restaurant drive in cocktail lounge bar restaurant restaurant cold storage frozen rooming house boarding house day care home rug carpet dry cleaning laundry RV park travel trailer elderly home salvage junk farm boat savings & loan bank fuel gasoline sewage disposal golf driving range sheriff police greenhouse florist solid waste dump health care hospital souvenir curio heavy equipment boat synagogue church highway patrol police tailor personal service home dwelling tavern bar house dwelling tree farm forest land liquid waste dump truck auto liquor alcohol TV broadcast livestock farmland TV radio lodge association utility plant public logging timber veterinarian kennel lumber sawmill woodworking carpentry mobile home boat mobile home manufactured motel hotel motorbike go-cart nightclub bar nursing home  
ARTICLE VII. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Section 7.00. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Nonconforming uses are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. 
    To avoid undue hardship, the lawful use of any building or land at the time of the enactment of this ordinance may be continued, even though such use does not conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
    The nonconforming building or land use shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
    The nonconforming building or land use shall not be reestablished after discontinuance for one year or more. 
    A lawful nonconforming use may be continued into any new building erected on that lot. 
    A lawful nonconforming use may be continued onto an adjoining lot if a variance is provided. 
    Any new structure and alterations, extensions, or additions to existing structures shall conform to all the height, area, width, yard and coverage requirements for the district in which the lot is located. 
    A nonconforming building, which has been damaged or destroyed, may be reconstructed and used for the same nonconforming use. 
    Reconstruction shall start within two years from the date the building was damaged or destroyed. 
    Reconstruction shall be carried on without interruption. 
    If the original building did not meet any of the required height, area, width, yard and coverage dimensions, the reconstructed building can use the original building's dimension. 
    Under extenuating circumstances, the owner may appeal to the board of zoning appeals for an extension to the two-year period. 
    Nothing in this Article shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety or health, upon order of such official. 
Section 7.01. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Signs existing and in place at the time of enactment of Section 7.01 which is not in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance are nonconforming signs. 
    Nonconforming signs existing on that date shall be exempt from fees or the requirement to apply for a permit. 
    However, any temporary or portable sign existing at that time shall be considered a nonconforming sign only for ninety (90) days. After that period, it shall be removed. 
    If nonconforming sign is replaced or renovated, the resulting sign must comply with the requirements of this ordinance. "Renovated" in this sentence means drastically, physically altered. Normal maintenance (such as painting) does not change the status of the sign. 
    If a nonconforming sign is replaced with a sign in conformance with this ordinance, the fees for a sign permit on the replacement sign will be waived. 
    Nonconforming signs shall be kept in the same manner of maintenance and repair as conforming signs. A nonconforming sign declared unsafe by the building inspector shall, be removed. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Section 8.00. - Home occupation. 
    A home occupation shall be permitted in any dwelling, provided that such occupation: 
(a)  Is conducted by no other persons than those residing on the premises; 
(b)  Is conducted entirely out-of-sight of neighboring properties within the principal building. 
(c)  Utilizes not more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area of the principal building; 
(d)  Produces no alteration or change in the character of exterior appearance of the principal building from that of a dwelling; 
(e)  Creates no disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, parking problem, voltage fluctuation, radio or television interference, open storage of materials or stock, unhealthy or unsightly conditions; and 
(f)  Is not visibly evident from outside the dwelling except for a non-illuminated sign no larger than four square feet in size mounted against a wall of the principal building. 
Section 8.01. - Accessory uses. 
    In addition to the principal uses, each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use, and as such, may be situated on the same lot with the principal use or uses to which it serves as an accessory provided that setback and yard requirements are met. 
    8.011. Uses customarily accessory to dwellings. 
(a)  Private garage not to exceed the following storage capacities: one- or two-family dwelling-four automobiles; multi-family dwelling-two automobiles per dwelling unit; group dwelling-1.5 automobiles per sleeping room. 
(b)  Open space or parking area for recreational vehicles and motor vehicles provided that such space does not exceed the maximum respective storage capacities listed above, and provided that such space shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle per family residing on the premises. 
(c)  Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. 
(d)  Children playhouse and play equipment. 
(e)  Quarters for the keeping of pets owned by occupants for noncommercial purposes provided that such use does not generate a nuisance to adjoining properties. 
(f)  Private swimming pool and bathhouse or cabana. 
(g)  Structures designed and used for purposes of emergency shelter in the event of manmade or natural catastrophes. 
(h)  Noncommercial greenhouse or slat house. 
    8.012. Uses customarily accessory to church buildings. 
(a)  Religious education buildings. 
(b)  Parsonage, pastorium, or parish house, together with any use accessory to a dwelling as listed above. 
(c)  Off-street parking area for the use without charge of members and visitors to the church. 
    8.013. Uses customarily accessory to retail business, office uses, and commercial recreational facilities. 
(a)  Off-street parking or storage area for customers, clients, and employee-owned vehicles. 
(b)  Completely enclosed building and customarily arranged outdoor displays for the storage of supplies, stock, or merchandise. 
(c)  Light manufacturing, and/or repair facility incidental to the principal use provided that dust, odor, smoke, noise, vibration, heat, or glare produced as a result of such manufacturing or repair operation is not perceptible from any boundary line of the lot on which said principal and accessory uses are located and provided such operation is not otherwise specifically prohibited in the district in which the principal use is located. 
    8.014. Uses customarily accessory to public uses, buildings, or activities. 
    Same as 8.013. There shall be no further limitations regarding accessory uses to any use, building, or activity operated within the public domain except that such uses, buildings, or activities must be directly related and subordinate to the principal public use. 
Section 8.02. - Off-street parking. 
    Areas suitable for parking or storing automobiles in out of public rights-of-way in off road or off-street locations shall hereafter be required in all districts at the time of the initial construction of any principal building; or when a structural alteration or other change in a principal building produces an increase in dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area, seating or bed capacity, or when a conversion in use occurs. Such off-street parking spaces shall have direct access to a public road, street, or alley and shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
Required Parking Residential Activities Single-Family Dwellings Two (2) spaces Any residential use consisting of two (2) more dwelling units. One and one-half (11/2) spaces for each dwelling or unit. Tourist homes, motels, and hotels. One (1) space for each accommodation unit plus one (1) space for each three (3) employees. Apartments and Group Dwellings One (1) space for each three (3) guest rooms, plus one (1) space for each five employees. Public and Semipublic Uses Hospitals, Clinics, and Nursing Homes One (1) space for each four (4) beds plus one (1) space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one (1) space for each four (4) employees at maximum employment on a single shift. Churches, Stadiums, and other places One (1) space for each two (2) staff members or Public Assembly employees plus one (1) space for each four (4) seats in the principal assembly room. Places of assembly or indoor recreation One (1) space for each two hundred (200) without fixed seats square feet of gross floor space directed to patron use. Schools, elementary, and middle One (1) space for each classroom and administrative office employee. Schools, senior high One (1) space for each classroom and administrative office employee plus one (1) space for each ten (10) seats or one (1) space for each two hundred (200) square feet of area used for public assembly whichever is greater. Other Public Buildings One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor space. Business Activities Medical, Dental, and Optical offices Five (5) spaces per doctor, dentist, and optician. Professional and Business Offices, not otherwise specifically enumerated One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor space. Banks One (1) space for each one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor space plus five (5) spaces for each drive-in window. Service and Repair Establishments, not otherwise specifically enumerated One (1) space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area not used for storage. Retail Businesses, not otherwise specifically enumerated One (1) space for each three hundred (300) square feet of retail floor space. Auto, Truck, and Mobile Home Sales, Outdoor Equipment and Machinery Sales Commercial Plant Nurseries Four (4) spaces for each sales person plus one for each other employee Restaurants, Theaters, Night Clubs, and other such places of public assembly One (1) space for each four (4) seating accommodations plus one (1) space for each two (2) employees on shift of greatest employment. Service Stations Two (2) spaces for each gasoline pump plus three (3) spaces for each grease rack and wash rack plus one (1) space for each attendant. Funeral Homes One (1) space for each four (4) seats in chapel or parlor plus sufficient space to park or store all company vehicles. Wholesale and Industrial Uses Wholesaling and Industrial Uses including lumber, brick, salvage, and supply yards One (1) space for each employee at maximum employment on a single shift, plus space for all company vehicles operating from the premises.  
    8.021. Parking space area requirements. Including aisles, entrances and exits, each required off-street parking area, lot, or other facility shall contain a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of space for each automobile to be accommodated. 
    8.022. Location on other property. If the required automobile parking space cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such spaces may be provided on the other off-street property provided such property lies within five hundred (500) feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
    8.023. Common off-street parking areas. Two or more principal uses may utilize a common area in order to comply with off-street requirements, provided that the total number of individual spaces available in such common area is not less than the sum of the spaces required for the individual uses as separately computed in accordance with the provisions of this section, and provided that the owner of said lot relinquishes his development rights over the property until such time as parking space is provided elsewhere. 
    8.024. Screening of parking lots, junk and salvage yards. Off-street parking lots, whether public or private for more than five vehicles and all junk and salvage yards shall be effectively screened by a fence, wall, or evergreen plant material when located within or visible from a PEH or R-X zoning district. The screen shall meet the following standards: 
(a)  The last ten (10) feet adjoining such district shall be developed as a planted landscape buffer with plant materials to be installed and maintained by the property owner. 
(b)  A landscape-planting plan is to be submitted to the building inspector and approved prior to the issuance of a land use permit. Installation of plant materials or other screening devices shall have been completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Plant materials shall consist of at least one evergreen tree or shrub six feet in height or one tree with a minimum trunk caliper of two inches for each twenty-five (25) lineal feet of buffer screen. 
(d)  Where healthy trees or other native plant material exists on a site prior to its development, islands and buffers of such material shall be incorporated into the parking lot design with special attention to the saving and preservation of trees with trunk caliper of four inches or more. 
(e)  An overall minimum average of one tree or shrub as described above occupying a planting space of sixty-four (64) square feet shall be furnished for each ten (10) cars on the interior and for each five cars on the perimeter of the parking lot. 
    8.025. Access to parking lots. A plan of entrances, exits, and storm water drainage shall be submitted to the building inspector and approved prior to the issuance of a land use permit for off-street parking lots, whether public or private, for more than five vehicles. Installation of entrances, exits, and drainage systems shall have been completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. Unless special circumstances make it impractical, curb cuts not wider than twenty-four (24) feet for entrances into or exits from parking lots shall be no closer than one hundred (100) feet apart measured from centerline to centerline. 
    8.026. Extension of parking space into a residential district. Required parking space may extend up to three hundred (300) feet into an adjoining residential district, provided that: 
(a)  It has its access to or fronts upon the same street as the property in the commercial or industrial district for which it provides the required parking space; and 
(b)  It is separated from abutting properties in the residential district by a ten-foot wide buffer strip, screened and maintained as provided by 8.024. 
    8.027. Paved Parking Lots. Parking Lots must be improved with an asphalt, concrete, brick, paving stone or similar surface. 
Section 8.03. - Off-street loading and unloading spaces. 
    Every lot on which a business, trade, or industry is hereafter established shall provide space as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street. Such space shall have access to any alley or, if there is no alley, to a public street. For the purpose of this section, an off-street loading space shall have the minimum dimensions of twelve (12) feet by forty (40) feet and be clear and be free of obstructions at all times. Required space shall be considered as follows: 
(a)  Retail business: one space for each five thousand (5,000) feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Wholesale, industrial, governmental, and institutional uses, including public assembly places, hospitals and education institutions, one space for the first twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of total floor area. For anything in excess of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet, such uses shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 
Square Feet No. of Spaces 25,001-99,999 2 100,000-159,999 3 160,000-239,999 4 240,000-349,999 5 For each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional  
Section 8.04a. - Manufactured homes. 
    Manufactured homes shall comply with the standards established under the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC § 5401 et seq. 
    The foundations upon which manufactured homes are affixed shall be in compliance with the Permanent Foundations Guide for Manufactured House, 1996, as the same may be amended and/or modified from time to time. 
    Every manufactured home located within the city shall; 
    Have axles, wheels, and hitch mechanisms, if any, removed; 
    Be connected to an approved water supply, approved waste disposal system and electrical supply similar to site-built housing; 
    Be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and other plant materials substantially equal to or better than adjoining dwellings; and 
    Be underpinned with such materials and of such general appearance as to be compatible and harmonious with adjacent structures in the neighborhood and such other public health and welfare considerations as are deemed necessary by city officials. 
Section 8.04b. - Manufactured home parks. 
    Manufactured home parks hereafter established or expanded shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  Site shall be no less than five acres suitable for development. 
(b)  Lot area per manufactured home site shall not be less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(c)  No manufactured home or related accessory structure shall be closer than thirty (30) feet to any other manufactured home or accessory, nor closer than forty (40) feet from any other structure. 
(d)  Shall conform to all specifications of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development as expressed in publications relating to minimum property requirements for manufactured home parks or manufactured home communities. 
(e)  Shall be provided with a twenty-foot planted buffer screen between the manufactured home park and all other land uses and between the manufactured home park and any public street frontage consisting of evergreen shrubs not less than six feet tall and at least one tree with a minimum trunk caliper of two inches for each twenty-five (25) lineal feet of buffer screen. 
Section 8.05. - Housing standards. 
    Dwelling units shall comply with the following minimum standards: 
(a)  The roof shall have a minimum 2:12 pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, or built-up gravel materials. 
(b)  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, maisonette, metal or vinyl lap, or other materials of like appearance. 
(c)  The structure must be attached to a permanent foundation in accordance with the manufacturer's requirements and those of the building codes of the City of Metter. 
(d)  The structure must not have any attached means of transportation, such as axles, wheels, pulling tongues, or hitches. 
(e)  The area beneath the structure shall be enclosed with a facing of brick, stucco, concrete, stone, metal, vinyl, wood, or like materials approved by the building inspector. 
(f)  Each exterior door must have compatible steps, porches, or landings adjacent to the threshold, and these steps, porches, or landings shall be constructed in accordance with the building codes of the City of Metter. 
(g)  The structure shall be connected with an approved water source, sewage disposal system, and electrical service as required, inspected, and approved by the City of Metter. 
(h)  In addition to the above standards, the structure must be of such like size, materials, and general appearance as to be compatible and harmonious with adjacent structures and the neighborhood and such other public health and welfare considerations as deemed necessary by the city council. 
Section 8.06. - Proximity restrictions. 
    A church may not locate within one hundred (100) yards of any establishment licensed for distilled spirits. 
    A school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus or alcoholic treatment center may not locate within two hundred (200) yards of any establishment licensed for distilled spirits. 
    A church, school building, educational building, school grounds, college campus, or alcoholic treatment center may not locate within one hundred (100) yards of any establishment licensed for beer, wine or malt beverages. 
Section 8.07. - Conditional professional offices. 
    If the city council issues a conditional use permit for a professional office in a residential zone, the following additional restrictions apply: 
    The building type must complement the building types of nearby residences in the zone. 
    Parking must be in the rear of the building. 
    A visual screen (such as planted buffer strip defined in Section 4.05 or as defined by the city council) must exist between the professional office use and existing (or potential) adjoining residences. 
Section 8.08. - Large truck parking in residential areas. 
    In districts zoned for residential use, no person shall park or store any vehicle over ten thousand (10,000) pounds gross vehicle weight or twenty-four (24) feet in length except for the purpose of loading or unloading such vehicle. The loading or unloading of such vehicle shall be done within a reasonable time but not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours. No truck body, trailer, or truck tractor, or part thereof may be parked or stored within the districts herein described unless specifically authorized by this ordinance. Recreational vehicles, motor homes, campers, boat trailers, and similar vehicles used solely for noncommercial or personal recreation use shall not come within this prohibition if such vehicle is parked or stored within a garage or enclosed area, or within the rear yard of a lot not closer than five feet to any lot line. 
Section 8.09. - Conditional day care groups. 
    The following minimum conditions apply to the conditional use of a day care group in a residential area: 
    The day care group is located in a private residence occupied by the person providing the day care. 
    The premises access a thoroughfare adequate for traffic. 
    The facility shall have at least thirty (30) square feet of indoor play area for each child. 
    The facility shall have at least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor play area for each child. 
    The outdoor play area shall be fenced with at least a four-foot high fence. 
    The premises must contain adequate off-street loading and unloading. 
    The day care portion of the dwelling shall not occupy over twenty-five (25) percent of the heated square feet of the dwelling. 
    All signs must comply with Article IX, Sign Regulations. 
    Off-street employee parking shall provide one and one-half parking spaces per employee. 
    The applicant must provide a site plan indicating parking, pickup and drop off points, and playground areas. 
    The city council may define other conditions to promote the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood. 
ARTICLE IX. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Section 9.00. - General provisions. 
    The sign regulations derive from these concerns: 
  The safe and efficient flow of motor vehicle and pedestrian traffic; 
  The protection of public and private property values by assuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses; 
  The ability of property owners to enjoy or use their property without undue visual obstruction, distraction or hazard; 
  The preservation and protection of properties and areas having historic, recreational, educational, cultural, religious values and environments; 
  The elimination of potential hazards arising during times of inclement weather or other natural disaster; 
  The control of the proliferation and placement of signs that pose a threat to the aesthetic and environmental values and quality of life. 
    The following regulations shall apply to all permitted signs: 
    9.001. A sign permit shall be required for the erection, alteration, or reconstruction of any sign unless otherwise noted. 
    9.002. Signs must be aesthetically pleasing and compatible with the surrounding area. In particular, permanent signs shall have a professional appearance instead of a homemade look. Signs on commercial lots bordering residential areas shall blend in with the neighborhood. 
    9.003. Signs must be constructed of durable materials maintained in good condition and not permitted to become dilapidated. 
    9.004. With the exception of temporary, special event or spectacular and window signs, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and permanently attached to the ground, building or other structure. 
    9.005. All signs must be designed to withstand winds of eighty (80) miles per hour. 
    9.006. All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, aesthetically pleasing in appearance, and in compliance with all building and electrical codes. The following deficiencies reflect a lack of care: rust spots; loose boards; faded paint or lettering; chipped or faded lettering; burned out lights; missing, broken, faded, or damaged panels; loose or missing inspection plates; faded or tattered flags or banners; or overall appearance not consistent with other signs in the area. 
    9.007. If several lots of records, which are contiguous and adjacent, have been combined for a single purpose, then the lots shall be considered as a single lot in determining the size, height and use requirements. 
    9.008. When two sign faces are identical and back-to-back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any one point at the same time, the sign's area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces. 
Section 9.01. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited: 
    9.011. Signs imitating warning signals. No signs shall display intermittent lights resembling lights customarily used in traffic signals or in police, fire, ambulance, or rescue vehicles, nor shall any sign use the words "stop," "danger," or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in a manner that might mislead or confuse an automobile or other vehicle driver. 
    9.012. Signs within street or highway rights-of-way. Except as herein provided, no sign whatever, whether temporary or permanent, except traffic signs, signals and information signs erected by a public agency, is permitted within any street or highway right-of-way. 
    9.013. Certain attached and painted signs. Signs painted on or attached to trees, fence posts, and telephone or utility poles or signs painted on or attached to rocks or other natural features or painted on the roofs of buildings are prohibited. Some signs painted onto roofs are permitted under the provisions of Section 9.03, Subsection 9.031b. 
    9.014. Pennants and ribbons. Pennants, ribbons, strings of lights (other than holiday lights), and similar devices are prohibited. 
    9.015. Off-site signs on roofs and walls. No off-site signs shall be hereafter erected in any permitted district except freestanding ground signs of sound construction and maintenance. All other signs shall become nonconforming uses upon the effective date of this ordinance. 
    9.016. Blinking or flashing signs. No sign shall be erected or maintained on which any word, symbol or design is displayed by means of electric lights which flash or blink or are otherwise illuminated intermittently. 
    9.017. Projecting or Swinging Signs. No projecting or swinging signs shall be permitted. 
    9.018. Portable Signs. No portable signs shall be permitted. Section 2.47 defines a portable sign as any sign, which is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported by wheels or trailer. 
    9.19. Beacons. No beacons shall be permitted. 
    9.019a. Adult Nudity. No sign depicting adult nudity shall be permitted. 
Section 9.02. - Signs for which a permit is not required. 
    A permit is not required for the following types of signs: 
    9.021. Traffic, directional, warning, or information signs authorized by any public agency. 
    9.022. Official notices issued by a court, public agency, or officer. 
    9.023. One non-illuminated construction project sign, real estate sign ("for sale", "for rent", "for lease"), or garage sale sign. The maximum height of such signs shall be five feet. In residential districts, such signs shall not exceed nine square feet. In nonresidential districts, such signs shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet. Such signs shall be removed when their temporary purpose has been served. 
    9.024. Three non-illuminated political signs not exceeding nine square feet each in residential districts. The maximum height of such signs shall be five feet. Such signs shall be removed when their temporary purpose has been served. 
    9.025. One permitted home occupation sign provided it is not illuminated, no larger than four square feet, and mounted against a wall of the principal building. 
    9.026. Seasonal or holiday lights and decorations. 
    9.027. Up to two flags or non-advertising banners on a lot. No flag or banner shall be displayed with dimensions larger than five feet in width and ten (10) feet in length. Except, the American flag has no maximum size. 
    9.028. Building markers, identification signs, and incidental signs of less than nine square feet. 
    9.029. Window signs provided they cover no more than fifty (50) percent of the window space. 
Section 9.03. - Regulations applying to specified types of on-site signs. 
    The following regulations apply to the following specified types of signs: 
    9.031a. Roof signs. Not more than one on-site structure may be erected on the roof of any one building. No roof sign shall extend more than twenty (20) feet above the elevation of the roof: 
    9.031b. Signs painted onto roofs. A painted-on-roof sign may be permitted on a building sited in an H.O.C. zoning district (or in an LI zoning district within one hundred (100) yards of an H.O.C. boundary) only as a special exception to be considered by city council. The standards for approval shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Compatibility. The sign shall be compatible with the architecture of the building on which the sign is placed and shall be complimentary to surrounding buildings, signs, and the natural environment. The sign shall be normally and customarily associated with the type of business on which it is to be located. The design and colors of the sign shall be approved by city council prior to placement. 
2.  Size and surface requirements. Such sign shall comprise no more than forty-five (45) percent of the square footage of the roof elevation in which it is located. Moreover, all signage must be painted on the surface of the existing roof, and any additional elevation or extension to the roof is prohibited. 
3.  Maintenance. The sign shall be maintained at all times and may not exhibit flaking paint. 
    9.032. Wall signs. On-site signs on the walls of a building, including signs attached flat against the wall, painted wall signs, and projecting signs shall meet the following requirements: 
(a)  The total area of signs on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the front surface of the building. 
(b)  The total area of signs on a side or rear surface of a building shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building respectively. 
(c)  The combined sign area on the front, side, and rear surface of a building shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet. 
(d)  Wall signs attached flat against a wall may extend not more than twenty-four (24) inches beyond the wall. 
(e)  Signs projecting from a wall may extend outward from the wall of a building not more than six and one-half feet and may be located not closer than eighteen (18) inches to a vertical plane at the street curb line. A projecting sign shall not extend above the roofline a distance greater than the height of the roof above the ground level. In no case shall signs project beyond property lines. The minimum height above grade of sidewalk level of such signs shall be no less than ten (10) feet. 
    Signs on a canopy, signs on a marquee, and projecting signs are considered wall signs when determining maximum size. 
    9.033. Freestanding signs. Not more than one freestanding sign shall be permitted on a lot. 
    Except if the lot faces more than one street, each street may have a freestanding sign. 
    In the H.O.C. zoning district, freestanding signs shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area. In other zoning districts, freestanding signs shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area. 
    In the H.O.C. zoning district, freestanding signs shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. In other zoning districts, freestanding signs shall not exceed thirty (30) feet in height. 
    Freestanding signs shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to a property line or right-of-way line. 
    Freestanding signs shall not be closer than one hundred (100) feet from another freestanding sign. 
    9.034. Temporary Signs. A temporary sign is any sign, which is not permanently erected, affixed, or maintained on a premise for a long period of time. 
    The maximum size of a temporary sign shall be one hundred (100) square feet. 
    If a temporary sign is freestanding, its maximum height shall be five feet. 
    Permits for temporary signs on private property shall be allowed upon issuance of a temporary sign permit. 
    Temporary sign permits shall be less complicated than normal sign permits. The fee shall be lower than the fee for a normal sign permit. 
    A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary sign for a specified thirty-day period. No more than three permits for temporary signs shall be issued to any applicant in any calendar year. No more than one permit shall be issued for each temporary sign per location. 
    Except as modified by this section, all temporary signs must comply with all other applicable regulations and conditions set forth in this ordinance governing their usage. 
    9.035. Special Event or Spectacular Signs. A special event or spectacular sign is a sign or device including, but not limited to: 
    a cloth/paper/canvas/plastic/similar material sign 
    a balloon 
    a parked vehicle/trailer/mobile device with a mounted sign 
    other attention-getting device. 
    Special event and spectacular signs require a temporary sign permit. 
    Special event and spectacular signs shall be displayed only for the purpose of advertising a special use or event. This includes, but is not limited to, grand openings, seasonal sales, liquidations, going-out-of-business sales, fire sales, give-a ways, and promotions. 
    The maximum size allowed for all special event and spectacular signs shall be three hundred (300) square feet. 
    The maximum number of special event or spectacular permits shall be four per year for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) days for each permit issued. 
    Except as modified by this section, all special event and spectacular signs must comply with all other applicable regulations and conditions set forth in this ordinance governing their usage. 
    9.036. Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs are permitted as an integral part of any sign, which meets all other requirements of this ordinance. 
    The changeable copy portion of a sign shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the overall display surface area of the sign. 
    9.037. Banners and Flags. An advertising banner will be treated as a temporary sign under Section 9.034 or as a special event sign under Section 9.035. 
    Up to two non-advertising banners or flags are exempt from a sign permit. 
    More than two non-advertising banners or flags require a sign permit. 
    9.038. Suspended Signs. Suspended signs are allowed only if firmly attached to the supporting structure. 
    Swinging suspended signs are not allowed. 
    If the sign is suspended over a walkway, the bottom edge of the sign must be no lower than seven feet above the walkway. 
Section 9.04. - Regulations applying to off-site signs. 
    The provisions of Section 9.04 are not applicable to off-site signs erected at Interstate 16. All provisions as may be in force and effect from time to time by the state department of transportation for off-site signs adjacent to an interstate apply. 
    9.041. Off-site advertising signs shall be permitted as conditional uses as shown in the table, Article VI. 
    9.042. Off-site signs shall not be spaced closer than three hundred (300) feet to any other advertising sign on the same side of any street or highway except back to back or end to end and no closer than one thousand (1,000) feet apart when located to be viewed by motorists from Interstate Highway 16. 
    9.043. Off-site signs shall not be erected which exceed three hundred seventy-eight (378) square feet in advertising area. No more than one sign per sign structure will be allowed to face the same direction. But no such size limitation shall apply to require the reduction in size of any advertising structure in place on the date of the enactment of this ordinance. 
    9.044. Off-site signs shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from the right-of-way. 
    9.045. The total height of an off-site sign shall not be greater than twenty-five (25) feet. 
    9.046. All illuminated signs shall use base or top mounted lights and shall be activated by photoelectric cells. Additional lighting, including but not limited to neon, animation, and running lights, is prohibited. 
    9.047. Off-site signs shall not obscure safe sight distances or conflict with official traffic signs or safety devices. Lighted signs shall be shielded so as to prevent rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled right-of-way and shall not be of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or impair the vision of the operator of any motor vehicle. 
Section 9.05. - Regulations applying to signs in residential zones. 
    Signs in residential zones are prohibited except those exempted by Section 9.02 or specifically permitted by this Section 9.05. 
    Temporary and special event signs are allowed in residential zones if the sign receives a sign permit. 
    A residential development with several houses or apartments may have one freestanding sign (identifying only the name of the residential development) per entrance to the development. Such signs must be constructed of brick, stone, masonry, wood or equal architectural material. They shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per sign and shall not be more than eight feet high. 
    No illuminated signs are allowed in residential zones. 
    If a conditional use permit has been granted by the city council for an area in a residential zone, signs are allowed in that area with the following conditions: 
    No roof signs allowed. 
    Wall signs are limited to the exterior front surface of a building and shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the front surface of the building. 
    Freestanding signs shall not exceed nine square feet in area and five feet in height. 
    No temporary signs, special event signs, spectacular signs, banners, or flags are allowed. 
    Illuminated signs are not allowed. 
    Signs must be constructed of brick, stone, masonry or equal architectural material. 
Section 9.06. - Sign violations. 
    Installing or maintaining a sign in a way that is inconsistent with this ordinance is a violation. 
    Installing or maintaining a sign in a way that is inconsistent with its sign permit is a violation. 
    Installing or maintaining a sign that requires a permit without a permit is a violation. 
    Failing to remove a sign after its sign permit has lapsed is a violation. 
    Each day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalties of this ordinance. 
    Each separate sign of a violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalties of this ordinance. 
Section 9.07. - Summary. 
    This summary is just a guide. For actual regulations, please see the other sections of this ordinance. 
Residential Zones Nonresidential Zones Signs by Type Banner (advertising) prohibited temporary permit required Banner (no advertising) exempt (# max) exempt (# max) Canopy prohibited permit required Flag exempt (# max) exempt (# max) Marquee prohibited permit required Pennants, Ribbons prohibited prohibited Portable prohibited prohibited Projecting prohibited 6 1/2 ft. out, bottom 10 ft. high Roof prohibited 1 max, 20 ft. high Seasonal/Holiday Decorations exempt exempt Self-standing permit required 1 max, 30 ft. high, 100 sq. ft. Special Event permit required 300 sq. ft. Spectacular prohibited 300 sq. ft. Strings of Light prohibited prohibited Suspended permit required permit required Swinging prohibited prohibited Wall prohibited 20% front, 25% sides/rear, 600 sq. ft. total Window less than 50% less than 50% Signs by Purpose Building Marker exempt if 9 sq. ft. exempt if 9 sq. ft. Construction exempt if 9 sq. ft. exempt if 20 sq. ft. Garage Sale exempt if 9 sq. ft. permit required Home Office exempt if 4 sq. ft. on wall not applicable Identification exempt if 9 sq. ft. exempt if 9 sq. ft. Incidental exempt if 9 sq. ft. exempt if 9 sq. ft. Political exempt if 9 sq. ft. permit required Real Estate exempt if 9 sq. ft. exempt if 20 sq. ft. Temporary permit required permit required Signs by Characteristics Animated prohibited prohibited Changeable Copy prohibited max 50% of total sign Illuminated prohibited permit required Blinking, Flashing prohibited prohibited Beacon prohibited prohibited  
ARTICLE X. - MODIFICATIONS FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS, PATIO HOUSES, AND CLUSTER DEVELOPMENTS 

Section 10.00. - Exceptions for innovative design. 
    Planned unit developments, patio houses, and cluster developments are recognized as being desirable for the conservation and more efficient use of open space, utilities, energy, and public services than the conventional pattern of land development. In the best interest of the long-range development plans of the city, therefore, the planning commission is hereby empowered to make certain modifications to the provisions of this ordinance in order to encourage new and innovative approaches to land development. Such modifications shall permit flexibility of design and construction and provide for ways to enclose outdoor space as a useful extension of living areas in a manner consistent with the preservation of property values within established areas but shall not permit structures of use of land that might endanger health, safety, or natural drainage. 
Section 10.01. - Procedure. 
    Any request for the establishment of a Planned Unit Development (PUD), or for the design of a patio house or cluster development that does not meet all of the requirements of this ordinance shall be considered an amendment and shall be administered and processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in Article XIII, Section 13.02. 
Section 10.02. - Professional design. 
    To assure developments of the quality desired by the city, to establish an optimum living environment between indoor and outdoor living, and to provide for good design and use of proper materials in the structures and landscape design, the professional talents of state registered architects and/or landscape architects should be utilized in the design of PUDs, patio houses, and cluster developments. 
ARTICLE XI. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, APPEAL, COMPLAINTS, AND REMEDIES 

Section 11.00. - Administration and enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector or his designee to administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance. 
    If the building inspector finds that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. 
    He shall order discontinuance of illegal buildings or structures; discontinuance of illegal additions, alterations, or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
    He shall order removal of any sign that endangers the public safety; removal of any sign with no permit that requires a permit; removal of any sign otherwise in violation of this ordinance; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. 
    Any sign erected in violation of this ordinance may be removed from public property or right-of-way by authorized employees of the city. The responsible party may be cited for such violation. 
Section 11.01. - Application for permits. 
    All applications for land use permits, sign permits, and temporary certificates of zoning compliance shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions and shape of the lot to be built upon; the exact sizes and locations on the lot of buildings already existing, if any. Location of adjacent trees of four inches or larger in caliper measured at breast height; and the location and dimensions of the proposed building or alteration. The application shall include such other information as lawfully may be required by the building inspector, including existing or proposed building or alteration; existing or proposed uses of the building and land; the number of families, housekeeping units, or rental units the building is designed to accommodate; conditions existing on the lot; and such other matters as may be necessary to determine conformance with, and provide for the enforcement of, this ordinance. 
    One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the building inspector; after he shall have marked such copy either as approved or disapproved and attested to same by his signature of such copy. The original copy of the plans, similarly marked, shall be retained by the building inspector. 
Section 11.02. - Land use and sign permits required. 
    No building, sign, or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefor, issued by the building inspector. No land use or sign permit shall be issued by the building inspector except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. The building inspector shall issue permits in accordance with this ordinance as well as with the provisions of the building code or other laws in effect. Unlawful uses shall be made to comply with all regulations or shall be removed in accordance with the appropriate provisions set forth in the building code or this ordinance. 
Section 11.03. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    It shall be unlawful to use or occupy or permit the use or occupancy of any building or premises, or both, or parts thereof hereafter created, erected, changed, converted, or wholly or partly altered or enlarged in its use or structure until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued therefor by the building inspector stating that the proposed use of the building or land conforms to the requirements of this ordinance and other codes and resolutions adopted by the city. 
    No nonconforming structure or use shall be changed or extended, until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the building inspector. 
    No permit for erection, alteration, moving, or repair of any building shall be issued until an application for a period not exceeding six months during alterations or partial occupancy of a building pending its completion, provided that such temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will protect the safety of the occupants and the public. 
Section 11.04. - Conditional and temporary uses. 
    Conditional uses, as listed in Article VI, are declared to possess characteristics, which require certain controls in order to insure compatibility with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location. 
    11.041. General requirements. Conditional uses shall be permitted subject to a determination by the building inspector that they conform to all conditions set forth by the city council. 
    11.042. Conditional use administration and duration. Applications for permission to build, erect, or locate a conditional use shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article, prior to the issuance of any permits. The individual or individuals who wants the conditional use permit must be the one who applies for the request and the property owner must give the applicant a letter of permission for that conditional use requested. 
    11.043. Temporary uses. The building inspector is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of zoning compliance for temporary uses, as follows: 
a.  Carnival, circus, or fair, for a period not to exceed twenty-one (21) days, subject to the approval of the city council in the CR, HOC, and CBD Districts. 
b.  Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure in CR and HOC Districts, for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
c.  Open lot sale of Christmas trees, fruit and vegetables, and other harvested products in the CR, HOC, and LI Districts for a period not to exceed forty-five (45) days. 
d.  Contractor's office and equipment sheds, in any district, for a period of one year, provided that such office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. 
e.  All temporary certificates of zoning compliance may be renewed provided that it is determined that said use is clearly of a temporary nature, will cause no increased traffic congestion and will not create a nuisance to surrounding uses. 
Section 11.05. - Expiration of land use permit. 
    If the work described in any land use permit has not begun within six months from the date of issuance thereof, said permit shall expire; it shall be canceled by the building inspector, and written notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. 
Section 11.06. - Complaints regarding violations and remedies. 
    Whenever a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the building inspector. He shall record properly such complaint, immediately investigate, and take action thereon as provided by this ordinance. 
Section 11.07. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined, as determined by the court, for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
    Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
Section 11.08. - Appeal from the decision of the building inspector. 
    It is the intention of this ordinance that all questions arising in connection with the enforcement of the ordinance shall be presented first to the building inspector and that such question shall be presented to the City Council on appeal from the decision of the building inspector. 
ARTICLE XII. - ZONING APPEALS 

Section 12.01. - Appeals, hearings, and notice. 
    Appeals to the city council may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city. Such appeal shall be taken within fifteen (15) days by filing with the city clerk notice of said appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
    An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Mayor, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of record on application, on notices to the officer from whom the appeal is taken, and on due cause shown. 
    City council shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter referred to it, and give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
Section 12.02. - Variances and special exceptions. 
    City council may authorize variance from the terms of the ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
    Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship upon a finding by the city council that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography. 
b.  The application of the ordinance to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; and 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purpose and intent of the ordinance. Provided, however, that no variance may be granted for a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited in a given district by the ordinance. No variance may be granted to the provisions of Article IX, Sign Regulation. 
    12.021. To hear and decide special exceptions by the granting of conditional use permits upon a finding by the city council: 
a.  The special exception or conditional use will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or of other property in the immediate vicinity nor diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  The proposed conditional use will not increase local or state expenditures in relation to cost of servicing or maintaining neighboring properties; 
c.  The establishment of the conditional use will not impede the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for uses predominant in the area; and 
d.  The location and character of the proposed conditional use is considered to be consistent with a desirable pattern of development for the locality in general. 
    12.022. To decide on other matters where a decision of the city council may be specifically required by the provisions of this ordinance. In exercising these powers, the city council may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. The city council, in the execution of the duties for which appointed, may subpoena witnesses and in case of contempt may certify such fact to the superior court. 
Section 12.03. - Certiorari from decisions of board of appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city council shall have the right of certiorari to the superior court within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board is rendered. 
Section 12.04. - Rules of procedure and fees required. 
(a)  Whenever a person shall take an appeal to the city council, he shall obtain the appropriate form therefor from the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the said person to complete the appeal form in its entirety; which form is then to be submitted to the city clerk together with the appropriate fees. 
    In addition, a list of names and addresses of the owner, if his residence is known, or the occupier of every lot in the same street within five hundred (500) feet of the building in question and of every lot not on the same street within one hundred fifty (150) feet of said lot or building, shall be submitted with the appeal form; provided, however, that failure to provide such list of names provided by this paragraph shall not invalidate any action taken by the board of appeals. 
(b)  Fees. A charge or fee as set by city council shall be paid by each applicant upon the filing of an application with the for a special exception, variance, or conditional use from the terms of this ordinance. The charge or fee shall be paid in advance to the City of Metter and shall be used to defray the necessary expenses . If the applicant desires a stenographic record of the proceedings before the board of appeals, he shall so indicate upon his application and shall forward therewith the actual cost of the records as stated by the city clerk. 
(c)  Expiration of Special Exceptions and Variances. Unless otherwise specified by the board of appeals, a special exception or variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building permit there under within six months from the date of authorization thereof. 
ARTICLE XIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 13.00. - Authority. 
    This ordinance, including the official zoning map, may be amended from time to time by the city council as herein specified. 
    No amendment shall become effective unless the city council has held a public hearing on the amendment. 
Section 13.01. - Requirements for a change. 
    When the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice justify such action, and after a public hearing, and after the required review and report by the planning commission, the city council may undertake the necessary steps to amend the zoning ordinance. 
Section 13.02. - Procedure for amendments. 
    Requests to amend the zoning ordinance shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
    13.021. Initiation of Amendments. The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify, or repeal this ordinance, including the zoning map, by proceeding in the following manner, and as otherwise required by law. In amending the zoning map or regulations, the city council shall use the "Standards for Zoning Decisions" adopted by the city. A proposed amendment may also be initiated by the planning commission, or by application filed with the city by the owners of the property proposed to be changed. 
    However, that action shall not be initiated for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel or parcels of property or any part thereof and requesting the same change in district classification more often that once every six months. 
    The owners of fifty (50) percent or more of the frontage in any district may initiate an amendment to the zoning ordinance by presenting a duly signed and acknowledged petition requesting the amendment to the city council. 
    13.022. Applications procedure. Each request for amendment of the zoning ordinance shall be submitted to the city on a form provided by the city and signed by the owner(s) or their duly authorized agent(s). A separate request must be filed for each parcel for which a zoning amendment is requested, and shall contain the following: 
A.  Applicant's name and address and his representative, and the interest of every person represented in the application. 
B.  A plan showing the extent of the area to be rezoned, streets bounding and intersecting the area, the land use and zone classification and abutting districts and photographs of the area to be rezoned and abutting areas. 
C.  A statement of the circumstances in the proposed district and the abutting districts and any other factors on which the applicant relies as reasons for supporting the proposed rezoning. The applicant's statements should address issues identified in the city's adopted: "Standards for Zoning Decisions." 
D.  The approximate time schedule for the beginning and completion of development in the area. 
E.  A site plan to scale, indicating the locations of structures, uses area for off-street parking and loading. 
F.  The City, at the applicant's expense, shall erect a sign upon the property in question. This sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location, as the building inspector may direct, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the public hearing. The required sign shall be at least nine square feet in size and shall contain a message composed of black letters at least three inches high upon a white background which shall read as follows: 
PUBLIC HEARING NOTICE ZONING CHANGE 
    A public hearing will be held at City Hall at (time) (am or pm) on (date), (year), to consider the rezoning of this property from (present zoning classification) to (request zoning classification). 
G.  A fee to cover the administrative expense, publication cost and signage involved in processing the official request as set by city council. 
    13.023. Public hearing. The city council by resolution adopted at a regular or special meeting shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on the proposed amendment which shall be conducted in accordance with the city's adopted "Policies and Procedures for the Call and Conduct of Zoning Public Hearings," and at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the public hearing, shall cause notice thereof to be given as follows: 
A.  By publishing a notice thereof in one newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
B.  By mailing a notice to all property owners adjacent of the particular property involved. 
C.  By requiring the applicant at his expense to erect a sign upon the property in question as outlined in Section 13.022(F) Public Hearing Notice. 
    The notice shall state the general nature of the proposed amendment and that full opportunity to be heard will be given to any citizen and all parties in interest attending such hearing. 
    Whenever a proposed amendment affects a particular property, then a notice of the proposed amendment shall be posted upon said property or premises at such place or places as shall be conspicuous to the traveling public and adjacent property owners. 
    13.024. Planning Commission recommendation. prior to the public hearing, the city council shall refer all proposed amendments, variance request, conditional use applications, and special exception applications to the planning commission for its recommendation and report. 
    All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public and any party may appear in person or by agent, or by attorney. 
    No member of the planning commission shall participate in a matter in which he has any pecuniary or special interest. 
    The planning commission's recommendation shall not be binding on the city council. 
    13.025 Final action. After holding the public hearing and receiving the planning commission's recommendation, the city council shall take final action on the proposed zoning amendment at a regular or special meeting. 
    In case of a protest against such amendment, change, modification or repeal, signed by the owners of 
(a)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the area included in such proposed changes, or 
(b)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the lots included in such proposed changes, or 
(c)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the lots immediately adjacent to such proposed changes, or 
(d)  Twenty (20) percent or more of the lots within one hundred (100) feet of such proposed changes, such amendment, supplement, change or modification shall not become effective except by a majority vote of the city council. 
    13.026. Changes in the zoning ordinance and map. Following final action by the city council, any necessary changes shall be made in the zoning ordinance and zoning map, as applicable. 
    A written record of the type and date of such change shall be maintained by the city clerk, within seven days after formal action by the city council. Action by the city council shall be considered official Effective immediately. 
    13.027 Right of certiorari. Any person aggrieved by final action of the city council changing the zoning ordinance and/or the zoning map shall have the right of certiorari to superior court within thirty (30) days after such final action. 
    13.028. Printed copies of hearing procedures available to the public. Printed copies of Article XIII, Amendments, with all applicable amendments, shall be maintained in the city hall office of building inspection for distribution to the general public. 
ARTICLE XIV. - SCHEDULE OF FEES 
    The schedule of fees shall be posted by the city and may be altered or amended from time to time by the city council to help defray the costs of zoning administration. 
ARTICLE XV. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Section 15.00. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever the regulations of this ordinance require a greater width or size of yards or require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
Section 15.01. - Validity. 
    Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof, which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
Section 15.02. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect. 
Section 15.03. - Enactment procedure effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect immediately and be in force. 
ARTICLE XVI. - STANDARDS FOR ZONING DECISIONS 
    In order to conform to the Zoning Procedures Law of the State of Georgia (Title 36, Chapter 66 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated), the following standards will be considered as appropriate and as relevant to a particular zoning decision by the city council when adopting, changing, or amending the zoning ordinance or the zoning map. 
1.  Assure that the proposed change is reasonable and consistent with the spirit, purpose, and intent of the zoning ordinance. 
2.  Consider the changes in community characteristics, which may take place because of the proposed change, and consider the consistency with and effect of the change on current public growth and development policies and plans. 
3.  Consider the relative effectiveness or ineffectiveness of the present wording or districting of the ordinance, and whether a justification for change exists because of special reasons or a change in conditions. 
4.  Consider the effect upon the public interest of granting or denying the proposed change and determine that the change will serve the best interests of the city, as compared to any hardship imposed upon the individual property owner. 
5.  Consider the existing land use pattern, and specifically the presence or absence in the adjacent surrounding area of conditions and uses which are the same or similar in character to any proposed change or use, and the possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent districts. 
6.  Determine that the proposed change will not substantially injure or detract from the use or value of neighboring property, or from the general character of adjacent and nearby property in the surrounding area. 
7.  Consider the unique characteristics of the property involved, and whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has some reasonable economic use as currently zoned or whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used in accordance with existing zoning. 
8.  Consider the effect of the proposed change upon the logical, efficient, and economical extensions of public services and facilities, or possible overtaxing or burdening of existing public services or facilities, including but not limited to utilities, streets, schools, and public safety services, and also the associated costs to the local government in providing, improving, increasing, or maintaining such facilities and services. 
9.  Consider the impact of the change with respect to probable effects upon highway traffic and safety, and especially access near intersections. 
10.  Consider the impact of the proposed change upon the environment, including but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, noise, air quality, and water quality and quantity. 
11.  Determine that the zoning proposal will permit suitable use or uses in view of the subject property's physical characteristics, the use and development of adjacent and nearby properties, existing zoning patterns, existing or proposed public facilities or services, environmental impacts, and current public growth and development policies and plans of the city. 
12.  Consider whether the change is designed to correct an improper situation or would merely result in the granting of special privileges not available to adjacent or surrounding properties. 
13.  Consider any other factors relevant to balancing the city's interests in promoting and protecting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against a right to unrestricted use of property. 
ARTICLE XVII. - POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR THE CALL AND CONDUCT OF ZONING PUBLIC HEARINGS 
    In order to conform to the Zoning Procedures Law of the State of Georgia (Title 36, Chapter 66 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated), the following policies and procedures shall govern the call and conduct of all zoning public hearings in the city. 
1.  In accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, the city council shall fix the time and place of a public hearing on any proposed adoption, change, or amendment to the zoning ordinance or the zoning map. 
2.  All required zoning hearings shall be properly advertised and have proper notice according to Georgia Law and the zoning ordinance of the city. 
3.  All such hearings shall be open to the general public, and no person shall be excluded for any reason other than grossly disruptive or offensive actions. 
4.  The purpose of holding a zoning public hearing is to listen to the views of the citizens of the community, and then evaluate the entire matter at a later time or official meeting. No cross-examination or prolonged argumentative questioning of the hearing body shall be permitted. Decorum and order shall prevail. 
5.  Before any requests for amendments or zoning changes may be considered, the clerk shall verify and announce publicly for the record that: 
(A)  All necessary submission requirements as established in the zoning ordinance have been met. 
(B)  All requirements under Georgia Law for advertising and posting of a sign on the property for rezoning, if appropriate, including any time limitations, have been met. 
6.  The chair shall announce publicly the convening of the hearing on each amendment or change, identifying specifically, if appropriate, the property proposed for zoning and stating the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classifications. 
7.  Any citizen and all parties in interest shall be given opportunity to be heard, provided that oral presentations for each side of the issue shall be limited to thirty (30) minutes, and those persons wishing to make oral presentations have signed a hearing register with their name, address and affiliation or standing, and indicated which side of the issue they wish to address. The chair shall have the authority to place more specific time limits on individual oral presenters (as a class), so long as each side is given its full amount of allotted time, or to extend the allotted time of the public hearing to one hour for each side, if warranted. 
8.  Submission of written comments and supporting data shall be allowed, in addition to or as a supplement to oral presentations, without affecting time limits on oral presentation. To be accepted and entered into the record, these comments must be clearly identified as to the issue concerned, and carry the name, address, and affiliation of the respondent. The receipt and acceptance of written comments shall be read into the record of the chair or the chair's designee. 
9.  Those persons wishing to make oral or written presentations before the hearing body should be aware that the hearing body is attempting to make an objective decision, based on the adopted "Standards for Zoning Decisions" of the city and is interested only in factual presentations and information which can be supported, and which is accurately and carefully presented. The chair may declare out of order any presenter making emotional arguments or extraneous statements not germane to the issue. Only presentation and information relevant to issues raised in the city's adopted "Standards for Zoning Decisions" shall be considered germane. 
10.  Only members of the hearing body may question a person making a presentation during the hearing. In order for a person in attendance to speak, the chair must first recognize that person. 
11.  The order of procedure for each hearing shall be as outlined below. 
(A)  After convening and identifying the public hearing, the chair will request the register for that hearing and briefly recite the procedures in effect, including any specific time limits. 
(B)  Presentations, if desired, by the proponents of the propose zoning change or amendment. 
(C)  Questions by members of the hearing body of the proponents. 
(D)  Presentations, if desired, by the opponents of the proposed zoning change or amendment. 
(E)  Questions by members of the hearing body of the opponents. 
(F)  Upon conclusion of the presentations and questions, the chair will thank all for their interest and attendance, assure that all views and the entire matter will be given careful consideration, and shall close that hearing. 
12.  The chair will then announce the time and place of the meeting of the governing body which will have the proposed change on the agenda for official action. 
13.  Any other scheduled public hearing or amendment or change shall then be convened, utilizing the same procedures. 
14.  Only normal minutes shall be maintained by any zoning public hearing as a matter of course. However, upon receipt of written request from an affected party or parties at least one week prior to the scheduled public hearing the city shall have a transcript prepared, provided that the entire cost of preparation shall be borne by the affected party or parties making such request. Agreement to this by the party or parties making such request must be provided to the city in writing before preparations for such a transcript will be undertaken. 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Printed herein are the Subdivision Regulations of the city, as adopted by the City Council on November 11, 1974. Amendments to the ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I 

Section 101. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Metter". 
Section 102. - Purpose and intent. 
    This Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957 (Ga. Laws 1957, p. 420), for the following purposes: 
A.  to encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
B.  to assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to land developments; 
C.  to assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in land developments; 
D.  to assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and, 
E.  to assure that land is developed in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Metter. 
Section 103. -   
    Whenever the provisions of this ordinance and those of some other ordinance or statute apply to the same subject matter, that ordinance requiring the highest, or more strict, standard shall govern. 
ARTICLE II 

Section 201. - Definitions. 
    When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. 
A.  "Lot" - a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
B.  "Planning commission" is the Metter Planning Commission. 
C.  "Street" is a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way, and for the purposes of this ordinance, "streets" are divided into the following categories: (See Illustration 1). 

Illustration 1. Subdivision Street Types 
(1)  "Major streets" - those streets designated as such on the Major Thoroughfare Plan of the City of Metter. 
(2)  "Collector street" - a street within a subdivision used to carry traffic from the "minor streets" to the "major streets" and includes the principal entrance and circulation streets of a subdivision. 
(3)  "Minor street" - a street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)  "Alley" - a minor way used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(5)  "Cul-de-Sac" - a "minor street" with only one outlet, sometimes called a "dead-end" street. 
(6)  "Marginal access street" - a "minor street" parallel and adjacent to "major streets" and which provides access to abutting properties with protection from through traffic. 
D.  "Subdivider" is the person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this ordinance. 
E.  "Subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets, and includes re-subdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
(1)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
F.  "Manufactured home park" - any portion or parcel of land designed to accommodate one or more manufactured homes to be used for living or sleeping purposes, including any land, building, structure, or facility used by the occupants of house trailers on such property. 
G.  "Buffer strip" - a planted evergreen strip ten (10) feet wide to effectively screen from view the enclosed development. 
ARTICLE III. - PLATTING JURISDICTION, ENFORCEMENT 

Section 301. - Platting authority. 
    From and after the passage of this ordinance, the Metter Planning Commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision shall be entitled to record in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Candler County unless it shall have the approval of the Planning Commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the approval of the planning commission as required by this ordinance is declared to be a misdemeanor. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 302. - Use of plat. 
    The transfer, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the planning commission and recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Candler County is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. 
Section 303. - Opening and improving public streets. 
    The governing body of the city shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street, which had not attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this ordinance, unless such street corresponds to the street location shown on an approved subdivision plat or on an official street map adopted by the planning commission, provided that the governing body may accept, lay out, open and improve any street not so platted if it first submits such proposed action to the planning commission for its review and comment. 
Section 304. - Erection of buildings. 
    No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the city unless the street giving access thereto has been accepted as a public street in accordance with this ordinance, or unless such street had attained the status of a public street prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or on a street accepted by the governing body. 
ARTICLE IV. - PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE 

Section 401. - Preapplication review. 
    Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land within the City of Metter is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the chairman of the planning commission. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. No fee shall be charged for the pre-application review and no formal application shall be required. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCEDURE FOR TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT 

Section 501. - Application for preliminary plat approval. 
    Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit to the secretary of the planning commission, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following: 
A.  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and giving the names and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
B.  Ten (10) copies of the preliminary plat and other documents, as specified in Article VII. 
C.  A statement from the county sanitation office approving the proposed water supply and sewage disposal systems. 
D.  A preliminary plat filing fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or three dollars ($3.00) per lot, whichever is greater. Said fee is non-returnable. 
Section 502. - Review of preliminary plat. 
    The secretary of the planning commission, or other person or persons designated by the planning commission, shall check the plat for conformance to the rules and regulations of this ordinance and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the preliminary plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting preliminary plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
    Thereafter, the planning commission shall give approval or disapproval to the preliminary plat. A notation of the action shall be made on two copies of the preliminary plat, including a statement of the reasons for disapproval, if the preliminary plat is disapproved. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent and one copy added to the records of the planning commission. In the case of a disapproval, a statement of the reasons shall accompany these copies. 
    Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat. It indicates only approval of the layout as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. Approval shall expire and be null and void after a period of one year unless an extension of time is approved by the planning commission. 
    If action on a preliminary plat is not taken by the planning commission within thirty (30) days of the date of submittal, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRELIMINARY PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Section 601. - Scale. 
    The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred (100) feet to one inch. 
Section 602. - Sheet size. 
    Sheet size shall be 18 × 24 inches where possible. If the complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, it may be shown on more than one sheet with an index map on a separate sheet of the same size. 
Section 603. - Ground elevations. 
    The preliminary plat shall show ground elevations at two-foot contour intervals based on the datum plane of the U. S. Coast Guard and Geodetic Survey. A tie to one or more benchmarks shall be shown. 
Section 604. - Information to be provided on preliminary plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. 
B.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
C.  North point and graphic scale and date. 
D.  Vicinity map showing location and acreage of the subdivision. 
E.  Exact boundary lines of the tract by bearings and distances. 
F.  Names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
G.  Existing streets, utilities and easements on and adjacent to the tract. 
H.  Proposed layout including streets and alleys with proposed street names, lot lines with approximate dimensions, easements, land to be reserved or dedicated for public uses, and any land to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
I.  Block numbers and lot numbers. 
J.  Provisions for water supply, sewerage, and drainage. 
K.  Minimum building front yard setback lines. 
L.  Such street cross-sections and centerline profiles as may be required by the city. 
Section 605. - Certificate of preliminary approval. 
    A certificate of tentative approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
    "Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Metter, Georgia, all the requirements of Preliminary Approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was given Approval by the Metter Planning Commission on _______, 19___. This Approval of Preliminary Plat does not constitute approval of a Final Plat. This Certificate of Approval shall expire and be null and void on _______". 
__________Date Secretary 
Metter Planning 
Commission  
ARTICLE VII. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 

Section 701. - Application for final plat approval. 
    After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the planning commission the subdivider may, within one year from said approval, submit to the planning commission: 
A.  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of the person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the final plat shall be sent. 
B.  Ten (10) copies of the final plat and other documents, as specified in Article V, the original and at least one copy of which shall be drawn in permanent ink on plastic vellum or linen. 
C.  A statement from the county sanitation officer approving the water supply and sewage disposal system. 
D.  A statement from the city or its engineer that all improvements have been made as required by this ordinance or that an adequate bond has been posted to cover the cost of the unfinished improvements as required in Article XIII. 
E.  The required recording fee for each sheet to be recorded. 
Section 702. - Review of final plat. 
    The secretary of the planning commission, or other person or persons designated by the planning commission, shall check the final plat for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and with the rules and regulations of this ordinance and report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall afford a hearing on the final plat, notice of the time and place of which shall be sent by the secretary of the planning commission by registered or certified mail to the person designated in the letter requesting final plat review and approval, not less than five days prior to the date of the hearing. 
    Thereafter, the planning commission shall approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action shall be made on the original tracing and two prints of the final plat, including a statement of the reasons therefore if the final plat is disapproved. If action on a final plat is not taken by the planning commission within thirty (30) days of the date of the submittal, the final plat shall be considered approved and a certificate of approval shall be issued on demand. However, the applicant for approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
Section 703. - Recording of final plat. 
    Upon approval of a final plat, the secretary of the planning commission shall have the final plat recorded in the Office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Candler County. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of the recording fee at the time of submitting the final plat as provided in the preceding section. 
    Upon recording of the approved final plat, the original tracing or a reproducible plastic vellum print of the final plat with all certificates endorsed thereon shall be provided by the subdivider for the records of the planning commission. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FINAL PLAT SPECIFICATIONS 

Section 801. - The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat and certain additional specifications. 
    The final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications of the preliminary plat (Article VI, Section 604), with the following additions: 
    The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on plastic vellum. Sheet sizes shall be 18 × 24, and where more than one sheet is required an index map shall be required on the same size sheet. The final plat shall show: 
A.  Bearings and distances to the nearest existing street lines or bench marks or other permanent monuments (not less than three) shall be accurately described on the plat. 
B.  Municipal, county and land-lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
C.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by a field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to five thousand (5,000). 
D.  Name of subdivision, exact locations, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat. 
E.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents. 
F.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot, and bearings. 
G.  Lots numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
H.  Location, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and any areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
I.  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. 
J.  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private covenants. 
K.  The following certifications: 
(1)  An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: "It is hereby certified that this Plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "Future", and their location, size, type and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Metter, Georgia have been fully complied with". 
By: _____
Registered C. E. No. _____ 
_____ Registered Georgia Land 
Surveyor No. _____ 
(2)  A certificate of approval of the final plat by the planning commission, directly on the plat, as follows: "Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Metter Georgia, all the requirements of approval having been fulfilled, this Final Plat was given Final Approval by the Metter Planning Commission on _______, 19___". 
__________Date Secretary 
Metter Planning 
Commission  

Final Plat Certificate of Approval 
ARTICLE IX. - GENERAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 

Section 901. - Suitability of land. 
    Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, or erosion, or that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
Section 902. - Name of subdivision. 
    The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the planning commission. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision in Candler County. 
Section 903. - Access. 
    Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. 
Section 904. - Conformance to adopted major street and other plans. 
    All streets and other features of the Major Street Plan of the City of Metter, Georgia, shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the major thoroughfare plan adopted by the planning commission. 
    When features of other plans adopted by the planning commission (such as schools or other public building sites, parks, or other land for public uses) are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
    Whenever a plat proposes the dedication of land to public use that the planning commission finds not required or suitable for such public use, the planning commission shall refuse to approve the plat, and shall notify the governing body of the reasons for such action. 
Section 905. - Large-scale developments. 
    The requirements of this ordinance may be modified in the case of a large-scale community or neighborhood unit, such as a housing project or shopping center which is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets, if the development is approved by the planning commission and if it is in conformity with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR STREETS AND OTHER RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Section 1001. - Continuation of existing streets. 
    Existing streets shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required width. (See Illustration 2) 
Section 1002. - Street names. 
    Street names shall require the approval of the planning commission. Streets that are obviously in alignment with streets already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing street. Names of new streets shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing streets. 
Section 1003. - Street jogs. 
    Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. (See Illustration 3) 
Section 1004. - Culs-de-sac. 
    Except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable, Culs-de-sac, or dead-end streets, shall not be greater in length than six hundred (600) feet. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turn-around having a property line diameter of at least one hundred (100) feet with an outside pavement diameter of at least eighty (80) feet. (See Illustration 4) 
Illustration 2. Continuation of Existing Streets 

Illustration 3. "Street Jogs" 

Illustration 4. Long and Short "Cul-de-Sac" with Turn-Arounds 
Section 1005. - Development along major street, limited-access highway or railroad right-of-way. 
    Where a subdivision abuts or contains a major street, a limited-access highway, or a railroad right-of-way either as a marginal access street or, at a distance suitable for an appropriate use of the intervening land, with a non-access reservation suitably planted. Due regard should be given requirements for approach grades and future grade separations in determining distances. Lots shall have no access to major street (or limited access highway), but only to access street. 
Section 1006. - Alleys. 
    Alleys will be required at the rear of all lots used for residential, commercial, or industrial developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for no alleys. 
Section 1007. - Reserve strips. 
    Reserve strips shall not be permitted unless their control is placed in the hands of the governing body, under conditions approved by the governing body. 
Section 1008. - Easements. 
    Easements having a minimum width of ten (10) feet and located along the side or rear lot lines shall be provided, as required for utility lines, and underground mains and cables. 
    Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater or drainage right-of-way of adequate width as approved by the city. Parallel streets may be required by the planning commission in connection therewith. 
ARTICLE XI. - STREET DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
    Except as otherwise specified by the planning commission, all streets shall meet the following design requirements: 
Type of Street Major Collector Minor Alley Right-of-Way Width (Minimum) As shown on Major Street Plan 60' 50' 20' Pavement Width (Minimum) As shown on Major Street Plan 37' 22' 20' Maximum Street Grade 7% 10% 14% 14% Minimum Street Grade 5% 5% 5% 5% Minimum Radius of Centerline Curvature, Horizontal curves 800' 200' 100' 100' Minimum length of tangent between Reverse Curves 200' 100' None None On vertical curves, a minimum sight distance at six (6) feet above ground level 500' 200' None None Street Intersections All street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible. No street intersections shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees, unless required by unusual circumstances. Curb-line radius at street intersections (Minimum) 15' 15' 15' 15' (Where angle of intersection is less than 90 degrees more may be required.)  
ARTICLE XII. - DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Section 1201. - Block lengths and widths. 
    Block lengths and widths shall be as follows: 
A.  Blocks shall be not greater than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet nor less than six hundred (600) feet in length, except in unusual circumstances. 
B.  Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where abutting upon major streets, limited-access highways, or railroads or where other situations make this requirement impracticable. 
Section 1202. - Lot sizes. 
    Residential lots shall meet the lot width and lot area requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
    Where individual septic tanks are used, the health officer shall prescribe minimum lot sizes to conform to health standards. 
Illustration 5. Tangents Between Reverse Curves 

Illustration 6. Streets Should Intersect at Nearly Right Angles 

Illustration 7 
    Commercial and industrial lots shall be adequate to provide service areas and off-street parking suitable to use intended. (See Illustration 8) 
    Residential corner lots shall have adequate width to meet building setback requirements from both abutting streets. (See Illustration 9) 
Section 1203. - Lot lines. 
    All lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines, unless not practicable because of topographic or other features. (See Illustration 10) 
Section 1204. - Building lines. 
    A building line meeting the front-yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be established on all lots. 
Section 1205. - Lots abutting public streets. 
    Each lot shall abut upon a dedicated public street. 
Section 1206. - Double and reverse frontage lots. 
    Double frontage, and reverse frontage lots, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. (See Illustration 11) 
Illustration 8. Typical Shopping Center 

Illustration 9 

Illustration 10 

Illustration 11. Reverse Frontage with Protective Screen Easement 
ARTICLE XIII. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

Section 1301. - Required improvements. 
    Every subdivider shall be required to have installed by the appropriate city agency at his expense, or with approval of the agency concerned, to install the following street improvements and utilities: 
A.  Except on major or limited-access streets, street grading, curbs and gutters, and street paving. 
B.  Sanitary sewer lines and manholes, storm-drainage facilities, sidewalks (when determined by the planning commission to be essential for the safety of pedestrians) and monuments and markers. 
C.  If the required sewer line cannot be connected to a truckline sewer at the time of the development of the subdivision, septic tanks shall be installed by and at the expense of the subdivider or lot purchaser for interim use, in conformity with the requirements of the county health department. 
D.  Water mains within the subdivision with connections to each lot. 
    All required street improvements, utilities and monuments shall be built to standards specified by the agency responsible for each. All utilities to be installed in the streets shall be placed and compacted prior to paving. 
Section 1302. - Bond in lieu of completion of improvements. 
    The planning commission may allow the subdivider to post a bond in lieu of completion of all the improvements as required by this article. The bond shall be made payable to the City of Metter and shall be of an amount sufficient to assure completion of all required improvements. The bond shall be approved and held until a specified reasonable length of time for completion has passed after which the bond may be cashed and the improvements installed by the city. 
PRIOR CODE CROSS-REFERENCE TABLE 
This table provides users with the legislative history and the current disposition of the sections in the Metter Municipal Code. Thus, prior code Section 1-1 appears in this code as Section 1.04.010. This prior code section information was derived from the Code of Ordinances of the City of Metter, Georgia. 
Prior 
Code § Ordinance History Herein 1-1 1.04.010 1-2 1.04.020 1-3 1.04.030 1-4 1.04.040 1-5 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 34; Ord. of 11-7-32 1.12.010 1-6 1.12.020 1-7 1.04.050 1-8 1.04.060 1-9 1.04.080 1-26 1.04.090 1-27 1.04.100 1-28 1.04.110 1-29 1.04.120 1-30 1.04.130 1-31 1.12.030 1-32 1.04.140 2-1 Mo. 2-14-83 3.04.010 2-2 Mo. 8-13-84 2.08.010 2-17 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 2 2.04.040 2-18 Ord. of 8-23-83 Not codified 2-19 Ord. of 8-23-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-20 Ord. of 8-23-83 2.04.110 2-21 2.44.010 2-22 2.44.020 2-23 2.44.030 2-24 Ord. of 11-18-91 2.40.010 2-25 Ord. of 6-10-91 2.36.010-2.36.170 2-35 2.04.130 2-36 2.04.140 2-37 2.04.150 2-38 1.04.070 2-39 2.04.160 2-56 Ord. of 8-23-83 2.04.010 2-57 Ord. of 1-9-28, §§ 3, 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-58 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-59 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-60 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 9 2.12.010 2-61 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 10 2.12.020 2-62 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 11 2.12.030 2-63 2.16.010 2-80 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.010 2-81 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.020 2-82 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.030 2-83 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.040 2-84 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.050 2-85 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.060 2-86 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.070 2-87 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.080 2-88 Ord. of 5-18-76 3.08.080 2-105 Ord. of 12-31-56, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-106 Ord. of 12-31-56, § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-107 Ord. of 12-31-56, § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-108 Ord. of 12-31-56, § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-109 Ord. of 12-31-56, § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-110 Ord. of 12-31-56, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 2-125 Ga. Laws 1969, P. 2230, Act No. 110 § 1 Not codified 2-126 Not codified 2-127 Adopted 11-6-85, M 15, Pg. 37 Not codified 2-128 Ord. of 10-30-90 M 17, Pg. 162-A Not codified 3-1 9.08.010 3-2 9.08.020 3-19 8.16.010 3-20 8.16.020 3-21 8.16.030 3-22 8.16.040 3-23 8.16.050 3-24 8.16.060 3-25 8.16.070 4-1 Ord. of 11-12-73; Ord. of 12-10-73, § 1 Not codified 4-2 Not codified 4-3 Not codified 4-4 Ord. of 6-13-77 Not codified 4-5 Ord. of 9-1-71 Not codified 4-22 Ord. of 5-12-33; Ord. of 3-5-34 Not codified 4-23 Ord. of 5-12-33; Ord. of 3-5-34 Not codified 4-24 Ord. of 11-12-62, § 2 Not codified 4-25 Ord. of 11-12-62, § 4 Not codified 4-26 Not codified 4-43 Not codified 4-44 Not codified 4-45 5.08.040 4-46 Not codified 4-47 Not codified 4-48 Not codified 4-49 Not codified 4-50 Not codified 4-51 Not codified 4-52 Not codified 4-53 Not codified 4-54 Not codified 4-55 Not codified 4-56 Not codified 4-57 Not codified 4-58 Not codified 4-59 Not codified 4-60 Not codified 4-61 Not codified 4-62 Not codified 4-63 Not codified 4-64 Not codified 4-65 Not codified 4-66 Not codified 4-67 Not codified 4-68 Ord. of 2-19-90; Ord. of 9-9-91 10.16.010-10.16.040 5-1 Ord. of 10-8-56 5.12.010 5-2 9.04.080 5-3 5.12.020 5-4 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 61 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 6-17 Ord. of 2-13-62 6.12.010 6-18 Ord. of 2-13-62 6.12.020 6-19 Ord. of 2-13-62 6.12.030 6-36 Ord. of 5-5-53 Ch. 6.04 6-37 Ord. of 5-5-53 Ch. 6.04 6-38 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 63; Ord. of 5-5-53 Ch. 6.04 6-39 Ord. of 1-9-28; Ord. of 5-5-53; Ord. of 5-9-88 Ch. 6.04 6-40 Ord. of 1-9-28; Ord. of 7-8-29 Ch. 6.04 6-41 Ord. of 1-9-28; Ord. of 5-9-88 Ch. 6.04 6-42 Ch. 6.04 6-43 Ch. 6.04 6-60(a) Ord. of 1-9-28, §§ 28, 57; Ord. of 11-5-45 6.08.010 6-60(b) Ord. of 1-9-28, §§ 28, 57; Ord. of 11-5-45 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 6-61 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 30 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 6-62 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 29 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 6-63 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 30 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 6-64 Ord. of 1-9-31, § 31 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 7-1 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 55; Ord. of 11-18-53, § 3 8.04.010 7-2 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 2 15.04.010 7-3 15.04.020 7-4 15.04.030 7-5 15.04.040 7-6 15.04.050 7-24 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 1 15.08.010 7-25 Ord. of 1-8-79 15.08.020 7-42 15.20.010 7-43 Ord. of 1-8-79 15.20.020 7-44 Ord. of 5-1-39, § 2 15.16.010 7-60 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.010 7-61 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.020 7-62 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.030 7-63 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.040 7-64 Ord. of 1-8-79 15.12.050 7-65 Ord. of 1-8-79 15.12.050 7-66 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.060 7-67 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.070 7-68 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.080 7-69 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.090 7-70 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.100 7-71 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.110 7-72 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.120 7-73 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.130 7-74 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 15.12.140 7-75 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 32 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-1 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-2 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-3 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-4 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-5 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-6 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-7 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-8 Ord. of 2-11-57, § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 8-9 Ord. of 6-10-91 2.48.010 9-1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 9-2 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 9-3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 9-4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 9-5 Ord. of 11-13-28 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 9-6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-17 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-18 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-19 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-20 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-21 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-22 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-23 Ord. of 11-18-53, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 10-24 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 11-1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 11-2 5.04.020 11-2.1 5.04.030 11-3 5.04.040 11-4 5.04.050 11-5 5.04.060 11-6 5.04.070 11-7 5.04.080 11-8 5.04.090 11-9 5.04.100 11-10 5.04.110 11-12 5.04.120 11-13 5.04.130 11-14 5.04.140 11-15 5.04.150 11-16 [1] Not codified 11-16(a)* 3.24.010 11-16(b)* 3.24.020 11-16(c)* 3.24.030 11-16(d)* 3.24.040 11-17.1 3.20.010 11-17.2 3.20.020 11-17.3 3.20.030 11-17.4 3.20.040 11-17.5 3.20.060 11-17.6 3.20.050 12-1 Ord. of 5-14-73 10.04.010 12-2 Ord. of 9-6-90 1.16.010, 10.04.020 12-3 10.04.030 12-4 10.04.040 12-5 10.04.050 12-6 Not codified 12-7 Not codified 12-8 Not codified 12-9 Ord. of 9-6-90 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 12-10 Ord. of 12-10-69; Ord. of 8-13-73 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 12-11 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 45 10.20.010 12-12 10.20.020 12-13 10.20.030 12-14 Ord. of 11-13-78 Repealed 12-31 10.08.010 12-32 10.08.030 12-33 10.08.040 12-34 10.08.050 12-35 10.08.060 12-36 10.08.070 12-37 10.08.080 12-38 10.08.020 12-55 Ord. of 7-2-45, § 1 10.12.010 12-56 Ord. of 7-2-45, § 5 10.12.020 12-57 Ord. of 7-2-45, § 4 10.12.030 12-58 Ord. of 7-2-45, § 6 10.12.040 12-59 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 12-60 Ord. of 7-2-45, § 3 10.12.050 12-61 Ord. of 7-2-45, § 2 10.12.060 12-62 Mo. of 1-9-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 13-1 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 43 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 13-2 Ord. of 8-17-65, § 1 9.04.090 13-3 9.04.100 13-4 9.08.030 13-5 9.12.010 13-6 9.12.020 13-7 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 41 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 13-8 9.08.040 13-9 Ord. of 8-12-29, § 1 9.08.050 13-10 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 39 9.04.020 13-11 9.04.040 13-12 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 40 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 13-13 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 38 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 13-14 9.04.050 13-15 Ord. of 1-11-22 9.08.060 13-16-1 8.12.010 13-16-2 8.12.020 13-16-3 8.12.030 13-16-4 8.12.040 13-16-5 8.12.050 13-16-6 8.12.060 13-16-7 Not codified 13-17 Ord. of 1-17-38; Ord. of 1-17-39 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 13-18 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 13-19 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 55 9.04.060 13-20 Ord. of 12-9-74 9.04.070 14-1 Ord. of 4-25-38 12.12.010 14-2 Ord. of 4-25-38 12.12.010 14-3 Ord. of 4-25-38 12.12.010 14-4 Ord. of 4-25-38 12.12.020 14-5 12.12.030 14-6 12.12.040 14-7 Ord. of 4-25-38 12.12.050 14-8 12.12.060 14-9 12.12.070 14-10 12.12.080 14-11 12.12.090 14-12 12.12.100 14-13 12.12.110 14-14 12.12.120 14-15 12.12.130 15-1 Ord. of 2-2-31; Ord. of 2-7-66, § 1 5.20.010 15-2 Ord. of 4-7-41; Ord. of 12-29-50, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 12-27-71 5.20.010 16-1 Res. of 2-22-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-18 Ord. of 10-30-73, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-19 Ord. of 10-30-73, § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-20 Ord. of 10-30-73, § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-21 Ord. of 10-30-73, § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-38 Ord. of 2-10-64, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-39 Ord. of 2-10-64, § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-40 Ord. of 2-10-64, § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-41 Ord. of 2-10-64, § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-42 Ord. of 2-10-64, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-43 Ord. of 2-10-64, § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-44 Ord. of 6-12-67, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-45 Ord. of 6-12-67, § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-46 Ord. of 6-12-67, § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 16-47 Ord. of 2-12-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 17-1 Ord. of 11-17-72 15.04.060 17-18 Ord. of 6-3-57 2.32.010 17-19 Ord. of 6-3-57, § 1; Ord. of 12-30-60, § 1 2.32.020 17-20 Ord. of 6-3-57, § 2 2.32.030 17-21 Ord. of 6-3-57, § 3 2.32.040 17-38 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 17-39 Ord. of 5-31-72, § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 17-40 Ord. of 5-31-72, § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 17-41 Ord. of 5-31-72, § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 17-42 Ord. of 5-31-72, § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 17-43 Ord. of 5-31-72, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 18-1 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 12 2.24.010 18-2 2.24.020 18-3 Ord. of 1-9-28, §§ 13, 14 2.24.030 18-4 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 15 2.24.030 18-5 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 16 2.24.030 18-6 2.24.040 18-7 2.24.050 19-1 2.28.010 19-2 2.28.020 19-3 2.28.030 19-4 2.28.040 19-5 2.28.050 19-6 2.28.060 19-7 2.28.070 19-8 2.28.080 20-1 Not codified 20-2 Not codified 20-3 Not codified 20-4 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 60; Ord. of 10-9-72; Not codified Ord. of 4-9-73, Art. II, § 1; Ord. of 4-1-77, § 1 Not codified 20-5 Not codified 20-6 Not codified 20-7 Not codified 20-8 Not codified 21-1 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 17 12.04.010 21-2 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 20 12.04.020 21-3 12.04.030 21-4 Ord. of 7-14-75 12.04.040 21-5 12.04.050 21-6 Ord. of 8-8-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 22-1 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 21 3.12.010 22-2 3.12.020 22-3 Ord. of 1-11-22 3.12.030 22A-1 3.16.010 22A-2 3.16.020 22A-3 3.16.040 22A-4 3.16.030 22A-5 3.16.050 22A-6 3.16.060 22A-7 3.16.070 22A-8 3.16.080 22A-9 3.16.090 22A-10 3.16.100 22A-11 3.16.110 22A-12 3.16.120 22A-13 3.16.130 22A-14 3.16.140 22A-15 3.16.150 22A-16 Not codified 22A-17 Not codified 22A-18 Not codified 23-16 Ord. of 1-22-73, § 9; Ord. of 4-18-78, § 2; Ord. of 2-11-91 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-17 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-18 Ord. of 1-9-28, § 64; Ord. of 3-10-47; Ord. of 1-22-73, § 7; Ord. of 4-18-78, § 3; Ord. of 7-1-90 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-19 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-20 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-21 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-33[22] Ord. of 4-18-78, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-23 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-24 Ord. of 4-18-76, para. 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-25 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-26 Ord. of 4-18-78 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-27 Ord. of 6-9-75; Ord. of 4-18-78 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-28 Ord. of 1-22-73; Ord. of 4-18-78; Ord. of 11-9-87; Ord. of 7-1-90 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-29 Ord. of 1-22-73 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-30 Ord. of 1-22-73; Ord. of 4-18-78 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-31 Ord. of 1-22-73, §§ 3, 5, 6; Ord. of 4-18-78, § 9 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-32 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-33 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-34 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-35 Ord. of 4-18-78, § 18 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-36 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-37 Ord. of 4-18-78 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 23-38 15.24.010-15.24.070 23-54 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.010 23-55 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.050 23-56 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.060 23-57 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.070 23-58 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.080 23-59 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.090 23-60 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.100 23-61 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.130 23-62 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.150 23-63 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.120 23-64 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.110 23-65(a) Ord. of 3-14-88 Not codified 23-65(b) Ord. of 3-14-88 Not codified 23-65(c) Ord. of 3-14-88 13.12.140 23-76 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.20.010 23-77 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.20.020 23-78 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.20.030 23-79 Ord. of 3-14-88 13.20.030 Appendix A Ord. of 10-8-73; Ord. of 4-14-86; Ord. of 6-10-91 Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97 Appendix B Ord. of 11-11-74 Not codified Appendix C Not codified  
Footnotes: 

STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR GEORGIA CITIES AND TOWNS 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Georgia cities and towns. They are up to date through the Regular Session of the 2017 Legislative Session. 
General Provisions 
Incorporation of municipal corporations 
OCGA ch. 36-31 
Powers of municipal corporations generally 
OCGA chs. 36-30 and 36-34 
Home rule 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II; OCGA ch. 36-35 
Limitations on home rule powers 
OCGA § 36-35-6 
Elections 
OCGA title 21 
Ordinances 
OCGA §§ 36-30-3; 36-35-3 
Local government code enforcement boards 
OCGA ch. 36-74 
Penalty limits 
OCGA §§ 36-30-8 and 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Annexation of territory 
OCGA ch. 36-36 
Administration and Personnel 
Administrative powers generally 
OCGA § 36-34-2 
Officers generally 
OCGA §§ 36-30-4 et seq., 36-34-2 
Vacancies in office 
OCGA § 36-30-13 
Ethics in Government Act 
OCGA ch. 21-5 
Public meetings 
OCGA ch. 50-14 
Ordinances not to bind succeeding councils 
OCGA § 36-30-3 
Municipal courts 
OCGA ch. 36-32 
Park or recreation boards 
OCGA § 36-64-5 
Liability for acts or omissions of officers 
OCGA ch. 36-33 
Municipal training 
OCGA ch. 36-45 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. Art IX, § II, para. III 
Peace officer training 
OCGA ch. 35-8 
Compensation of law enforcement officers 
OCGA § 36-30-9 
Mutual aid agreements 
OCGA ch. 36-69 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial provisions generally 
OCGA §§ 36-80-2 et seq., 36-60-7, 36-60-8 
Powers of taxation and expenditure 
Ga. Const. Art IX, § IV 
Limits on taxing power 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. VIII 
Fiscal year 
OCGA § 36-81-3 
Limits on local debt 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § V 
Municipal taxation 
OCGA § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Revenue bonds 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § VI 
Budgets and audits 
OCGA ch. 36-81 
Bonds 
OCGA chs. 36-38 and 36-82 
Local government investment pool 
OCGA ch. 36-83 
Public works bidding 
OCGA ch. 36-91 
Interlocal risk management agencies 
OCGA ch. 36-85 
Acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property 
OCGA ch. 36-37 
Grants of state funds 
OCGA ch. 36-40 
Urban residential finance authorities 
OCGA ch. 36-41 
Downtown development authorities 
OCGA ch. 36-42 
City business improvement districts 
OCGA ch. 36-43 
Immunity from antitrust liability 
OCGA ch. 36-65 
Business and occupation taxes 
OCGA ch. 48-13 
Fees and taxes on insurance companies 
OCGA ch. 33-8 
Special assessments 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § VI 
Business Licenses and Regulations 
Alcoholic beverages 
OCGA title 3 
Business and occupation taxes 
OCGA ch. 48-13 & §§ 36-60-6 and 36-60-9 
Cable television 
OCGA §§ 36-18-3, 36-34-2(7) 
Adult bookstores and theaters 
OCGA § 36-60-3 
Self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps 
OCGA § 36-60-1 
Animals 
Animals generally 
OCGA title 4 
Dogs 
OCGA ch. 4-8 
Responsible Dog Ownership Law 
OCGA § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Health and Safety 
Food service establishments 
OCGA § 26-2-370 et seq. 
Air quality control 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Public health facilities 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Facilities for treatment of patients 
OCGA § 36-34-4 
Fireworks 
OCGA ch. 25-10 
Garbage collection and disposal 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Alarm systems 
OCGA § 36-60-12 
Unfit buildings 
OCGA §§ 36-61-11 and 41-2-7 et seq. 
War on terrorism local assistance 
OCGA ch. 36-75 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
State criminal code 
OCGA title 16 
Prohibition on regulating conduct which is prohibited by state criminal law 
OCGA § 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Vehicle code 
OCGA title 40 
Powers of local authorities 
OCGA § 40-6-370 et seq. 
Prosecution of traffic offenders 
OCGA ch. 40-13 
Abandoned and junked motor vehicles 
OCGA ch. 40-11; OCGA § 36-60-4 
Public transportation 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Street and sidewalk construction and maintenance 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III; OCGA §§ 36-60-5, 36-30-11, 36-30-12 
Street improvements 
OCGA ch. 36-39 
Street obstructions 
OCGA § 36-30-10 
Parks and recreation areas 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III; OCGA ch. 36-64 
Botanical gardens 
OCGA § 36-34-5.2 
Zoos 
OCGA § 36-34-5.3 Public Services 
Water and sewer systems 
OCGA § 36-34-5 
Industrial waste water treatment services 
OCGA § 36-60-2 
Library services 
OCGA § 36-34-5.1 
Buildings and Construction 
Building codes 
OCGA ch. 8-2 
State building codes 
OCGA § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Planning and Zoning 
Generally 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. IV 
Zoning procedures 
OCGA ch. 36-66 
Conflict of interest in zoning actions 
OCGA ch. 36-67A 
Coordinated and comprehensive planning 
OCGA ch. 36-70 
Development impact fees 
OCGA ch. 36-71 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
Ordinance 
Number 11-11-74 Adds Appendix B, Subdivision Regulations 3-25-92 Amends prior code §§ 7-24, 7-25, 7-42, 7-43, 7-44 and 7-60, buildings and construction (15.08, 15.12, 15.16, 15.20) 3-25-92 Adds prior code § 23-38, water conservation (15.24) 10-20-92 Hazard communication program (Not codified) 1-11-93 Adds prior code Ch. 22A, motel excise tax (3.16) 6-1-93 Civil service system personnel policies (Not codified) 12-1-93 Adds schedule of fines for ordinance violations to prior code § 12-2 (1.16) 5-10-93 Amends prior code § 11-19, business licenses (Repealed by Ord. dated 1-9-95) 5-10-93 Alcoholic beverages (5.08) 6-14-93 Amends Ord. 5-10-93, alcoholic beverages (5.08) 9-20-93 Amends prior code §§ 7-25, 7-43, 7-64 and 7-65, construction permit fees (15.08, 15.12, 15.20) 10-11-93 Insurance company license fees (5.16) 4-11-94 Amends prior code §§ 13-5 and 13-6, curfew (9.12) 1-9-95 Repeals and replaces prior code Ch. 11 Arts. I and II, occupation taxes, administrative fees and regulatory fees (5.04) 3-20-95 Adds prior code § 11-16, secondary electric suppliers (3.24) 3-20-95 Adds prior code § 11-17, financial institutions tax (3.20) 3-20-95 Grants franchise to Excelsior Electric Membership Corporation (Special) 4-10-95 Amends Ord. dated 3-20-95, grant of franchise to Excelsior Electric Membership Corporation (Special) 6-9-95 Amends Ord. dated 3-20-95, grant of franchise to Excelsior Electric Membership Corporation (Special) 7-17-95 Schedule of fines (1.16) 8-21-95 Leave for salaried FSLA exempt employees (Not codified) 10-9-95 Repeals and replaces prior code § 22A-2, motel excise tax (3.16) 10-9-95 Adds Ch. 15.44, soil erosion and sedimentation control (15.44) 11-13-95 Amends prior code Appx. A § 1050, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 5-12-97) 12-11-95 Repeals and replaces prior code §§ 13-16 and 13-17, nuisances (8.12) (Repealed by Ord. 08-03 dated 4-14-08) 6-1-96 Urban forestry (12.16) 5-12-97 Amends prior code § 1-5(a), general penalty; § 2-2 [2-25], ethics; § 5-1(a), amusements; § 6-40, dogs running at large; §§ 7-1, 7-25, 7-43, 7-64 and 7-65, buildings and building regulations; §§ 12-1 and 12-37, motor vehicles and traffic; §§ 13-15, 13-19 and 13-20, offenses; Ch. 15, peddlers and solicitors; §§ 17-18 through 17-21, planning and development; § 18-1, police; Ch. 19, municipal court; and § 22-3, taxation (1.12, 2.24, 2.28, 2.32, 2.36, 3.12, 5.12, 5.20, 6.04, 8.04, 9.04, 9.08, 10.04, 10.08, 15.08, 15.12, 15.20) 5-12-97 Repeals §§ 2-19, 2-57, 2-58, 2-59, 2-105-2-110, 5.4, 6-60(b), 6-61-6-64; 7-75, 8-1-8-8, 9-1-9-6, 10-17-10-24, 11-1, 12-9, 12-10, 12-59, 12-62, 13-1, 13-7, 13-12, 13-13, 13-17, 13-18, 14-6(6)-(9), 16-1, 16-18-16-21, 17-38-17-43, 21-6, 23-16-23-37 and Appx. A (Repealer) 97-1 Disorderly conduct; weapons (9.04) 97-2 Fiscal provisions; corporate limits; administration and personnel (1.08, 2.04, 2.20, 2.40, 2.44, 3.04) 97-4 Building numbering (15.28) 97-5 Loitering (9.04) 97-6 Parades, meetings and assemblies in public places (12.08) 97-7 Public services (13.04, 13.08, 13.12, 13.16) 7-14-97 Amends prior code § 13-16, nuisances (8.12) (Repealed by Ord. 08-03 dated 4-14-08) 97-8 Wellhead protection (8.20) 97-9 Speed limits (10.24) 97-10 Code adoption (1.01) 97-11 Solicitation for contributions (5.24) Amdmt. to Ord. 1-9-95 dated 3-9-98 Amends §§ 5.04.060 and 5.04.130, occupation taxes (5.04) 98-12 Flood damage prevention (15.36) 10-12-98 Adds § 2.44.040; amends § 12.12.040, city property and parks (2.44, 12.12) 99-13 Motorized carts (10.28) 99-14 Adds standards for telecommunications antenna and towers (15.40) Amdmt. to Title 17 dated 12/13/99 Amends § 17.1200, zoning (Not codified) 00-01 Cross-connections and backflow-prevention (13.04) 00-02 Services outside the city (13.24) 00-04 Drought contingency plan (Repealed by Ord. dated 10-14-04) 00-05 Adds §§ 2.36.161-2.36.164; amends §§ 2.36.060, 2.36.160 and 2.36.170, ethics code (2.36) 00-06 Franchise grant to city of Statesboro, Georgia, natural gas service (Special) 01-01 Adds § 15.28.999 [15.28.005]; amends § 15.28.060, building numbering (15.28) 01-02 Amends § 5.08.060(I), alcoholic beverages (5.08) 01-03 Amends § 10.24.010 Table B, speed limits (10.24) 01-04 Amends § 5 of Ord. 99-13, motorized carts (10.28) 01-05 Adds §§ 8.12.010(P) and (Q), nuisances (8.12) (Repealed by Ord. 08-03 dated 4-14-08) 02-01 Amends Ch. 15.44, soil erosion and sedimentation control (15.44) 02-02 Amends § 13.16.070, waste generated by contractors, tree surgeons and landscapers (13.16) 02-03 Amends § 1.16.010, schedule of fines (1.16) 02-04 Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.08, alcoholic beverages (5.08) 02-05 Adds Ch. 9.16, adult entertainment and establishments (9.16) 02-06 Amends §§ 8.06.010 and 8.06.030, outdoor burning (8.06) 03-01 Adds § 2.16.020, oaths for committee members (2.16) 03-02 Adds § 5.08.360, brown bagging prohibited (5.08) 2-16-04 Amends § 13.08.050, water service system (13.08) 6-14-04 Amends Ch. 15.44, soil erosion and sediment control ordinance (15.44) 11-14-04 Amends §§ 5.08.030, 5.08.120 and 5.08.150, alcoholic beverage (5.05) 8-24-04 Authorizes employment agreement (Special) 10-14-04 Adds § 13.28.040; repeals and replaces §§ 13.28.010-13.28.030, drought contingency plan (13.28) 2-14-05 Amends § 5.08.030, alcoholic beverages (5.08) 3-14-05 Amends § 1.16.010, schedule of fines (1.16) 4-11-05 Amends Ch. 6.04, dogs (6.04) 7-11-05 Amends § 15.32.040, buildings or structures, and 15.32.070, complaint and inspection 11-14-05 Amends § 13.16.040, charges for collection-use of system required; adds § 13.16.090, private disposal services 12-12-05 Adds § 13.04.055, petition for non-existing water and sewer line services 1-9-06 Adds Appendix A, Zoning 4-10-06 Amends §§ 12.16.010 and 12.16.070, urban forest/tree ordinance 4-10-06 Amends §§ 5.08.030, 5.08.120 and 5.08.160, alcoholic beverage 4-30-07 Adds § 13.08.240, collection costs for delinquent utility accounts 6-11-07 Adds Ch. 9.20, noise control 6-11-07 Adds Ch. 13.32, grease, oil, and sand control 6-11-07 Adds Ch. 15.48, recreational vehicle parks 7-10-06 Adds Ch. 8.24, fireworks 7-10-06 Adds Ch. 8.28, private well drilling 6-27-07 Amends Appendix A, zoning 8-27-07 Amends § 2.44.040, unlawful peddling, selling, vending 9-10-07 Adds Ch. 5.28, vehicles for hire 10-8-07 Amends § 13.16.010, definitions; § 13.16.020 A, refuse containers to be provided by city-responsibility of consignee; § 13.16.030, placing of refuse containers for collection; § 13.16.090, private disposal services; and adds § 13.16.100, exception-commercial apartments 2-21-08 Amends Appendix A, zoning 2-29-08 Amends Appendix A, zoning 08-01 Adds Title 18, development agreements 08-02 Adds § 8.14.010, international property maintenance code adopted 08-03 Repeals and replaces Ch. 8.12, nuisances 11-10-08 Adds Ch. 13.36, identity theft prevention program 7-13-09 Amends Appendix A, zoning 2010-1 Amends § 1.16.010, schedule of fines 8-9-10 Amends § 12.12.040, parks and recreational facilities 2010-6 Amends § 3.16.020, motel excise tax 2010-08 Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.36, flood damage prevention 8-9-10 Amends Ch. 15.44, soil erosion and sedimentation control 6-28-11 Amends Charter § 2.10A 2011-1 Amends § 1.16.010, schedule of fines 9-24-07 Amends Appendix A, zoning 3-12-12 Adds Ch. 15.52, pre-owned manufactured homes 2012-07 Adds Ch. 2.30, municipal court prosecutor 2012-8-2 Amends § 1.16.010, schedule of fines 3-12-12 Amends Appendix A, zoning 13-01 Amends Ch. 10.28, motorized carts 12- 9-13 Amends § 5.08.240, proximity restrictions (5.08) 10-15-13 Amends § 10.24.010, speed limits (10.24) 1-21-14(1) Amends § 3.16.020, imposition and rate of tax (3.16) 1-21-14(2) Amends Appendix A, zoning 5-11-15(1) Amends § 3.04.010, fiscal year established (3.04) 5-11-15(2) Amends §§ 5.16.020, 5.16.030, relating to insurance companies (5.16) 7-13-15 Amends §§ 5.04.010, 5.04.040, 5.04.120, 5.04.130, relating to occupational tax and fees (5.04)  1-19-16 Adds Ch. 2.54, purchasing card ordinance  3-14-16 Amends, § 5.08.120, regarding alcoholic beverages 12-12-16 Amends, §§ 5.08.320, 5.08.710, regarding alcoholic beverages 2017-01 Amends 2.04.040, time and place of council meetings 4-10-17 Amends § 1.16.010, schedule of fines 5- 8-17 Amends §§ 5.08.200 and 5.08.240, proximity restrictions for consumption of alcoholic beverages and special events permits 9-21-17 Amends Ch. 2.54, purchasing card ordinance  4- 9-18(1) Amends Ch. 6.04, dogs  4- 9-18(2) Adds Ch. 5.29, temporary vendors and transient merchants 12-10-18(1) Amends App. A, zoning 12-10-18(2) Amends Ch. 13.16, refuse collection and disposal  1-14-19 Adds Ch. 8.30, environmental conservation, onsite sewage management and permit ordinance  
