
THE CODE OF
THE CITY OF
ROSSVILLE, GEORGIA
_____________________________
Published by Order of the Mayor and Council 
_____________________________
Adopted May 11, 1998 
Effective July 1, 1998 
_____________________________
 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ROSSVILLE, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
_____________________________
William L. North 
Mayor
_____________________________
Richard A. Buff 
James D. Crane 
David C. Hicks 
William E. Morton 
City Council
_____________________________
John Davis 
City Attorney
_____________________________
Bobbie Alexander, CMC 
City Clerk
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Rossville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1976 Code, as supplemented through December 11, 1995, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 

Indexes
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments
This publication was under the direct supervision of Ronald McLaughlin, Supervising Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to W. L. North, Mayor, John Davis, City Attorney, and Bobbie Alexander, City Clerk, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Rossville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Rossville, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Rossville, Georgia. 1998. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
ORDINANCE NO. 354 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Rossville, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective.
Be it Ordained by the Mayor and Council of Rossville, GA:
Section 1The Code entitled ``The Code of Ordinances of the City of Rossville, Georgia, published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 78, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before April 14, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5Additions and amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6Ordinances adopted after April 14, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7This ordinance shall become effective July 1, 1998. 
Passed and Adopted on first reading this 11th day of May, 1998.

/s/ 	W.L. North 

	W.L. North, Mayor 
	
/s/ 	Richard A. Buff 

	Richard A. Buff, Councilmember 
	
/s/ 	James D. Crane 

	James D. Crane, Councilmember 
	

/s/ 	Bobbie Alexander 

	Attest: Bobbie Alexander 
	
/s/ 	David C. Hicks 

	David C. Hicks, Councilmember 
	
/s/ 	W.E. Morton 

	W.E. Morton, Councilmember 
	

Passed and Adopted on second and final reading this the 8th day of June, 1998.
/s/ 	W.L. North 

	W.L. North, Mayor 
	
/s/ 	Richard A. Buff 

	Richard A. Buff, Councilmember 
	
/s/ 	James D. Crane 

	James D. Crane, Councilmember 
	

/s/ 	Bobbie Alexander 

	Attest: Bobbie Alexander 
	
/s/ 	David C. Hicks 

	David C. Hicks, Councilmember 
	
/s/ 	W.E. Morton 

	W.E. Morton, Councilmember 
	

  
 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 

Ordinance 
Number 	Date 
Adopted 	Included/ 
Omitted 	Supplement 
Number 
452 	 1- 9-12 	Included 	5 
458 	 6-11-12 	Omitted 	5 
462 	 9-10-12 	Included 	5 
463 	 9-10-12 	Included 	5 
467 	12-10-12 	Omitted 	5 
468 	 2-11-13 	Included 	5 
470 	 7-10-17 	Included 	5 
474 	 8-12-13 	Included 	5 
486 	 9-14-15 	Included 	5 
487 	 4-11-16 	Omitted 	5 
488 	 9-12-16 	Omitted 	5 
492 	 1- 9-17 	Omitted 	5 
493 	 2-13-17 	Omitted 	5 
494 	 2-13-17 	Omitted 	5 
495 	 3-13-17 	Included 	5 
498 	 6-12-17 	Included 	5 
412 	 3-13-06 	Included 	6 
502 	 8-13-18 	Included 	6 
512 	 2-10-20 	Omitted 	6 
513 	 2-10-20 	Included 	6 
514 	 8-14-20 	Included 	6 
517 	 2- 8-21 	Included 	6 
518 	 5-14-21 	Included 	6 
519 	 6-14-21 	Included 	6 
523 	 9-13-21 	Included 	7 

 
PART I 
CHARTER 
 
ARTICLE 1. CREATION, INCORPORATION POWERS
 
Section 1.10. Incorporation.
The City of Rossville, Georgia, in the County of Walker, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the same name and style of the City of Rossville, Georgia. Under that name, said city shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the corporation; shall have perpetual succession; may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with, may acquire and hold such property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it, and from time to time may hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same at will; and may exercise in conformity with this charter all municipal powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature whatsoever. 
 
Section 1.11. Corporate boundaries.
(a)	The boundaries of the City of Rossville shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The current boundaries of the City of Rossville, at all times, shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Rossville, Georgia." Alterations in these boundaries shall be indicated by appropriate entries upon or additions to such map or description. Such entries or additions shall be made by and under the direction of the mayor. Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk shall be admitted in evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
(b)	The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the earlier map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
 
Section 1.12. Specific powers.
The corporate powers of the government of the City of Rossville, Georgia, to be exercised by the governing authority, may include the following: 
(1)	To levy and to provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(2)	To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to license and regulate such privileges, occupations, trades and professions, and to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; 
(3)	To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)	To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(5)	To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise, any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(6)	To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(7)	To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for present or future use, and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, under section 36-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or under applicable Public Acts as are or may be enacted; 
(8)	To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell and dispose of public utilities, including but not limited to a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations and penalties and withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay same and the manner in which such remedies shall be enforced; 
(9)	To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services, not to exceed periods of 20 (twenty) years; to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations and standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with such regulations by the public service commission; 
(10)	To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon, or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; 
(11)	To grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads, and over the bridges and viaducts, for the use of public utilities; 
(12)	To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewerage treatment, airports, hospitals, and charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; and any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under section 6-202 of the Code of Georgia, 1933, or other applicable public acts, as are or may be enacted; 
(13)	To require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands; and to enact ordinances establishing the terms and conditions under which such repairs and maintenance shall be effected, including the penalties to be imposed for failure to do so; 
(14)	To regulate the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes and to regulate all housing, building, and building trades; to license all building trades, and to license the construction and erection of buildings and all other structures; 
(15)	To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(16)	To regulate or prohibit junk dealers; pawnshops; the manufacture, sale or transportation of intoxicating liquors; the use and sale of firearms; and to regulate the transportation, storage and use of combustible, explosive and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; 
(17)	To regulate and control the conduct of peddlers, and itinerant trades, theatrical performances, exhibitions, shows of any kind whatever, by taxation or otherwise; 
(18)	The City of Rossville is prohibited from issuing license or allowing license to be issued to any professional fortune-tellers, palmists, mind-readers, clairvoyants, seers, wizards, sooth-sayers, psychics, astrologers, dealers in witchcraft, or anyone practicing under such guises; 
(19)	To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(20)	To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(21)	To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(22)	To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time to extend, enlarge or restrict same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to both fire prevention and detection and to firefighting, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation thereof; 
(23)	To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which may or might become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(24)	To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(25)	To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee, for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business therein benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes or fees, and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(26)	To levy a fee, charge of sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on the users of sewers and the sewerage system a sewer service charge fee of sewer tax for the use of the sewers; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of same; 
(27)	To charge, impose and collect a sewer connection fee or fees, and to charge the same from time to time; such fees to be levied on the users connecting with the sewerage system; 
(28)	To define, regulate and prohibit any act, practice, conduct or use of property which is detrimental, or likely to be detrimental, to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(29)	To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property; 
(30)	To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(31)	To establish minimum standards for and to regulate building construction and repair, electrical wiring and equipment, gas installation and equipment, plumbing, and housing, for the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare and safety of inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(32)	To provide that persons given jail sentences in the municipal court shall work out such sentence in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains and squares in the city; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(33)	To adopt ordinances and regulations for the prevention of loitering, disorderly conduct, public drunkenness and disturbing the peace in the corporate limits of the city and to prohibit the playing of lotteries therein, and to prohibit or regulate by ordinance such other conduct and activities within said city, which, while not constituting an offense against the laws of this state, [is] deemed by the governing authority to be detrimental and offensive to the peace and good order of the city or to the welfare of the citizens thereof; 
(34)	To regulate and license, or prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same, if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; also to provide for their disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction, when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; to provide punishment for violation of [any] ordinance enacted hereunder; 
(35)	To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(36)	To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate and rent parking spaces in public ways for the use of such vehicles; 
(37)	To provide and maintain a system of pensions and retirement for officers and employees of the city; 
(38)	To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(39)	To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms and corporations providing for services to be furnished and payments to be made therefor; 
(40)	To create, alter or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions and agencies of the city; and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all powers conferred upon or delegated to same; 
(41)	To make, ordain and establish such bylaws, ordinances, rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience and interest of the city and the inhabitants thereof, and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(42)	To provide penalties for violations of any ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(43)	To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed policemen; 
(44)	To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists within or without the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(45)	To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully enumerated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia. No enumeration of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers; but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution of applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
 
Section 1.13. General powers.
In addition to all other powers herein granted, the city shall be vested with any and all powers which municipal corporations are or may hereafter be authorized or required to exercise under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, as fully and completely as though such powers were specifically enumerated herein; and any and all powers which the city was heretofore authorized to exercise upon the effective date of this charter. 
 
Section 1.14. Construction.
The powers of the city shall be construed liberally and in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers in this charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power of the city as stated in this charter. It is the intention hereof to grant the city full power and right to exercise all governmental authority necessary for the effective operation and conduct of the city and all of its affairs. 
 
Section 1.15. Exercise of powers.
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this charter. If this charter makes no provision such powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance of the governing authority and as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
 
Section 1.16. Ordinances.
All ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations now in force in the city, not inconsistent with this charter, are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the governing authority. 
 
ARTICLE 2. GOVERNING BODY
 
Section 2.10. Creation; composition; number; election.
The legislative authority of the government of the City of Rossville, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and four (4) councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected in the manner provided by article 5 of this charter. 
 
Section 2.11. Terms and qualifications of office.
Except as otherwise provided in section 5.10, the members of the council shall serve for terms of four (4) years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilman unless he shall have been a resident of the city for a period of one (1) year immediately prior to the date of the election of mayor or members of the council and shall continue to reside therein during his period of service, and shall be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of the City of Rossville, Georgia, and unless he shall meet the qualification standards required for members of the Georgia House of Representatives, as are now or may in the future be prescribed by the Georgia Constitution. 
(Ga. Laws 1977, Act No. 136, § 1)
 
Section 2.12. Vacancy; forfeiture of office; filling of vacancies.
(a)	Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office or removal from office in any manner authorized by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	Forfeiture of office. The mayor or any councilman shall forfeit his office if he: 
(1)	Lacks at any time during his term of office any qualifications of the office as prescribed by this charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(2)	Wilfully and knowingly violates any express prohibition of this charter; or 
(3)	Is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(c)	Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilman shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in article 5. 
 
Section 2.13. Compensation and expenses.
The councilmen shall receive as compensation for their services an amount to be determined by resolution of the mayor and council. The mayor and councilmen shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
 
Section 2.14. Prohibitions.
(a)	Holding other office. Except as authorized by law, no member of the council shall hold any other elective city office or city employment during the term for which he was elected. 
(b)	Voting when personally interested. Neither the mayor nor any other member of the council shall vote upon any question in which he is personally interested. 
 
Section 2.15. Inquiries and investigations.
The council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. Any person who should fail or refuse to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the council shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
 
Section 2.16. General powers and authority of the council.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided by law or by this charter, the council shall be vested with all the powers of government of the City of Rossville, Georgia, as provided by article 1. 
(b)	In addition to all other powers conferred upon it by law, the council shall have the authority to adopt and provide for the execution of such ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, the constitution, and the laws of the State of Georgia, which it shall deem necessary, expedient, or helpful for the peace, good order, protection of life and property, health, welfare, sanitation, comfort, convenience, prosperity, or well-being of the inhabitants of the City of Rossville, and may enforce such ordinance by imposing penalties for violation thereof. 
(c)	The council may by ordinance create, change, alter, abolish, or consolidate offices, agencies and departments, of the city and may assign additional functions to any of the offices, agencies and departments expressly provided for by this charter. 
 
Section 2.17. Chief executive officer.
The mayor shall be the chief executive of the City of Rossville, Georgia. He shall possess, have and exercise all of the executive and administrative powers granted to the city under the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, and all the executive and administrative powers contained in this charter. 
 
Section 2.18. [Same—] Term; qualification; compensation.
The mayor shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall be a qualified elector of the City of Rossville, shall meet the qualifications required of members of the state house of representatives by the Georgia Constitution, and shall have been a resident of the City of Rossville, Georgia, for a period of one (1) year immediately preceding his election. He shall continue to reside in the City of Rossville during the period of his service. The compensation of the mayor shall be $16,000.00 per year beginning with the next duly elected administration taking office in 1979, and said compensation shall be increased by the sum of $1,000.00 per year for the years 1980, 1981, and 1982, such that the total salary for the mayor shall be $19,000.00 per year by the year 1982; except that in the event he should become a part-time mayor under a mayor-council-city-manager government, the city council shall establish the mayor's compensation. 
(Ord. No. 160, 5-8-78)
 
Section 2.19. [Same—] Powers and duties.
As the chief executive of the City of Rossville, Georgia, the mayor shall: 
(a)	See that all laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully executed; 
(b)	Recommend appointments and removals of all officers, department heads and employees of the city, to the council, but that it is the duty of the council to do the actual appointing and removing of such persons; but the mayor shall have the power to hire temporarily such persons in an emergency and shall have the right to suspend said persons until the next meeting of the council; 
(c)	Exercise supervision over all executive and administrative work of the city and provide for the coordination of administrative activities; 
(d)	Prepare and submit to the council a recommended annual operating budget and recommended capital budget; 
(e)	Submit to the council at least once a year a statement covering the financial conditions of the city from time to time, [and] such other information as the council may request; 
(f)	Recommend to the council such measures relative to the affairs of the city, improvement of the government, and promotion of the welfare of its inhabitants as he may deem expedient; 
(g)	Call special meetings of the council as otherwise provided for in this charter; 
(h)	Examine and audit all accounts of the city before payment; 
(i)	Require any department or agency of the city to submit written reports with connection to the affairs thereof whenever he deems it expedient; 
(j)	Perform other duties as may be required by law, this charter or ordinance. 
 
Section 2.20. [Same—] Limitation on terms of service.
The mayor may be re-elected to succeed himself so long as he meets the qualifications of this charter and the laws of the State of Georgia, and so long as the voters of the City of Rossville desire him. 
 
Section 2.21. Mayor pro tem.
During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, or in his absence or disability for any reason, any one of the councilmen chosen by the council, shall be clothed with all rights and privileges of the mayor and shall perform the duties of the office of the mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. 
 
Sections 2.22—2.29. Reserved.
 
Section 2.30. Organization meeting.
The council shall meet for organization on the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members, as follows: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will well and truly perform the duties of (Mayor or Councilman) (as the case may be) of the City and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Following the induction of members the council by majority vote of all the members thereof shall elect one of their number to be mayor pro tem, who shall serve for a term of four (4) years and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
 
Section 2.31. Regular and special meetings.
(a)	The council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. The council may recess any regular meeting and continue such meetings on any weekday or hour it may fix, and may transact any business at such continued meeting as may be transacted at any regular meeting. 
(b)	Special meetings of the council may be held on call of the mayor or three (3) members of the council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or shall be left at their residence at least 24 (twenty-four) hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmen are present when the special meeting is called. Notice of any special meeting may be waived in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice of any special meeting. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted, at the special meeting, except by unanimous consent of all members present. With such consent, any business which may be transacted in a regular meeting may be conducted at the special meeting. 
(c)	All meetings of the council shall be public, except when private meeting or hearing or executive session is required or allowed by law. 
Editor's note(s)—The exception at the end of the last sentence in paragraph (c) was added by the city to reflect current procedures. 
 
Section 2.32. Rules of procedure.
The council shall adopt its rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of its proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
 
Section 2.33. Quorum; voting.
Three (3) councilmen shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances, shall be taken by voice vote, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote. The affirmative vote of three (3) councilmen shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion except as otherwise provided in this charter. 
 
Section 2.34. Action requiring an ordinance.
(a)	Except as herein provided, every official action of the council which it to become law, shall be by ordinance. Each proposed ordinance or resolution shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption, but the same may be amended between the time of the first reading and the final reading so long as the amendment does not change the subject matter. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The Council of the City of Rossville hereby ordains…." 
(b)	An ordinance may be introduced by any member of the council and read at a regular or special meeting of the council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, ordinances, except emergency ordinances, shall not be adopted until the next regular meeting of the council following the meeting of their initial introduction. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall distribute a copy to the mayor, and to each councilman, and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public place as the council may designate. 
 
Section 2.35. Emergency ordinances.
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the council may adopt one or more emergency ordinances, but such ordinances may not levy taxes, grant, renew or extend a franchise, regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its service, or authorize the borrowing of money except as provided by law. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner prescribed for ordinances generally except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three (3) councilmen shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed sixty (60) days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
 
Section 2.36. Codes of technical regulations.
(a)	The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)	the requirements of section 2.37, for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)	a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.37(a). 
(b)	Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price. 
 
Section 2.37. Signing, authenticating, recording; codification; printing.
(a)	The clerk shall authenticate by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for the purpose all ordinances adopted by council. Every ordinance shall be signed by the mayor as a matter of course after adoption. 
(b)	The council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all of the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto, with this charter and any amendment thereto, and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia". Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city, and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the council. 
(c)	The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed or typed ordinances and charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the council. Following publication of the first Code of the City of Rossville, and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with respect to reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
 
ARTICLE 3. EXECUTIVE BRANCH—ORGANIZATION AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Section 3.10. Administrative and service departments.
(a)	The council, by ordinance, may establish, abolish, merge, or consolidate offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city, as they shall deem necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. The council shall prescribe the functions and duties of existing departments, offices and agencies or of any departments, offices and agencies hereinafter created or established; may provide that the same person shall fill any number of offices and positions of employment; and may transfer or change the function or duties of offices, positions of employment, departments and agencies of the city. 
(b)	The operations and responsibilities of each department now or hereafter established in the city shall be distributed among such divisions or bureaus as may be provided by ordinance of the council. Each department shall consist of such officers, employees and positions as may be provided by this charter or by ordinance, and shall be subject to the general supervision and guidance of the mayor and council. 
(c)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority. Vacancies occurring in an appointive office shall be filled in the same manner as prescribed by this charter for an original appointment. 
(d)	Except as otherwise provided by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(e)	All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance of the city council. 
 
Section 3.11. Boards, commissions and authorities.
(a)	All members of boards, commissions and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the council for such terms of office and such manner of appointment as provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, term of office or manner of appointment is prescribed by this charter or by applicable state law. 
(b)	No member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(c)	Any vacancy in office of any member of a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed herein for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this charter or any applicable state law. 
(d)	No member of any board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he shall have executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance of the council and administered by the mayor. 
(e)	Any member of a board, commission or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of three (3) members of the council. 
(f)	Members of boards, commissions and authorities may receive such compensation and expenses in the performance of their official duties as prescribed by ordinance. 
(g)	The qualifications required of members of boards, commissions and authorities shall be as prescribed by ordinance. 
(h)	Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by applicable state law, each board, commission or authority of the city government shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman for terms of one year and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this charter, ordinances of the city or applicable state laws, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
 
Sections 3.12—3.19. Reserved.
 
Section 3.20. City attorney.
The council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized by ordinance, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; shall attend the meetings of the council as directed; shall advise the council, mayor and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position as city attorney. In addition, the city council shall be authorized to hire associate council for the city attorney if and when they should deem it necessary. 
 
Sections 3.21—3.29. Reserved.
 
Section 3.30. City clerk.
The city council may appoint a city clerk to keep a journal of the proceedings of the city council and to maintain in a safe place all records and documents pertaining to the affairs of the city, and to perform such other duties as may be required by law or as the council may direct. 
 
Section 3.31. Tax collector.
The city council has appointed the city clerk as tax collector to collect all taxes, licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this charter and the ordinances of the city, and the tax collector shall diligently comply with and enforce all general laws of Georgia relating to the collection, sale or foreclosure of taxes by municipalities. 
Editor's note(s)—The specific designation of the city clerk as the tax collector was made to reflect the current practice of the city. 
 
Section 3.32. City accountant.
The city council may appoint a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant. 
 
Section 3.33. Consolidation of functions.
The city council may consolidate any two or more of the positions of city clerk, city tax collector and city accountant, or any other positions, or may assign the functions of any one or more of such positions to the holder or holders of any other positions. 
 
Sections 3.34—3.39. Reserved.
 
Section 3.40. [Reserved.]
Editor's note(s)—Section 3.40, dealing with position classification and pay plans for city employees was deleted by the city as the same is no longer applicable. 
 
Section 3.41. Personnel policies.
The council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this charter concerning: 
(1)	The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)	The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)	Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoff shall be effected; and 
(4)	Such other personnel policies as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of the personnel affairs of the City of Rossville. 
 
ARTICLE 4. JUDICIAL BRANCH
 
Section 4.10. Creation.
There is hereby established a Court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Rossville which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power and authority to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law; to punish witnesses for nonattendance, and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court, to go or move beyond the reach of the process of court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which under the laws of Georgia are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal or police courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. Said court shall be presided over by the judge of said court. In the absence or disqualification of the judge, the judge pro tem shall preside and shall exercise the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. Should both the judge and judge pro tem become disqualified, then any member of the council may be designated to preside with the same powers and duties as the judge when so acting. 
 
Section 4.11. Judge.
(a)	No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge unless he shall have attained the age of thirty (30) years and is a high school graduate. The judge shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at the discretion of the council. The compensation of the judge shall be fixed by the council. 
(b)	The judge pro tem shall serve in the absence of the judge, shall have the same qualifications as the judge, shall be appointed by the council, and shall take the same oath as the judge. 
(c)	Before entering on duties of his office, the judge shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state, that he will truly, honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the council. 
 
Section 4.12. Convening.
Said court shall be convened at such times as designated by ordinance or at such times as deemed necessary to keep current the dockets thereof. 
 
Section 4.13. Jurisdiction; powers.
(a)	The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Rossville and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed [a fine of] one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or thirty (30) days in jail. The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for thirty (30) days or both, and as an alternative to fine or imprisonment, to sentence any offender upon conviction to labor in a city work gang or on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public works for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days. 
(b)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(c)	The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court, and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi, at least two (2) days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Rossville, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(d)	The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(e)	The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(f)	The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this charter or by state law. 
(g)	The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdiction and powers throughout the entire area of the City of Rossville granted by the state laws generally to mayor's, recorder's and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
 
Section 4.14. Appeal.
The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the superior court of Walker County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the court of the ordinary. Provided that any person who fails to file his appeal within ten (10) days of the date of his conviction shall be deemed to have waived any such right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
 
Section 4.15. Rules for court.
With the approval of the council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations relative to the procedure of the operation of the superior court under the general laws of the State of Georgia. The rules and regulations made or adopted for said court shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 (forty-eight) hours prior to said proceedings. 
 
ARTICLE 5. ELECTIONS
 
Section 5.10. Regular elections; time for holding.
Municipal elections for the City of Rossville shall be held on the first Saturday in December of each even-numbered year. At the municipal election in 1978, and at the municipal election each four (4) years thereafter a mayor shall be elected. At the municipal election in 1978, there shall be elected four (4) councilmen. The mayor and councilmen shall be elected by the voters of the entire city. At the 1978 election the four (4) candidates for councilmen receiving the highest number of votes cast in such election shall be elected as councilmen. The two (2) persons elected councilmen who receive the highest number of votes shall serve for an initial term of office of four (4) years each and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. The other two (2) persons elected as councilmen in the 1978 municipal election shall serve for initial terms of office of two (2) years each and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. Thereafter, all persons who are elected councilmen shall serve for terms of office of four (4) years each and until their respective successors are duly elected and qualified. All elections for mayor and councilmen shall be by a plurality vote. The terms of office for the mayor and councilmen and tax assessor or tax coordinator shall begin at the day and hour of taking the oath of office as provided for in article 2, section 2.30 of this charter. 
(Ga. Laws 1977, Act No. 136, § 2)
Editor's note(s)—The sentence providing for the election and term of a tax assessor beginning in the 19th line of this section was deleted by the city as the same is no longer applicable. 
 
Section 5.11. Qualifying; nomination of candidates; absentee ballots.
The council may, by ordinance, prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, nomination of candidates, absentee ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes, and such other rules and regulations as may be necessary for the conduct of elections in the City of Rossville, Georgia. 
 
Sections 5.12—5.19. Reserved.
 
Section 5.20. Applicability of general laws.
The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officials of the City of Rossville as to primary, special or general elections shall be in conformity with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code approved April 4, 1968 (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
 
Section 5.21. Special elections; vacancies.
In the event that the office of mayor or councilman shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such office; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within three (3) months of the expiration of the term of office of the mayor or any councilman, said vacancy in office shall be filled by appointment by the remaining members of the council. Both special elections and qualifications of candidates therefor shall conform to the applicable provisions of this charter and the Georgia Municipal Election Code and Title 34A of the Code of Georgia 1933 as now or hereafter amended. 
 
Sections 5.22—5.29. Reserved.
 
Section 5.30. Grounds for removal.
The mayor or any councilman shall be subject to removal from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(a)	Incompetence, misfeasance or malfeasance in office; 
(b)	Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(c)	Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this charter or by law; 
(d)	Wilful violation of any express prohibition of this charter; 
(e)	Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(f)	Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this charter or by law. 
 
Section 5.31. Procedure for removal.
Removal of an elected officer from office may be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(a)	By action of two-thirds (⅔) vote of the entire membership of the council. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten (10) days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as herein provided shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the council to the superior court of Walker County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the court of ordinary and with the right of a jury trial. 
(b)	By information filed in the superior court of Walker County as provided by law. 
 
Sections 5.32—5.39. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE 6. FINANCE AND FISCAL
 
Section 6.10. Property taxes.
All property subject to taxation for state or county purposes, assessed as of January 1st in each year, shall be subject to the property tax levied by the City of Rossville. The council by ordinance shall elect to use the county assessment for the year in which the city taxes are to be levied and shall request the county to furnish appropriate information for such purpose. 
 
Section 6.11. Sales tax and income tax.
If and when the state should authorize the cities by state legislation to impose a sales tax, excise tax, or income tax, the City of Rossville, Georgia, will be authorized under this charter to impose such a tax in their discretion. 
 
Section 6.12. Tax levy.
The council shall be authorized to levy an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, providing governmental services, and for any other public purpose as determined by the council in its discretion. The council is also authorized to provide for sufficient levy to pay principal and interest on general obligations. The City of Rossville is hereby exempted from the provisions of Georgia Code sections 92-4101 through 92-4104 inclusive. 
 
Section 6.13. Tax due dates and tax bills.
The council shall provide by ordinance when the taxes of the city shall fall due and in what length of time said taxes may be paid and shall provide by ordinance for the payment of taxes due to the city in installments, or in one lump sum, and when and how and upon what terms such taxes shall be due and payable, as well as to authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
 
Section 6.14. Collection of delinquent taxes.
The council may provide by ordinance for the collection of delinquent taxes by fi. fa. issued by the city clerk, tax collector (finance officer) and executed by any police officer of the city under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which city property taxes are levied, as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have discretionary authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by this charter on delinquent taxes, fees, assessments, or on other amounts due to the city. 
 
Section 6.15. Licenses, occupational taxes, excise taxes.
The council by ordinance shall have full power to levy such license and specific or occupation taxes upon the residents of the City of Rossville, both individual and corporate, and on all those who transact or offer to transact business therein, or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling therein, as the council may deem expedient for the public health, safety, benefit, convenience or advantage of the city; to classify businesses, occupations, professions or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful; to require such persons to procure licenses; to compel the payment of such licenses by execution or any other lawful manner; and to make laws and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the powers herein conferred, and to prescribe penalties for the violation thereof. The council shall have full power and authority to levy an excise tax not prohibited by general law. 
 
Section 6.16. Sewer service charges.
The council by ordinance shall have the right, power and authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewer services rendered both within and without the corporate limits of the City of Rossville, to provide for the cost and expense of providing for the collection and disposal of sewage through the sewerage facilities of said city. If unpaid, said sewer service charge shall constitute a lien against any property of persons served, which lien shall be second in priority only to liens for county and city property taxes and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
 
Section 6.17. Sanitary and health services charge.
The council shall have authority by ordinance to provide for, to enforce, to levy and to collect the cost of sanitary and health services necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms and corporations, residing in or doing business in said city benefiting from such service. Such authority shall include the power to assess, levy, and collect annual or monthly sanitary taxes or fees in such amount or amounts, and based upon and in accordance with such classification of property and sanitary service or service provided, as may be fixed by ordinance. Said sanitary taxes and the assessment thereof shall be a charge and lien against the real estate in respect to which said taxes are so assessed, and the owner or owners thereof, superior to all other liens except for liens for county and city property taxes, and shall be enforceable in the same manner and under the same remedies as a lien for city property taxes. 
 
Section 6.18. Special assessments.
The council shall have power and authority to assess all or part of the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances, against the abutting property owners, under such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by ordinance. Such special assessments shall become delinquent thirty (30) days after their due dates, shall thereupon be subject, in addition to fi. fa. charges, to a penalty of ten percent and shall thereafter be subject to interest at the rate of seven (7) percent per annum from date due until paid. A lien shall exist against the abutting property superior to all other liens, except that it shall be of equal dignity with liens for county and city property taxes, and said lien shall be enforceable by the same procedures and under the same remedies as provided for in this article for city property taxes. 
 
Section 6.19. Transfer of executions.
The city clerk shall be authorized to assign or transfer any fi. fa. or execution issued for any tax or for any street, sewer, or other assessment in the same manner and to the same extent as provided by Georgia law regarding sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Such transfer or assignment when made, shall vest the purchaser or transferee with all right, title and interest as provided by Georgia law governing sales and transfers of tax fi. fas. Provided that, upon levy of execution and sale of property pursuant to such tax fi. fa., whether assigned, transferred, or executed by the city, the owner of such property, in fee simple or lesser interest, shall not lose his right to redeem the property in accord with the requirements of redemption of property sold under state or county ad valorem tax fi. fas., as said requirements now exist or as may be hereinafter provided by law. 
 
Section 6.20. General obligation bonds.
The council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program or venture authorized under this charter or the general laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
 
Section 6.21. Revenue bonds.
Revenue bonds may be issued by the council as provided by an act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved March 31, 1937, known as the Revenue Bond Law (Ga. Laws 1937, p. 761) as now or hereafter amended, or by any other Georgia law as now or hereafter provided. 
 
Section 6.22. Short term notes.
Pursuant to applicable state law, the city may obtain temporary loans between January 1 and December 31 of each year. 
 
Sections 6.23—6.29. Reserved.
 
Section 6.30. Fiscal year.
The council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. Said fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department or institution, agency and activity of the city government, unless otherwise provided by state or federal laws. 
 
Section 6.31. Preparation of budgets.
The council shall provide by ordinance the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget and a capital improvement program and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and programs. 
 
Section 6.32. Submission of operating budget to city council.
On or before a date fixed by the council but not later than ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the mayor containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget and such other comments and information as he may deem pertinent. The operating budget and the capital improvements budget, hereinafter provided for, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
 
Section 6.33. Action by council on budget.
(a)	The council may amend the operating budget proposed by the mayor; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues, constituting the fund availability of such fund. 
(b)	The council shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the first day of September of each year. If the council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Such adoption shall take the form of an appropriation ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose or activity as set out in the budget document. 
(c)	The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such item, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations, or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. 
Editor's note(s)—The city changed the month "December" to "September" to reflect the current practice in the city. 
 
Section 6.34. Property tax levies.
As the next order of business following adoption of the operating budget, the council shall levy by ordinance an annual tax on real and personal property within the City of Rossville. The tax rate set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the City of Rossville. 
 
Section 6.35. Additional appropriations.
The council may make appropriations in addition to those contained in the current operating budget, at any regular or special meeting called for such purpose, but any such additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unappropriated surplus in the fund to which it applies. 
 
Section 6.36. Capital improvements budget.
(a)	On or before the date fixed by city council but not later than ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed capital improvements budget with his recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The council shall have power to accept with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency threatening the lives, health, or property of the inhabitants, when passed by two-thirds (⅔) vote of the membership of the council. 
(b)	The council shall adopt the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing year not later than the 1st day of December of each year. No appropriation provided for in the capital improvements budget shall elapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided the mayor may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his recommendations thereon. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by a vote of the council. 
 
Sections 6.37—6.39. Reserved.
 
Section 6.40. Contracting procedures.
All contracts shall be made or authorized by the council, and no contracts shall bind the city unless reduced to writing and approved by the council. All contracts, and all ordinances or resolutions making contracts or authorizing the same, shall be drawn by the city attorney or shall be submitted to him before authorization by the council. 
 
Section 6.41. Centralized purchasing.
(a)	The council may by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the City of Rossville. 
(b)	The council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the City of Rossville for governmental or other purposes, at a public or private sale, with or without advertisement, for such consideration as it shall deem equitable and just for the city. 
(c)	The council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the mayor and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(d)	Whenever in opening, extending or widening any street, avenue, alley or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city, a deed conveying said cut off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley or public place or in settlement of any alleged damages sustained by said abutting or adjoining property owner. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
 
ARTICLE 7. MUNICIPAL SERVICES AND REGULATORY FUNCTIONS
 
Section 7.10. Streets.
The council is hereby vested with the power to layout, open, widen, change, straighten, alter, improve, vacate, abandon, and otherwise to exercise complete control over the streets, alleys, squares and sidewalks of the City of Rossville, Georgia. The council shall provide for the removal of any and all obstacles and nuisances in regard to the streets, alleys, or sidewalks or other public places within the city and shall adopt appropriate ordinances to accomplish this purpose. 
 
Section 7.11. Municipal utilities.
The council shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, build, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, electric lights, sewerage, and gas distribution; to establish rates and charge fees for services rendered in any of said systems; to finance any of said systems through appropriate bond issues in accordance with the laws of Georgia; to exercise the power of eminent domain in regard to any of said systems, both within and without the corporate limits; and to contract to furnish the services of any of said systems to consumers outside the corporate limits of the City of Rossville, Georgia. 
 
Section 7.12. Sewers and drains.
The council shall have the power and authority to provide for the establishment, extension, and maintenance of a system of sewers and drains, together with a sewerage disposal system. This power includes the authority to extend said system beyond the corporate limits. For these purposes the city is granted the power of eminent domain both within and without its corporate limits. The council may provide by ordinance for reasonable connection fees for tapping on to the water and sewer lines of said city, and may compel citizens to tap into the same when such service is made available. They may cause said connection to be made when the owners refuse, and issue executions to be made for the amount so expended, which execution shall create a lien on the property connected with said water and sewerage systems from the date of the order or connection. 
 
Section 7.13. Right-of-way.
The City of Rossville shall have the right, easement and franchise of laying the necessary mains, pipes, conduits, and drains, for waterworks and sewerage system purposes along the highways in the county of Walker without cost; it shall have full power and authority to enact and enforce such rules, regulations and ordinances as may be necessary to protect the water basin and watershed, from which the water supply is taken, from contamination and to protect said water works and sewerage system, including the mains, pipes, and conduits whether the same be situated within or without the corporate limits of said city. 
 
Section 7.14. Eminent domain.
The council is hereby empowered to acquire, construct, build, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be taken under chapter [section] 36-202 of the Georgia Code, subject to such amendments as shall be enacted, or any other applicable Georgia law. 
 
Sections 7.15—7.19. Reserved.
 
Section 7.20. Power to regulate and license.
The council shall have the power and authority to provide by ordinance for the registration and licensing of any trade, business, occupations, vocation, profession or any and every other undertaking pursued for the purpose of personal gain or profit of whatever nature, engaged in or carried on within the limits of the City of Rossville, regardless of whether or not the subject has an office or establishment within said city. The council shall be authorized to fix the amounts, terms, and manner of issuing and revoking licenses, provided that this authority is subject to the Constitutions and laws of the United States and the State of Georgia. This power is conferred for the purpose of regulation under the police powers of the city and for the purpose of raising revenue for the operation of the city government through the imposition of a tax or fee for the privilege of operating within the city. This authority extends over individuals, partnerships, associations, corporations, and their agents, and any other legal entity capable of transacting business. 
 
Section 7.21. Franchises.
The council shall have authority to exercise control over the use of streets of the City of Rossville. The power is hereby conferred upon the council to grant franchises for the use of said city's streets and alleys for the purpose of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electrical companies, gas companies, and transportation companies. This franchise right extends to, but is not limited to, the erection of poles, stringing of wires, laying of pipes, lines or conduits both above and below the ground surface. The council shall determine the duration, provisions, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration of such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of twenty (20) years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in the registration book to be kept by him/her. The council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
 
Section 7.22. Building, housing, electrical, and plumbing regulations.
The council shall have the power and authority to enact such reasonable rules and regulations as it may deem necessary or expedient regarding the construction and maintenance of buildings, remodeling of buildings, plumbing, and electrical wiring and equipping of buildings, in order to promote the safety and welfare of its citizens and to guard against fire or other property damage. This power may, in the discretion of the council, be exercised by adoption of any such standard building, housing, gas, heating and air-conditioning, electrical, and plumbing codes as may be deemed appropriate. The council shall be empowered to engage the necessary personnel to enforce such rules and regulations as adopted, and to charge reasonable fees of inspections and permits; and may require the obtaining of a permit as a condition precedent to any construction, building, electrical or plumbing work. The council may enact all ordinances necessary to enforce such rules and regulations. 
 
ARTICLE 9. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Section 9.10. Official bonds.
The officers and employees of the City of Rossville, both elective and appointive, shall execute such official bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council may from time to time require. 
 
Section 9.11. Existing ordinances and regulations.
Existing ordinances and resolutions of the City of Rossville not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended by the council. Existing rules and regulations of departments or agencies of the City of Rossville not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter shall continue in effect until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
 
Section 9.12. Section captions.
The captions to the several sections of this charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part thereof. 
 
Section 9.13. Penalties.
The violation of any provisions of this charter, for which penalty is not specifically provided for herein, is hereby declared to be a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand ($1,000.00) dollars or by imprisonment not to exceed thirty (30) days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
 
Section 9.14. Specific repealer.
An Act incorporating the City of Rossville in the County of Walker, approved August 24, 1905, is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety and any and all other charters, and any and all amendments thereto, but this in no way repeals any ordinances or resolutions in effect as of this date, but to the contrary, that any and all ordinances and resolutions shall remain in full force and effect until repealed or changed by the city council of Rossville, Georgia. 
 
Section 9.15. Severability.
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this charter, unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part or parts held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other. 
 
Section 9.16. Effective date.
This act shall become effective upon December 1, 1974. 
 
Section 9.17. Repealer.
All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this act are hereby repealed. 
 
APPENDIX A. CODE OF ETHICS AND PROHIBITED PRACTICES
 
Section 1. Conflict of interest.
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this code of ethics applies shall knowingly: 
(a)	Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair his independence of judgement or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(b)	Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(c)	Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is employed without proper legal authorization, or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(d)	Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the governmental body by which he is employed; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; 
(e)	Represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the council by which he is employed; 
(f)	Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
 
Section 2. Disclosure.
Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the consolidated government who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the council. The mayor or any councilman who has a private interest in any matter pending before the council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the council and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this code of ethics applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such agency or entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
 
Section 3. Use of public property.
No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this code of ethics applies shall use property owned by such governmental body for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
 
Section 4. Contracts voidable and rescindable.
Any violation of this code of ethics which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of another party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable as to that party, at the option of the council. 
 
Section 5. Ineligibility of elected officials.
Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilman shall hold any other elective or appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. 
 
Section 6. Political activities of certain officers and employees.
No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office. 
 
Section 7. Penalties for violations.
(a)	Any city officer or employee who wilfully conceals such financial interest or wilfully violates any of the requirements of this section shall upon conviction be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his office or position. 
(b)	Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his office or position, as described in subsection (a), shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
GEORGIA LAWS
This table shows the location of the sections of the Georgia Laws cited in the Charter. 
Ga. Laws 
Year 	Act 
Number 	Page 	Section 	 Section 
this Charter 
1974 	2819 		arts. I—IX 	Arts. I—IX 
1977 		136 	1 	2.11
			2 	5.10

 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
ORDINANCES
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number 	 Date 	 Section 
this Charter 
160 	 5- 8-78 	2.18

 
PART II 
CODE
 
Chapter 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code.
The provisions in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the "Rossville City Code." 
(Code 1976, § 1-1)
Charter reference(s)—Codification of ordinances, § 2.37(b). 
 
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The words "the city" shall mean the City of Rossville in the County of Walker and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The words "city council" or "the council" shall mean the city council of Rossville. 
Code. "Code" shall mean the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The word "county" or "the county" shall mean the County of Walker, State of Georgia. 
Day. The word "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All words giving joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such words are used to grant authority to the mayor and council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Names of officers and departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of Rossville" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation O.C.G.A. means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Or, and. The word "or" may be read "and," and the word "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of words as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The word "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The words "personal property" shall include every species of property except real property. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the word "premises" is used it shall mean place or places. 
Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The words "real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The word "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" shall mean the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office which lists rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. 
Seal. The word "seal" shall mean the city seal. 
Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The word "sheriff" shall mean the Sheriff of Walker County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The words "state" or "the state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The word "street" shall mean and include any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
Tenant and occupant. The words "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean a calendar week of seven days. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1976, § 1-2)
State law reference(s)—Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
 
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.
The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1976, § 1-3)
State law reference(s)—Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
 
Sec. 1-4. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1976, § 1-5)
State law reference(s)—Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
 
Sec. 1-5. Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance.
(a)	The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)	When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1976, § 1-4)
 
Sec. 1-6. Ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)	Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)	Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)	Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)	Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)	Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)	Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)	Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)	Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)	Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)	Any zoning ordinance. 
(11)	Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat or adopting subdivision regulations. 
(12)	Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(13)	The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(14)	Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code. 
(15)	Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter. All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
 
Sec. 1-7. Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
 
Sec. 1-8. Amendments to Code.
(a)	Generally. All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)	Revisions. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. The following form shall be used: 
Ordinance No._____ 
An ordinance of the City of Rossville, Georgia, providing that the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, be amended by revising section _____ of said Code providing that 
BE IT ORDAINED THAT: 
Section 1That section _____ of the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, be amended so that such section shall read as follows: 
Section 2That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(c)	Additions. If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following forms shall be used: 
Ordinance No._____ 
An ordinance of the City of Rossville, Georgia, providing that the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, be amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, providing that 
BE IT ORDAINED THAT: 
Section 1That the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, be amended by adding a section to be numbered _____, reading as follows: 
Section 2That all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(d)	Repeals. If a new section in the Code is to be repealed, the following form shall be used: 
Ordinance No._____ 
An ordinance of the City of Rossville, Georgia, providing that the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, be amended by repealing the section numbered _____, and declaring the same to be null and void and of no effect. 
BE IT ORDAINED THAT: 
Section 1That the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, be amended by repealing section _____ is hereby repealed and declared null and void and of no effect. 
(e)	Alternate procedure. In lieu of the foregoing, the following section may be added at the end of each ordinance authorizing the inclusion of the ordinance in the Code as deemed necessary and appropriate. 
Section _____. The provisions of this ordinance shall be included and incorporated in the Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, as an addition or amendment thereto, and shall be appropriately renumbered to conform to the uniform numbering system of the Code. 
(Code 1976, § 1-6)
 
Sec. 1-9. Supplementation of Code.
(a)	By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)	In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)	When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)	Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)	Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)	Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)	Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)	Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
 
Sec. 1-10. Altering Code.
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 1-7)
State law reference(s)—Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
 
Sec. 1-11. General penalty, continuing violations.
(a)	Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding 30 days or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor if the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)	The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)	Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code, the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, if such fines are not paid; 
(2)	Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)	Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)	The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond. The procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizance set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1976, § 1-8)
Charter reference(s)—Punishment for violation of ordinances, §§ 1.12(32), (42), 4.13, 9.13. 
State law reference(s)—Imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-23; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq.; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e). 
 
Sec. 1-12. Liability for violations by corporations and other associations.
(a)	Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)	Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
 
Sec. 1-13. Additional penalties; jail fund; depositing of money in funds.
(a)	In every case in which any court in this county, including any court of a municipality which has entered into the intergovernmental contract as provided for in this section, shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state or any offense against a county or municipal ordinance, there shall be imposed as an additional penalty a sum equal to ten percent of the original fine. 
(b)	At the time of posting bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or a violation of a county or municipal ordinance, an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted. In every case in which any court of this county, including any court of a municipality which has entered into the intergovernmental contract as provided for in this section, shall order the forfeiture of bail or bond, the additional sum equal to ten percent of the original bail or bond shall be collected. 
(c)	The additional penalties set forth in this section shall be in addition to that amount required by O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 to be paid into the Peace Officers' Annuity and Benefit Fund, by O.C.G.A. § 47-11-51 to be paid into the Judges of the Probate Courts Retirement Fund of Georgia, or by any other provision of law. 
(d)	The additional penalties as prescribed in this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds. Such additional penalties shall be paid over to the board of commissioners by the tenth day of each month following the month in which these sums are collected. 
(e)	All such sums collected and paid over to the board of county commissioners shall be deposited into a special account which shall be known as the "county jail fund." 
(f)	All monies collected pursuant to this section and placed in the county jail fund shall be expended solely and exclusively for constructing, operating, and staffing the county correctional facilities, or for such other purposes as specified in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
(g)	The additional penalties provided for by this section shall not be imposed or collected in any court operated by any municipality located in the county, unless the municipality and the county enter into an intergovernmental contract providing for use of the county jail, correctional institution, or detention facility by municipal prisoners. 
State law reference(s)—Magistrate courts, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-1 et seq.; violation of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 15-10-60 et seq.; punishment for misdemeanors, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; maximum punishments which may be imposed for violations of county ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(b); county responsibility for sentencing and maintenance of inmates, O.C.G.A. § 42-5-51(a). 
 
Sec. 1-14. Authorizing and setting cash bonds in traffic cases and in other cases constituting violations of the laws of the city.
(a)	The police chief, his successor and any duly qualified agent appointed by said police chief, or either of them, are hereby authorized to accept cash bonds for the personal appearance of persons arrested for violation of any traffic ordinance of the city in lieu of a statutory bond or recognizance in such cases and in such amounts and for the offenses set forth on attached schedule; however, no cash bonds shall be accepted at any place other the city hall. 
(b)	Cash bonds can be accepted for all offenses that are to be tried in the city's traffic court. However, offenses such as D.U.I. and revoked and suspended driver's license, which carry a mandatory penalty of time to be served, must make an appearance before the judge for final disposition of said case. Serious traffic accidents offenders must also make an appearance in court whether or not a cash bond has been posted prior to court date. 
(c)	Other traffic offenses not listed and which may be furnished to said offenders by the judge of the municipal court of the city shall be included with the listed offenses in the same manner as if originally included herein. This section is subject to modification by additions or deletions, notice of which will be given to said officers. 
(d)	The above-named officers authorized to receive cash bonds shall be furnished by the clerk of this court with a book of blank receipts, consecutively numbered in triplicate and readily distinguishable and identifiable, which receipts shall be completed by such officers when making an arrest and accepting a cash bond so as to show the name of the person arrested, date of arrest, nature of the offense, amount of the cash bond given, and the name of the arresting officer. The arresting officer shall deliver a copy of such receipt to the person arrested at the time the cash bond is given and shall file the original receipt together with the cash bond with the clerk of the court, not later than the next succeeding business day of such clerk, following the date of issuance of such receipt. The triplicate copy of said receipt shall be mailed to the director of the department of public safety. 
(e)	All receipts issued to arresting officers and all cash bonds received under the provisions of this section shall be accounted for by such officers to this court, and in the event that any such officer fails to so account for same, he shall be personally liable for any default and may be punished as for contempt by said court in addition to any other penalties which may be now or hereafter provided by law in such cases. 
(f)	If any person arrested for a violation of the traffic laws of the state gives a cash bond as above provided for his appearance and fails to appear at the next regular term of court convening thereafter without legal excuse therefore, then and in that event, in the discretion of the court said cash bond shall then and thereby forfeited without the necessity for the statutory bail bonds, and a judgment may be entered accordingly, in the discretion of the court, ordering the case disposed of and settled and the proceeds shall be applied and distributed as any fine would be. However, if the judge shall not desire to enter in his discretion, a judgment ordering the case disposed of and settled, the forfeiture of the cash bond shall not be a bar to a subsequent prosecution of the arrested person for such violation. 
(g)	Upon the posting of any bond by any person charged with any of the offenses listed, said person be furnished, then and there, with written notice containing the place, date and time of his formal arraignment. 
(h)	Under no circumstances shall any cash bond be accepted by any officer at any place other than the city hall and no cash bond shall ever be accepted by any officer on the streets or highways of Rossville or the State of Georgia or any other state. 
(Ord. No. 357, 10-12-98)
 
Chapter 2 ADMINISTRATION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. MAYOR AND COUNCIL 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 2-31. Mayor.
The mayor is responsible for the orderly conduct of council meetings. In order to fulfill this duty, the mayor shall enforce the rules of procedure that are adopted by the city council. The mayor shall be impartial and conduct the meetings in a fair manner. The mayor shall have the right to vote on any issue. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 1, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-32. Vice-mayor.
(a)	The council shall select a vice-mayor from the councilmembers at the beginning of each calendar year. The vice-mayor shall fulfill the duties of the mayor if the mayor is not in attendance, and shall serve until a successor is selected. 
(b)	If the mayor and the vice-mayor are absent and a quorum is present, the remaining councilmembers shall select a councilmember to serve as temporary chairman of the meeting until either the mayor or vice-mayor is present at the meeting. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 2, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-33. Committees.
The mayor, with the concurrence of the council, may create committees of members of the council to study any issue before the council. Any such committee may make recommendations to the city council, but no committee shall be empowered to make any final decision on any matter before it for consideration. In addition to councilmembers, committees may include other city officials, staff or citizens at large. Whenever a committee is created, its duties, any litigation on the scope of its duties, and the times, places and periods of time for which the committee may operate shall be determined by the chairman with the concurrence of the council. The mayor shall serve as an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 3, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-34. Open meetings.
All meetings of the city council shall be held in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq. The public shall at all times be afforded access to all meetings other than executive sessions. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 4, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-35. Organizational meeting.
The city council shall hold an organizational meeting on or before the second Monday in January. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members of the city council whose terms of office shall begin the day and hour of taking the oath of office. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 5, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-36. Regular meetings.
Regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the second Monday of each month at a time established by the mayor, at city hall or at some other public location within the city. The city clerk shall cause the time and location of the meeting to be published in accordance with law. A notice containing the foregoing information shall be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the general public at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 6, 4-14-97; Ord. No. 518, § 1, 4-14-21)
 
Sec. 2-37. Special meetings and rescheduled regular meetings.
A regular meeting may be canceled, rescheduled or moved to a new location within the city by the chairman for any reason. Other special meetings may be called as provided in the city Charter. Whenever a rescheduled regular meeting or any other special meeting is to be held at a time or place other than the regularly scheduled time or place, written notice of the change shall be posted for at least 24 hours at the place of the regular meetings. In addition, written or oral notice shall be given by the clerk at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to either the legal organ of the city or a newspaper having a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 7, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-38. Emergency sessions.
When emergency circumstances occur, the council may hold a meeting with less than 24 hours' notice to the public. When such meetings are to be held, the clerk shall provide notice to the legal organ of the city or a newspaper with a general circulation at least equal to that of the legal organ and to each member of the city council as soon as possible. The notice shall include the subjects expected to be considered at the meeting. In addition, the minutes shall reflect the reason for the emergency meeting and the nature of the notice given to the media. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 8, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-39. Executive sessions.
(a)	Executive sessions of the city council may be held for the purpose of conducting business excepted from public access requirements as authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-2 and 50-14-3. Where a meeting of the council is devoted in part to matters within the authorized exceptions to public access requirements, any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exceptions shall be open to the public. No executive session shall be held except pursuant to a majority affirmative vote of the city council taken in a public meeting. 
(b)	The minutes of the public meeting shall reflect the names of the councilmembers present, those voting for the executive session and the specific reasons for the executive session. Minutes of the executive session may be maintained by the city clerk at the direction of the mayor. Any such minutes shall be maintained in a confidential file and shall not be subject to disclosure, except that disclosures of such portions of minutes identifying real estate to be acquired by the council may only be delayed until such time as the acquisition of the real estate has been completed, terminated, or abandoned or court proceedings have been initiated. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 9, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-40. Quorum.
A quorum must be present for conducting meetings of the council. It is the duty of the mayor to enforce this rule. Any councilmember may raise a point of order directed to the mayor if he believes that a quorum is not present. If, during the course of a meeting, a councilmember leaves and a quorum no longer exists, the meeting cannot continue. If a quorum is not attained within 30 minutes, the meeting will be rescheduled by the chairman with the approval of the councilmembers present. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 10, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-41. Majority vote required for passage of motion.
Passage of a motion shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of councilmembers, including the mayor, present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present. Unless otherwise specified in these procedures, a majority shall mean more than one-half of the councilmembers present, excluding abstentions. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 11, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-42. Abstentions.
A councilmember shall vote on all motions unless he has a conflict of interest which would prevent him from making a decision in a fair and legal manner. If a conflict of interest does exist, the councilmember shall explain for the record his decision to abstain on any vote. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 12, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-43. Agenda.
(a)	The city clerk, with the advice of the mayor and the councilmembers, shall prepare an agenda of subjects to be acted on for each meeting. An agenda work session shall be held by the city clerk to finalize the agenda. The mayor and all councilmembers may participate in the work session. Whenever a quorum of the council is present for an agenda work session, the meeting shall be open to the public and all notice and recordkeeping requirements applicable to an open meeting must be met. The agenda shall be made available to the councilmembers at least one business day before every council meeting. 
(b)	The order of the agenda may be changed during a meeting by a majority vote of the council. 
(c)	A copy of the agenda and a list of those members present shall be made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of any meeting. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 13, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-44. Minutes.
(a)	The city clerk shall promptly record the minutes for each council meeting. The minutes serve as the official written record of the council meeting and shall be open for public inspection once approved as official by the council, but in no case later than immediately following the next regular meeting of the council. The minutes shall specify the names of councilmembers present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made at the meeting, the councilmember who proposed each motion, the councilmember who seconded each motion, and a record of all votes. In the case of a roll-call vote, the name of each councilmember voting for or against a proposal shall be recorded. It shall be presumed that a councilmember has voted in the affirmative unless the minutes show otherwise. More detailed information may be included in the minutes at the request of the council. 
(b)	The council must approve the minutes before they can be considered as an official record of the council. A copy of the minutes from the previous meeting shall be distributed to the councilmembers at least one business day before the next meeting. The minutes of the previous meeting shall be corrected and approved by the council at the beginning of each meeting. A majority vote is required for approval. Conflicts about the content of the minutes shall be decided by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 14, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-45. Order of business.
All regular council meetings shall follow an established order of business. The order is as follows: 
(1)	Call to order. 
(2)	Minutes. 
(3)	Invited guests. 
(4)	Reports from committees and departments. 
(5)	Old business. 
(6)	New business and comments from councilmembers. 
(7)	Public comments. 
(8)	Adjournment. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 15, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-46. Decorum.
(a)	All councilmembers must conduct themselves in a professional and respectful manner. All remarks should be directed to the chairman and not to individual councilmembers, staff or citizens in attendance. Personal remarks are inappropriate. A councilmember is not allowed to speak at a meeting until he has been recognized by the chairman. 
(b)	The chairman shall enforce these rules of decorum. If a councilmember believes that a rule has been broken, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chairman can rule on the question or he may allow the council to debate the issue and decide the issue by majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 16, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-47. Public participation.
Public participation in meetings of the city council shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)	Public comments. The final agenda item of the meeting shall be reserved for comments from the public. All members of the public who wish to address the council must submit their name and the topic of their comments to the city clerk by the close of business on the day of the council meeting. These individuals will be allotted five minutes to make their comments and their comments must be limited to their chosen topic. These limits can be waived by a majority vote of the council. 
(2)	Public participation on agenda items. By a majority vote, the council may allow comment on an agenda item at the time the item is being considered by the council, with such restrictions as the council may set. These comments must be limited to the subject that is being debated. These limits may be waived by a majority vote of the council. Anyone wishing to speak at any council meeting must be recognized by the chairman before addressing the council. 
(3)	Decorum. Members of the public shall not make inappropriate or offensive comments at a council meeting and are expected to comply with the rules of decorum that are established for councilmembers. Individuals who violate any rules of the council may be ruled out of order by the chairman or on a point of order made by a councilmember. A majority vote of the council will rule on the point of order. An individual who violates the rules of decorum may be removed from the meeting at the direction of the chairman. 
(4)	Public hearings. The council may schedule public hearings for the purpose of soliciting public comment on any subject of interest to the council. Hearings may be held immediately prior to or following a meeting of the council or at such other places and times as the council may determine. No official action shall be taken at any such public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 17, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-48. Amendments to rules.
Any amendments to the rules of order must be submitted by a councilmember in writing to the city clerk three business days before a regular meeting of the council. The proposed amendment shall be included in the agenda for that meeting and distributed to all councilmembers. All amendments require a majority vote of the council to be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 18, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-49. Suspending the rules of order.
Rules of order may be suspended in the case of an emergency. A motion to suspend the rules requires a second, is debatable and requires a majority vote of the council. Rules governing quorum, voting methods and requirements, the notification to councilmembers of meetings, and rules necessary for compliance with state law cannot be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 19, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-50. Visual and sound recordings.
Visual, sound, and visual and sound recordings shall be permitted for all public meetings. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 20, 4-14-97)
 
Secs. 2-51—2-70. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE
 
Sec. 2-71. Rules of procedure.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, procedures for meetings of the city council shall follow an edition of Robert's Rules of Order prescribed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 21, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-72. Parliamentarian.
The city attorney shall serve as the parliamentarian for council meetings. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 22, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-73. Main motion.
In order for the council to take any official action on any subject, a councilmember must propose a main motion. A proposed main motion will not be recognized by the chair until another councilmember agrees to second the motion. A second does not require the councilmember seconding the motion to support the motion. A councilmember may withdraw a main motion that he has made at any time before the council has voted on that motion. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 23, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-74. Debate.
(a)	After the main motion is recognized by the chair, the council shall debate the motion. The debate shall be managed by the chairman in a manner that is fair to all members of the council. Councilmembers may participate in the debate only when they are recognized by the chairman. 
(b)	During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce subsidiary motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a motion. There are two classes of subsidiary motions: debatable subsidiary motions and undebatable subsidiary motions. Debatable subsidiary motions consist of motions to postpone indefinitely, amend, refer to committee, and postpone to a time certain. Debatable subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. There are three undebatable subsidiary motions: limit debate, vote immediately, and lay on the table. They require a second and cannot be debated. 
(c)	Councilmembers may also introduce privileged motions. Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting and can be introduced during the course of debate. Privileged motions consist of a motion to raise a question of privilege and motions to recess and adjourn. The motions to recess and adjourn require a second. Debate is not allowed on privileged motions. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 24, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-75. Voting; procedure.
Voting on debatable motions and voting on undebatable motions shall take place in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)	Debatable motions. In the case of debatable motions, the vote can be proposed in one of two ways: 
a.	If debate has been completed and no other councilmember wishes to speak, the chair can call for the vote. If there are no objections then the chair can proceed with the vote; 
b.	If the chairman calls for the vote and there is an objection, a member of the council may move to vote immediately ("move the previous question"). If this motion is seconded and approved by a majority vote, debate will stop. The chairman will then read the proposed motion to the council and ask for the votes of the councilmembers. 
(2)	Undebatable motions. In the case of undebatable motions, the vote shall occur immediately after the motion is recognized by the chair. The chairman shall read the proposed motion to the council and then call for the vote. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 25, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-76. Ranking of motions.
(a)	Each subsidiary and privileged motion is assigned a specific rank. A motion of higher precedence can interrupt a motion of lower precedence. The higher motion must be decided before the council returns to consider the motion of lower precedence. 
(b)	A main motion has the lowest rank and does not take precedence over any other motion. A motion to adjourn has the highest rank and will take precedence over all other subsidiary and privileged motions. The order of precedence of motions shall be in accordance with this section. Motions at the bottom of the following list take precedence over motions at the top of the list. 
(1)	Main motion (lowest rank). 
(2)	Subsidiary motions (debatable): 
a.	Postpone indefinitely. 
b.	Amend. 
c.	Refer to committee (commit). 
d.	Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). 
(3)	Subsidiary motions (undebatable): 
a.	Limit debate or extend limits. 
b.	Vote immediately (previous question). 
c.	Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). 
(4)	Privileged motions (undebatable): 
a.	Question of privilege. 
b.	Recess. 
c.	Adjourn (highest rank). 
(Ord. No. 348, § 26, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-77. Subsidiary motions.
During the course of debate, councilmembers may introduce motions that propose that the council take a particular action on a main motion. These motions are called subsidiary motions and they allow a council to reach a conclusion on the main motion. Subsidiary motions require a second before they can be voted on or debated. Three subsidiary motions: amend, limit debate and vote immediately, also may apply to other subsidiary motions. 
(1)	Postpone indefinitely. If a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered by the council, that councilmember may move to postpone the consideration of the main motions indefinitely. If the motion is successful, consideration of the main motion stops and the main motion is tabled. A motion to postpone indefinitely may be debated, but it cannot be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(2)	Amend. If a councilmember believes that a main motion that is on the table should be changed in order to make it more acceptable, he can move to amend the motion. 
a.	Amendments must be closely related to the original motion and must not change the nature of the motion that they amend. 
b.	Motions to refer, amend, postpone to a time certain and the motion to recess can also be amended. 
c.	A motion cannot be amended more than two times. 
d.	Debate is allowed on a motion to amend only if the original motion is debatable. 
e.	A majority vote is required for the council to adopt an amendment. 
f.	If the amendment is adopted then the council shall consider the amended version of the motion. 
(3)	Refer to a committee (commit). If a councilmember believes that further information is needed before the council can act on a main motion, he may propose that the motion be referred to a specific committee or department for further study. If an appropriate committee does not already exist, then a committee may be formed as a part of the motion. A motion to refer should specify the date that the committee or department will report back to the council. This motion is debatable and amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(4)	Postpone to a time certain (postpone definitely). A motion to postpone to a certain time may be proposed if a councilmember believes that the main motion should not be considered until a future time. This motion shall set a particular time for the main motion to be considered again. It is debatable and can be amended. If this motion is passed, the chairman will bring the original motion back to the council for consideration at the specified time. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(5)	Limit or extend limits of debate. A motion to limit debate places a time constraint on the length of debate. The details of such a motion are to be decided by the councilmember who makes the motion. This motion can also be used to extend the limits of debate if a limit on debate already exists. Debate is not allowed on this motion and a two-thirds vote is required. 
(6)	Vote immediately (previous question). If a councilmember believes that the motion that is being considered should be voted on, the councilmember may move to vote immediately. The motion is undebatable and a vote of two-thirds of the council is required for the motion to pass. 
(7)	Lay on the table (postpone temporarily). A motion to lay on the table proposes that the consideration of a main motion be postponed until a later time in the meeting. The motion can be brought up for consideration only if a motion to resume consideration is accepted by the council during the same meeting. The motion will die if it is not taken up during the meeting. Debate is not allowed on this motion and the motion is not amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 27, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-78. Privileged motions.
Privileged motions facilitate the running of the meeting. They do not address or relate to a main motion and can be introduced whether or not there is a main motion under consideration. Privileged motions take precedence over all subsidiary motions. Debate is not allowed on these motions. 
(1)	Question of privilege. A formal question addressed to the chair concerning the rights of a councilmember or of the council as a whole is referred to as a question of privilege. It does not require a second and cannot be debated or amended. The chair is required to make a ruling on the question. 
(2)	Recess. A motion to recess proposes that the meeting be suspended for a particular amount of time. The motion must specify the length of the recess. The motion must also be seconded. Debate is not allowed on this motion but the motion can be amended. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(3)	Adjourn. In order for a meeting to come to a close, a councilmember must make a motion to adjourn. The motion to adjourn has the highest rank of any motion and as a result it can be introduced at any time. The motion requires a second, but is not debatable or amendable. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 29, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-79. Incidental motions.
Incidental motions allow councilmembers to exert their rights as a member of the council. Incidental motions can be introduced at any time during a meeting. 
(1)	Appeal. If a councilmember disagrees with a decision that is made by the chair, that councilmember may appeal the decision. If the appeal is seconded, the appeal will be considered by the council. The chair has the opportunity to explain the ruling that has been challenged. The council may then debate the appeal. The council shall decide by majority vote if the chair's decision is to be upheld or overturned. An appeal is high in precedence and can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or by a motion to lay on the table. 
(2)	Parliamentary inquiry. If a councilmember has a question about the rules of order, he may ask the chair to give an opinion on that question. This question should take the form of a parliamentary inquiry and should relate to the current business of the council. This motion takes precedence over all motions except privileged motions. This motion does not require a second and is not debatable or amendable. 
(3)	Point of order (question of order). If a councilmember believes that a violation of the rules of parliamentary procedure has occurred, he can raise a point of order. A second is not required. The chair can make a ruling on the question or can allow the council to debate and then rule on the question by majority vote. A point of order can only be interrupted by a privileged motion or a motion to lay on the table. 
(4)	Point of information (request for information). If a councilmember has a question about the facts of a particular issue that is being considered, he may ask a point of information. This motion is addressed first to the chair and then to the appropriate person. A second is not required and the motion is not debatable or amendable. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 29, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-80. Supplementary main motions.
Three motions allow the council to act on a main motion that has either been passed or tabled by the council. These motions are considered to be main motions but differ from usual main motions in the ways specified. 
(1)	Reconsider. The motion to reconsider allows the council to debate whether or not to overturn a decision made at the meeting that is in progress. It allows the council to consider new information that may affect the decision that has already been made. Any councilmember may make a motion to reconsider and any councilmember may second the motion. The motion is debatable but it cannot be amended. A majority vote of the council is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to reconsider is passed, the original decision will be voided and the council will return to debate and revote the original motion. 
(2)	Rescind. A motion to rescind proposes that the council overturn a motion passed at a previous meeting. A motion to rescind can be made by any councilmember. It is in order as long as the original motion has not been implemented. An announcement of the intention to rescind a motion may be made at the meeting where the decision was made, or the councilmember seeking to rescind may place the matter on the agenda for the next meeting pursuant to section 2-43. The motion to rescind will then be placed on the agenda for the next meeting. At the next meeting, the motion to rescind will formally be made. If it is seconded, then the council shall debate and vote on rescission. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. If a motion to rescind is passed, the original decision will be voided. 
(3)	Resume consideration. The motion to resume consideration allows the council to consider a motion that has been temporarily postponed. This motion requires a second and is not debatable or amendable. It is a main motion but ranks higher than any debatable motion. A majority vote is required for the motion to pass. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 30, 4-14-97)
 
Secs. 2-81—2-100. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. LEGISLATION
 
Sec. 2-101. Legislative authority generally.
The city council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city, and may pass any ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the government of the city; provided, however, that such ordinance or resolution is not in conflict with the Charter of the city, the constitution or the laws of the state, or the Constitution or the laws of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 31, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-102. Ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements.
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and interlocal agreements of the city shall be prepared, approved, introduced and adopted in the manner provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 32, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-103. Preparation of ordinances.
Whenever possible, all ordinances shall be prepared by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 33, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-104. Introduction of ordinances, resolutions and other matters.
Ordinances, resolutions and other matters of subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 34, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-105. Action restricted; emergencies.
No ordinance shall be put on its final passage on the same day on which it is introduced, except that where an emergency exists and public health and safety require it, an ordinance containing a full statement of the facts and reasons for the emergency may be made effective upon its adoption, if approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 35, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-106. Reading of ordinances.
Each ordinance shall be read at two consecutive meetings of the mayor and council. This subsection may be waived by a majority of those voting upon the question of waiver. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 36, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-107. Adoption of ordinances, resolutions, etc.
An ordinance, resolution or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives an affirmative vote of a majority of the whole council. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 37, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 2-108. Effective date of ordinances.
All ordinances, unless otherwise specified, shall be effective immediately upon adoption. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 37, 4-14-97)
 
Secs. 2-109—2-140. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC. 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Secs. 2-141—2-160. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 2-161. Established; membership.
There is hereby established the city planning commission. The city planning commission shall consist of seven members. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the mayor and council. The terms of the members shall be for four years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council which appointed the same which shall also have the authority to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1976, § 2-8)
 
Sec. 2-162. Organization; rules; staff; finances.
The city planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. The commission shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 2-9)
 
Sec. 2-163. Powers and duties.
From and after the time when the planning commission shall have organized and selected its officers, and shall have adopted its rules of procedure, such planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in state law. 
(Code 1976, § 2-10)
State law reference(s)—The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; authority to adopt plans and exercise zoning powers, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 
 
Secs. 2-164—2-169. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. PROSECUTING ATTORNEY
 
Sec. 2-170. Prosecuting attorney.
(a)	There is hereby created the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. The term "prosecuting attorney" shall be substituted for the term "city solicitor" and for the word "solicitor" wherever they may appear in the Code. 
(b)	The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall be a part-time position. The term and compensation for the prosecuting attorney shall be as set by contract from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Sec. 2-171. Qualifications; oaths.
(a)	The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and shall be admitted to practice before the appellate courts of the State of Georgia. 
(b)	In addition to the oaths prescribed chapter 3 of title 45 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, relating to official oaths, the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the City of Rossville, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Sec. 2-172. Substitute prosecuting attorney.
The mayor and council may provide for a substitute prosecuting attorney if the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is disqualified from engaging in the prosecution of a particular case or is unable to perform the duties of said office due to illness of incapacity. At any time in which a substitute prosecuting attorney is not available or an appointment has not been made, the city attorney, or his designee, may serve as the substitute prosecuting attorney until such time as the prosecuting attorney or substitute prosecuting attorney is available or appointed. Any substitute prosecuting attorney shall meet the qualifications set forth in section 3-61. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Sec. 2-173. Duties.
The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court shall have the duties and authority to represent the City of Rossville as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 462, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Secs. 2-174—2-195. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. RECORDS MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-196. Keeping and maintaining official records.
It shall be the policy of the mayor and council to make every record kept and maintained by the mayor and council and the officers, agents and employees of the city available to the public for reading, inspecting, examining and copying the same. 
(Code 1976, § 2-3)
 
Sec. 2-197. Custodian designated.
The city clerk is hereby made the official custodian of the records of the city, including records made by its officers, agents and employees, of every nature whatsoever. 
(Code 1976, § 2-4)
 
Sec. 2-198. Removal from city hall restricted.
The custodian of the records of the city shall not allow any person to take away from the city hall or any other place where the records are lawfully stored any records for any purpose whatsoever, unless by competent and lawful court order, except by motion of the mayor and council authorizing same. 
(Code 1976, § 2-5)
 
Sec. 2-199. Inspection; examination; copying.
In order to preserve the authenticity and correctness of all records of the city no person shall be allowed to see, inspect, examine or copy the same unless within the presence of the records custodian of the city or some person designated by the records custodian, and such examination shall be made during regular business hours when the city hall is kept open to the public. 
(Code 1976, § 2-6)
 
Sec. 2-200. Cost of certified copies.
The city clerk shall charge for furnishing certified copies of records of the city at the rate set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 2-7)
 
Sec. 2-201. Open records officer.
There is hereby created the office of open records officer. The deputy city clerk is hereby designated as the city's open records officer; the open records officer may designate, in writing, assistant open records officer(s) as required to perform the duties of his or her office. The open records officer shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Sec. 2-202. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the open records officer and his or her duly designated assistant open records officer(s) to accept written requests to inspect and copy public records, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70, et seq., and to produce to the requester all records responsive to a request within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed three business days of receipt of a request, unless the time for response is extended in accordance with law. No request shall be deemed filed until served upon the open records officer, either by hand delivery, certified United States mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery to the Open Records Officer at City Hall, 400 McFarland Avenue, Rossville, Georgia, 30741; by email to rjenkins@rossville-ga.com; or by facsimile transmission to the open records officer at 706-861-0765. Requests, whether oral or in writing, served upon any other officer or employee of the city shall not be deemed filed, until the requester has filed his or her request, in writing, with the open records officer. In the absence or unavailability of the open records officer, an assistant open records officer shall perform the duties of the open records officer. The absence or unavailability of a designated open records officer shall not delay the city's response to a properly served request. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Sec. 2-203. Request response.
Upon receipt of a request, it shall be the duty of the open records officer to promptly ascertain the availability of all public records responsive to the request and to produce to the requester those records that can be located and produced within a reasonable time, not to exceed three business days of receipt of a request. For purposes of computing the time within which a response must be made, the open records officer shall not count the business day on which a request is received, nor any intervening Saturday, Sunday, or designated holiday on which city offices are closed for general business. Upon intake of a request, the open records officer shall stamp the request with the date and time of receipt, and initial the request. In any instance where records are unavailable within three business days of the request, it shall be the duty of the open records officer to provide the requester with a written description of such records and a timeline for when the records will be available for inspection or copying and to provide the responsive records to the requester as soon thereafter as practicable. Such response shall also contain a good faith estimate of the cost to the requester for the search, retrieval, redaction, and production and copying of records. The open records officer shall confer with every officer or department head of the city, as necessary, to ascertain the existence of public records responsive to a request (including electronically-stored information), and it shall be the duty of every city officer and department head to confer with and provide records, or true and correct copies of the originals thereof, to the open records officer promptly, time being of the essence. Upon receipt of a public record responsive to a request, the open records officer shall determine, in consultation with the city attorney, if the record is exempt from disclosure by order of a court of this state or by law; if the record is exempt from disclosure, the written response by the open records officer shall set forth the specific legal authority under which withholding of inspection of the record is claimed. The open records officer shall maintain a log or other documentation of his or her due diligence to comply with a proper request. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Sec. 2-204. Fees.
The open records officer shall further have the duty to collect from a requester a reasonable charge for the search, retrieval, redaction, and production/copying of records, utilizing the most economical means available to identify and produce nonexcluded records. The charge for the search, retrieval, or redaction of records shall not exceed the prorated hourly salary of the lowest paid full-time employee who, in the reasonable discretion of the open records officer, has the necessary skill and training to perform the request; provided, however, no charge shall be made for the first quarter hour. In addition thereto, where certified copies of specific records are sought, the fees for certified copies prescribed by law shall apply; otherwise, a fee for the copying of records shall not exceed $0.10 per page for letter or legal size documents or, in the case of other documents and electronic records, the actual cost of reproducing the document or media on which the records or media are produced. It shall be the right of the requester, at the time of inspection, to make photographic copies or other electronic reproductions of records, at his or her own expense, using suitable portable devices brought to the place of inspection. Whenever any person has requested to inspect and copy public records and received a written response estimating the cost of the search, retrieval, redaction, and production/copying of the records responsive to the request, and the city has actually incurred such costs but the requester fails to inspect or accept copies of the records, the open records officer shall be authorized to collect such charges in any manner authorized by law. In any instance in which the open records officer has estimated costs in excess of $25.00 for responding to a request, the open records officer may defer the search, retrieval, redaction, and production/copying of the records until the requester has stated, in writing, his or her willingness to pay an amount equal to the estimate of costs. In any instance in which the estimated costs exceed $500.00, the open records officer shall insist, in writing, upon prepayment of the estimated costs prior to beginning search, retrieval, redaction, production or copying of the records. In any instance in which a requester has outstanding costs owing to the city for a previous records request, the open records officer shall insist upon prepayment of the outstanding costs and estimated costs prior to beginning search and retrieval. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Sec. 2-205. Litigation.
Requests by civil litigants, or their counsel of record, in any ongoing civil action or administrative proceeding shall be made in writing and shall include the style of the action or proceeding, the names and addresses of all parties and, if a party is represented by counsel, the name, address, and telephone number of the party's attorney; a copy of the request shall be served by the requester upon all parties or their counsel of record in the action or proceeding contemporaneous to filing the written request with the open records officer. The open records officer shall make duplicate set(s) of records provided in response to the request available to all parties or their counsel for the cost of copies only, unless a party or its counsel elects not to receive the records and pay the copying charge. If the city is a party to the action or proceeding, a set of responses shall be provided to counsel for the city at no charge. 
(Ord. No. 463, § 1, 9-10-12)
 
Secs. 2-206—2-230. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. FINANCES 
 
Sec. 2-231. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year for the city shall be from October 1 through September 30 of the following year. 
(Code 1976, § 8-1; Ord. No. 332, 4-8-90)
Charter reference(s)—Authority to set, § 6.30. 
 
Sec. 2-232. City materials sold or work done for private individuals.
When any work is done or materials sold for private use, the head of the department involved must compute the cost of such work done or materials sold; such cost is to be set out on a form to be supplied by the city and is to be given to the city clerk. Upon the payment in full to the city clerk of computed amount, the city clerk shall issue a work order to the head of the department so that the work can be completed. No work may be done without first receiving such a work order from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 8-5)
 
Sec. 2-233. Insurance trust agreement.
(a)	Established. The city does hereby establish a system to provide group life insurance, group accident and health insurance to employees. 
(b)	Contract. For the purpose of establishing this system, a group master contract is hereby entered into with the Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Tennessee. 
(c)	Effective date. The effective date for this coverage shall be midnight May 31, 1980. 
(Code 1976, § 8-6)
 
Sec. 2-234. Procedure for formal bids.
(a)	Except as otherwise provided in this section, the sale of all real or personal property belonging to the city shall be made to the highest responsible bidder, either by sealed bid or by auction after due notice has been given. The mayor and council shall have the right to reject any and all bids or to cancel any proposed sale. The mayor and council shall cause notice to be published once in the official organ of the county, and in two additional newspapers of general circulation in the community, not less than 15 days nor more than 16 days preceding the day of the auction, or, if the sale is by sealed bids, preceding the last day for the receipt of proposals. The legal notice shall include a general description of the property to be sold if the property is personal property or a legal description of the property to be sold if the property is real property. If the sale is by sealed bids, the notice shall also contain an invitation for proposals and shall state the conditions of the proposed sale, the address at which bid blanks and other written materials connected with the proposed sale may be obtained, and the date, time and place for the opening of bids. If the sale is by auction, the notice shall also contain the conditions of the proposed sale and shall state the date, time and place of the proposed sale. Bids received in connection with a sale by sealed bidding shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the legal notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection following the opening of all bids. All such bids shall be retained and kept available for public inspection for a period of at least 60 days from the date on which such bids are opened. 
(b)	Any property belonging to the city which, in the estimation of the mayor and council or their designated agent, is of an estimated value of $500.00 or less and lots from any municipal cemetery, regardless of value, which may be sold without regard to subsection (a) of this section. Such sales may be made in the open market without advertisement and without the acceptance of bids. The estimation of the value of any such personal property to be sold shall be in the sole and absolute discretion of the mayor and council or their designated agent. 
(c)	Nothing in this section shall prevent the city from trading or swapping property with another property owner if such trade or swap is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
(d)	The mayor and council may sell real property in established municipal industrial parks or in municipally designated industrial development areas for industrial development purposes without regard to subsection (a) or (b) of this section. 
(e)	This section shall not apply to the disposal of property: 
(1)	Which is acquired by deed of gift, will or donation and is subject to such conditions as may be specified in the instrument giving or donating the property; 
(2)	Which is received from the United States government or from the state, pursuant to a program which imposes conditions on the disposal of such property; 
(3)	Which is disposed of pursuant to the powers granted in O.C.G.A. § 36-61-1 et seq., the "Urban Redevelopment Law," or a homesteading program; 
(4)	Which is sold or transferred to another government authority or government agency for public purposes; or 
(5)	Which is no longer needed for public road purposes, and which is disposed of pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 32-7-4. 
(f)	Notwithstanding any provisions of any other law or ordinance to the contrary, the mayor and council are hereby authorized to sell real property within the corporate limits of the city for museum purposes to either a public authority or a nonprofit corporation, which is classified as a public foundation (not a private foundation) under the United States Internal Revenue Code, for the purpose of building, erecting and operating a museum or facility for the development or practice of the arts. Such sale may be made in the open market or by direct negotiations without advertisement and without the acceptance of bids. 
(g)	No property shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this section. 
(h)	Purchase of property of a value of $1,000.00 or more shall be submitted by the mayor to the council for approval or ratification. 
(Code 1976, § 8-7)
 
Sec. 2-235. Purchasing card/credit card policy.
(a)	Overview. The Georgia General Assembly established guidelines and penalties into the Official Code of Georgia Annotated ("O.C.G.A.") which provides that no municipal corporation shall issue government purchasing cards or government credit cards to elected officials on or after January 1, 2016, until the governing authority of the municipal corporation, by public vote, has authorized the issuance and has promulgated specific policies regarding the use of such government purchasing cards or government credit cards for elected officials of such municipal corporation. 
(b)	Purpose. The purpose of this policy is to set requirements and standards for the City of Rossville Purchasing Card Program. The policy is not intended to replace current State of Georgia statutes but is intended to comply with such state laws and establish more efficient guidelines for elected officials using such purchasing cards. At no time should a city issued purchasing card or credit card be used for personal purchases regardless of the circumstances. Utilizing the purchasing card or credit card for personal use or for any item or service not directly related to such official's public duty may result in disciplinary action including, but not limited to, felony criminal prosecution. All purchases utilizing a government purchasing card or government credit card must be in accordance with these guidelines and with state law. 
(c)	Scope. This purchasing card policy, as required by state law under O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(c), applies to the use of government purchasing cards or government credit cards used by elected officials authorized to be issued such government purchasing cards or government credit cards. The below list of officials have been authorized by the governing authority of the city to use such government purchasing cards or government credit cards and must abide by all of the applicable state laws and this purchasing card policy. 
(1)	Mayor. 
(d)	Public inspection. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-80-24(b) any documents related to purchases using government purchasing cards or government credit cards incurred by elected officials shall be available for public inspection. 
(e)	Transaction limits. Transaction limits are hereby established to insure compliance with state purchasing laws, maintain proper budgetary controls, and to minimize excessive use of any individual credit line. Individual monthly card limits cannot exceed those established by the municipal governing authority. The established single transaction limit for each card must be less than $1,000.00. The established monthly card limit is based upon the city's budgetary constraints and is not to exceed $1,000.00 per month. Any exceptions to the standardized limits must have express written approval by the municipal governing authority and must be added to this policy by amendment or addendum. 
(f)	Purchasing restrictions.
(1)	Elected officials may not use a government purchasing card or government credit card for the following: 
a.	Any purchases of items for personal use. 
b.	Cash refunds or advances. 
c.	Any transaction amount greater than the transaction limits set for by this policy. 
d.	Items specifically restricted by this policy, unless a special exemption is granted by the municipal governing authority. 
e.	Alcohol or liquor of any kind. Such purchases should not be made with the purchasing card and may not be reimbursed by the city. 
f.	Purchases or transactions made with the intent to circumvent the city purchasing policy, transactional limits, or state law. 
(2)	Elected officials may use government purchasing cards or government credit cards to purchase goods and/or services not prohibited by this policy or state law. Such purchases include, but are not limited to: 
a.	Purchases of items for official city use which fall within the transactional restrictions of this policy. 
b.	Purchase of lodging, fuel, food, non-alcoholic beverages, or education and training materials while on city business. 
c.	Emergency purchases necessary to protect city property. 
(g)	Administrator. The city designates the office of city clerk, as the program administrator of government purchasing cards or government credit cards. Such administrator shall: 
(1)	Serve as a liaison between the city's cardholders and the issuers of such cards. 
(2)	Maintain the cardholder agreement for all cardholders. 
(3)	Provide instruction, training, and assistance to cardholders. 
(4)	Maintain account information and secure all cardholder information. 
(5)	Keep cardholders up-to-date on new or changing information. 
(6)	Upon receipt of information indicating fraudulent use or lost/stolen cards immediately report it to appropriate parties, including the issuer. 
(7)	Ensure all card accounts are being utilized properly as set forth by state law and this policy, 
(8)	Define the city's policy and procedures for proper documentation and storage of receipts, logs, and approvals required under this policy. 
(9)	Identify any changes to named persons authorized to use a government purchasing car or government credit card. 
(10)	Any other duties assigned by the municipal governing authority. 
(h)	Accounting and auditing. The administrator, in an effort to ensure compliance with city policy and state law, will conduct monthly/quarterly reviews and audits of ail government purchasing card or government credit card transactions. The review is designed to ensure compliance, identify noncompliance issues and misuse, and through corrective measures assist the city with improving compliance. The monthly/quarterly review and audit should happen within ten days of the start of a new month/quarter. After completing the monthly/quarterly audit the administrator shall notify cardholders of any violations or questions the administrator has that occurred within that previous month/quarter. Depending on the severity of the violation, the administrator may suspend or revoke the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card after notification to the cardholder and to the municipal governing authority, but only after consultation with the city attorney. Any unresolved violations should be reported to the municipal governing authority and the city attorney in writing within ten business days. 
(i)	Violations. The use of a government purchasing card or government credit card may be suspended or revoked when the administrator, after consultation with the city attorney, determines that the cardholder has violated the approved policies or state law regarding the use of the government purchasing card or government credit card. The government purchasing card or government credit card shall be revoked whenever a cardholder is removed from office with the city and shall be suspended if such elected official has been suspended from office. 
(j)	Agreement. Before being issued a government purchasing card or government credit card under this policy and state law, all authorized users of government purchasing cards or government credit cards shall sign and accept below indicating that such user will use such cards only in accordance with the policies of the city and with the requirements of state law. 
(Ord. No. 486, 9-14-15)
 
Sec. 2-236. Purchasing and contracting.
(a)	For purposes of this section, expenditure shall mean any purchase or contract using city funds, regardless of the fund source. 
(b)	Expenditures up to $5,000.00 may be approved by the mayor upon determination that it is appropriate for the proper operation of the city and where funding is provided in the approved city budget. 
(c)	Expenditures between $5,000.00 and $10,000.00 may be approved by the mayor upon a determination that it is appropriate for the proper operation of the city and where funding is provided in the approved city budget, provided that for purchases and new contracts, three quotation or informal bids shall be first obtained. 
(d)	Expenditures greater than $10,000.00 shall require formal bidding or request for proposal, and shall be approved by the city council upon determination that it is appropriate for the proper operation of the city and where funding is provided in the approved city budget. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city council may waive the bidding or request for proposal requirement where not required by Georgia general law upon a finding that just cause exists. 
(e)	An expenditure may be approved or a contract may be awarded without formal bidding or request for proposal, when not required by Georgia general law, when the city council determines, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service or construction item and the expenditure is within the approved city budget. 
(f)	An existing contract may be renewed, extended or renegotiated without undergoing the bidding or request for proposal process when the city council determines that the existing service provider has performed acceptably under the terms of the existing service provider. 
(Ord. No. 513, § 1, 2-10-20)
 
Chapter 6 ADVERTISING 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 6-1. Banners across streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to extend or suspend any sign or banner across any street in the city without permission from the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 3-5)
 
Sec. 6-2. Sound trucks and sound-amplifying devices.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit to be operated in the city any sound-amplifying device or equipment for any purpose whatever, whether the same be stationary or operated from a vehicle unless a permit has been obtained from the mayor and council to do so; provided, however, it shall be unlawful for any person to make any loud and raucous noise to the disturbance of the peace. Any person to whom a permit has been issued under this section who abuses his discretion and causes or permits loud and raucous noises shall subject the permit to immediate revocation. 
(b)	The words "sound-amplifying equipment" as used in this section shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of any sound. 
(Code 1976, § 3-8)
Cross reference(s)—Noise control, § 34-31 et seq. 
 
Secs. 6-3—6-35. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS
 
Sec. 6-36. On streets, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed on any of the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or any vacant public property within the city any paper handbills, circulars, dodgers or other advertising matter without permission of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 3-3)
Cross reference(s)—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
 
Sec. 6-37. Placing in or on vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute in the city any handbill or other similar form of advertising by throwing or placing the same in or on any automobile or other vehicle within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 3-4)
Cross reference(s)—Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 6-38. Posting, etc., bills, notices, signs—On utility poles, public property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or place, or cause to be posted, painted or placed, any notice, sign, handbill, picture or advertisement whatever on any street telegraph or telephone pole, lamppost or upon the walls of any public building, or upon any property of the city, except that legal election and similar notices may be posted on bulletin boards. 
(Code 1976, § 3-1)
 
Sec. 6-39. Same—On private property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint or place or cause to be posted, painted or placed upon any private building or fence, any handbills, pictures, signs or advertisement whatsoever without the consent of the owner thereof first having been obtained in writing. 
(Code 1976, § 3-2)
 
Chapter 10 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 10-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol. Any ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverage caterer. Any retail dealer licensed pursuant to this chapter who provides alcohol at authorized events or functions, special events, or special events facilities. 
Alcoholic beverage. Includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in this section. 
Authorized catered function. An event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this chapter. 
Beer or malt beverage. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "nonalcoholic beer"' which is made by fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than 0.1 percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Brown bagging. Brown bagging refers to the practice of customers, patrons, or guests bringing alcoholic beverages into an establishment that is open to the public; this practice is commonly referred to as "bring your own bottle". 
Distilled spirits. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Restaurant. Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised, and held out to the public as a place where meals are actually and regularly served, which: 
(1)	Maintains adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment to serve food as required in this article. 
(2)	Provides a regular seating capacity for at least 75 persons and at least 2,500 square feet of heated space devoted to eating and food preparation with a minimum of 25 percent of any such area to be devoted to a kitchen and food preparation area. 
(3)	Employs sufficient personnel to serve food as required in this chapter. 
(4)	Serves at least one meal per day at least five days per week (with exception of holidays, vacations and periods of relocating). 
(5)	Derives at least 75 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed on the premises. 
Fortified wine. Any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
License. Authorization granted by the city to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer or wholesale dealer. 
Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer. Any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the State of Georgia who possesses a license by a local government in the State of Georgia authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
Licensee. A person, as defined herein, holding any class of license issued under this chapter. 
Manager. Any person who supervises the regular operations of a business licensed under this chapter. 
Manufacturer. Any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. It would also include a brewer of beer or malt beverages. 
Minor. When used in this chapter, minor shall refer to any person or persons under the legal age for consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, and any subsequent amendment thereto. 
Outdoor dining area. An enclosed space in which a licensee serves food and beverages as part of the operation of the licensed premises as a sidewalk cafe. 
Package. A bottle, can, keg, barrel, box or other original consumer container. Retail package alcoholic beverages shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. 
Premises. The space or area owned, leased and/or controlled by a licensee and used for the purpose of operating under the license. 
Retail consumption dealer. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retail package dealer. Any person who sells unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer. Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine. Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-2. Inspection of licensed establishments.
The city shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under this chapter during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other county or city officer to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1-2, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-3. Closure of licensed establishments in cases of emergency.
(a)	The chief of police, or his designee, may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(b)	Additionally, the mayor is authorized to suspend any license issued under this ordinance for any emergency situation such as civil disorders or natural disasters or in any situation that the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and such suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor and council determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council or at a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting. When a license is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license tax to title holder of such suspended or revoked license. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1-3, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-4. Brown bagging.
Brown bagging is prohibited within the city. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1-4, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-5. Permit for special event sales at city facilities.
(a)	The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Special event. An event approved and sanctioned by the city occurring on city or public property, or an event in which the city's personnel oversees such event. 
(b)	Any entity maintaining an alcohol beverage license in good standing with the State of Georgia may obtain a temporary special event permit for the sale of beer and/or wine at a city special event under the following terms and conditions: 
(1)	Such applicant must complete in a timely manner, the respective application and submit, the respective fee as set forth in the license fee schedule. The applicant shall submit, as may be required by the city clerk or designee, a plan or rendering which details operational matters. 
(2)	The application must be reviewed and duly approved by the city clerk or designee. 
(3)	When safety consideration and/or effective traffic circulation issues exist, it may be deemed necessary by the city to require enclosed structures providing restricted public ingress/egress. 
(4)	Unless otherwise approved, no more than one entity/organization shall be allowed to sell beer or wine during the course of any one event. The city reserves the right to permit or to refuse any permit for a special event, as deemed in the best interest of the city. 
(5)	The possession of any open glass container for the consumption of any beverage is prohibited. 
(6)	The chief of police or designee shall be authorized to suspend or terminate a special event at any time, if he/she determines that it is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(7)	Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b)(1) thru (b)(6) above, nothing in this section shall relieve applicants from complying with all other provisions of this chapter and state law. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1-5, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-6. Alcohol beverage commission.
(a)	There is hereby created the alcohol beverage commission of the city which shall consist of five residents of the city appointed by the mayor and approved by the council. Each member of the commission shall serve a three-year term. In order that the terms of the members shall be staggered, the initial appointment by the city shall be two persons for a three-year term, two persons for a two-year term and one person for one-year term. The members shall serve until their successors are duly appointed and qualified. Members of the authority may serve up to two consecutive five-year terms. The mayor and council shall appoint a chairperson of the commission who shall serve one year as chairperson. Three members shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of three members shall constitute action of the commission. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(b)	The commission shall conduct a hearing on all properly appealed, alcohol beverage license application denials and alcohol beverage license suspensions or revocations. The commission shall either affirm or overrule the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 1-6, 6-12-17)
 
Secs. 10-7—10-20. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. LICENSES
 
Sec. 10-21. Sale in C-l and C-2 zoning area of city; license a privilege.
(a)	Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the C-l and C-2 zoned area of the city under a license granted by the city upon the terms and conditions provided in this chapter. 
(b)	All licenses in this chapter shall be a mere grant of privilege to carry on the business during the term of the license and is subject to all terms and conditions imposed by the city ordinances and state law. 
(c)	All licenses under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: 
"This license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled, and is subject to any further ordinances which may be enacted." 
(d)	Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence and are required to abide by all applicable state regulations and laws. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-22. Compliance with rules and regulations; license fee.
Before a license shall be granted under this chapter, the applicant shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the mayor and council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with the fee scale adopted by the mayor and council from time to time and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-2, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-23. Sale or possession for sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-3, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-24. License fees enumerated.
License fees applicable to this chapter are set out as follows: 
(a)	Retail consumption dealers: 
(1)	Beer: $500.00 per year. 
(2)	Wine: $500.00 per year. 
(3)	Distilled spirits: $3,500.00 per year. 
(b)	Retail package dealers: 
(1)	Beer: $500.00 per year. 
(2)	Wine: $500.00 per year. 
(c)	Off-premises license (inside city limits): $100.00 per year. 
Off-premises license (outside city limits): $200.00 per year. 
(d)	License fees are pro-rated the first year that the license is issued based on the date issued as follows: 
(1)	January 1 to June 30: The full amount of the license fee designated is due. 
(2)	June 30 to December 31: One-half of the full amount of the license fee designated is due. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-4, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-25. Multiple locations for sale of alcohol.
Separate applications must be made for each location and separate licenses must be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-5, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-26. License application forms.
(a)	All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall complete the application forms prescribed by the city clerk or designee. 
(b)	The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name and address of the applicant; the proposed business to be carried on; location; if a partnership, the names and residence addresses of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers, the names of the managers, and the names of all shareholders holding more than ten percent of any class of corporate stock; if a limited liability company (LLC) the names of all managers, members holding more than ten percent of any units; or any other entity having a financial interest in each entity which is to own or operate the establishment for which a license is sought. 
(c)	If the establishment manager changes, the applicant must furnish the city clerk or designee, the name and address of the new manager within ten days of such change. 
(d)	All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(e)	All applicants shall furnish data, fingerprints and other records as required by the city clerk or designee to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish such data, fingerprints and other records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(f)	In instances in which an application is denied under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may not reapply for a license for at least two years from the final date of such denial. The city clerk or designee shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied under the provision of this chapter. Such written notification shall set forth the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the appeal rights under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-6, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-27. Supporting documents to be filed with application.
Those applying for a license under this chapter shall submit in support of the application for license the following documents: 
(a)	The SAVE affidavit of each applicant as required by state law. 
(b)	A copy of a deed showing the applicant to be the owner of the premises for which the license is sought or a copy of a lease showing any interest the owner of the premises has in the business for which the license is sought. 
(c)	Each applicant shall submit to the police department such information as may be required by the Georgia Crime Information Center and by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, including classifiable sets of fingerprints, and such fees as may be set by the Georgia Crime Information Center and by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for a records check comparison by the Georgia Crime Information Center and by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. An application for a license under this chapter shall constitute consent for performance of a records check comparison. 
(d)	Other appropriate information may be required as determined by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-7, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-28. Licensing qualifications.
(a)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or to any person who cannot provide documentation of their ability to be lawfully employed in the United States. 
(b)	Where the applicant is a partnership, limited liability company or private-held corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, members, officers, managers, and majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation or limited liability company, the license shall be issued jointly to the entity and the majority equity holder; where the majority equity holder, is not an individual, then the license shall be issued jointly to the entity and its license applicant under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership the license will be issued to one of the partners owning at least ten percent of the partnership. If no partner owns ten percent of the partnership then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. If the applicant is a publicly held entity, then the license shall be issued jointly to the entity and its designated agent. 
(c)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, within ten years prior to the filing of application for such license. 
(d)	Should any applicant, partner, or officer used in the sale or dispensing of any alcoholic beverages, after a license has been granted, be convicted under any federal, state or local law of any felony, the license shall be immediately revoked and canceled by the city, 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter, to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(f)	No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license issued by the city previously revoked within two years prior to the filing of the application. 
(g)	Any written notice or demand required by the city, permitted by law or under this chapter, will be served by hand delivery to the establishment and signed for by the licensee or manager on duty. If the licensee or manager is not onsite to be served by hand delivery, service may be perfected by certified mail to the licensee. 
(h)	A license application may be denied to any applicant for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the application is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(i)	No new or renewal license for the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city shall be issued for a location that fails to meet all applicable state and local fire, life safety, building, health and zoning codes. A license for the sale of alcoholic beverages may be issued for a location prior to the completion of the building or tenant space indicated on the license application, provided no alcoholic beverages may be sold under the license until said building or space is completed as determined by the city planning and inspection department. 
(j)	No new or renewal alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any applicant who is delinquent in the payment of city taxes or fees, including, but not limited to property taxes, alcoholic beverage excise taxes, occupational tax certificate fee, hotel/motel excise taxes or any other taxes or fees which are owed to the city by the applicant. 
(k)	Payment for new or renewal alcoholic beverage license that is returned by a financial institution will be considered a non-payment and the alcoholic beverage license will be invalid. The licensee has seven days from the date the payment was returned by the financial institution to provide payment by cash or certified check. If the appropriate payment is not received within seven days, the license will be invalid. Once a license is invalid, the licensee would need to re-apply for a new license. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-8, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-29. Advertising in official gazette.
A notice of each application for an alcohol beverage license shall be advertised in the official gazette of Walker County, once a week for two weeks immediately preceding consideration of the application. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-9, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-30. Action by city clerk.
Within seven days from the time a complete application and supporting documentation are filed, the city clerk shall notify the chief of police, who shall investigate the proposed location and the criminal background of the applicant and such officers, directors and owners subject to such investigation under this chapter and make a full report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall within 30 days of the receipt of the investigation of the applicant and proposed location issue the license or refuse to issue the license and give the applicant written notice of the refusal and the reasons therefore. The issuance of the license shall be conditioned upon payment of the appropriate fee. The written notice denying an application shall advise the applicant of the right to a hearing as provided for in section 10-39 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-10, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-31. Surrender of license.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any licensee authorized to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages on specifically described premises shall be required to surrender the license held by the licensee without demand of the mayor and council upon any of the following events: Any sale or transfer of any interest in the business of the license holder, whether an actual sale of any of the license holder's equity interest to any unregistered person or upon a sale of all or substantially all of the license holder's assets to any unregistered person. For purposes of this subsection, the term "unregistered person" shall mean any individual, entity, club, association or fraternal order not shown upon any current application for an alcoholic beverage license on the specific premises involved. For purposes of this subsection, a sale of all or substantially all of the licensee's assets shall include, or be deemed to include, any sale of any specifically described premises or bulk sale of inventory or assets at any specifically described premises for which the license holder is licensed to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city. For purposes of this subsection, any corporation or limited partnership or association whose stock is traded on any stock exchange recognized by the United States Securities and Exchange Commission shall be exempted from this requirement to the extent of any transfer of shareholding or partnership interests not exceeding five percent in any one trade or transaction. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-11, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-32. Display at place of business.
The city alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be kept plainly in view at the premises whereby it may be easily viewed by patrons. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-12, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-33. Transferability of license.
No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-13, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-34. Automatic license forfeiture for nonuse.
Any holder of any license under this chapter who shall for a period of six consecutive months after the license has been issued cease to operate the business and sale of the product or products authorized shall after the six-month period automatically forfeit the license without the necessity of any further action. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-14, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-35. Expiration and renewal.
(a)	All licenses granted under this chapter shall be valid from the date issued through December 31 of the license year. 
(b)	All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire at midnight on December 31 of each year. Renewal packages will be sent to all current licensees by November 1. It is the licensee's responsibility to return renewal paperwork along with the required fee, to the city clerk or designee by November 30 of each year. Any renewal paperwork submitted or renewal paperwork submitted without the required fee after November 30 but before 4:00 p.m. on December 31, if December 31 should be on a Saturday or Sunday, the last renewal date would be the last Friday in the month of December, shall pay, in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent. 
(c)	Any renewal paperwork received after 4:00 p.m. on December 31, if December 31 should be on a Saturday or Sunday the renewal date would be the last Friday in the month of December, shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. This will include a reassessment of investigative and administrative fees and no alcohol sales will be permitted during the reapplication process. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-15, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-36. Audits.
(a)	If the city clerk or designee deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the licensee shall be notified and an agreed upon date, time and place of the audit shall be arranged. The city clerk or designee may designate the city's auditor or other designated person to perform any audit authorized in this chapter. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license issued under this chapter. Failure to arrange an agreed upon date within three months of an audit request will be deemed as an uncooperative act and the licensee will forfeit any licenses issued. 
(b)	All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)	Monthly income or operating statements. 
(2)	Daily sales receipts showing food sales separate from liquor, beer and wine sales. This requirement applies to retail consumption on premises licensees only. 
(3)	Daily cash register receipts such as "Z" tapes or guest tickets. 
(4)	Monthly state sales and use tax reports. 
(5)	Federal income tax return with all form 1099's. The city clerk or designee can waive all or some of the requirements of this requirement if the city clerk or designee finds that no such records exist and it is not financially practical based on the net income of the licensed establishment to require them to keep such records. 
(c)	If a licensed establishment is unable to provide the records, or does not meet the required food consumption percentage, another audit shall be performed within 90 days at the licensee's expense. If after two, or more, consecutive audits a licensed establishment is unable to provide the records, or does not meet the required food consumption percentage, the licensed establishment license will be suspended for 30 days. During the 30-day suspension period, no alcoholic beverages will be allowed on the premises. 
(d)	If an audit is triggered by a violation of this ordinance, then the cost of the audit shall be the responsibility of the licensee. The failure of the licensee to timely pay the city for its audit after being invoiced shall result in the automatic suspension of all licenses of the licensee until all deficiencies found by the audit are corrected and the audit expense is paid to the city. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-16, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-37. Tax delinquent on 21st day.
The tax imposed under this ordinance shall, for each month, become delinquent on the 21st day of each succeeding month. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H.15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release of H.15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year and a penalty of ten percent of such delinquent tax shall be added and attached to the total amount of the fee. The city clerk or designee is empowered to pursue any remedy or right of collection and payment of taxes lawfully levied by the city, as may be allowed under the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-17, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-38. Suspension or revocation of license.
No license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing. Section 10-39 of this chapter details the licensee rights to a hearing. 
(a)	A license may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk or designee: 
(1)	When the licensee furnishes fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license or omits information required in the application for a license, or for failure to pay all fees, taxes or other charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)	Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license of any licensee to sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to sell alcoholic beverages shall thereupon be automatically revoked. 
(3)	Where the establishment has been found in violation of employment of underage persons to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)	Where the establishment has been found in violation of sales to underage persons. 
(5)	Where alcoholic beverages have been sold or distributed during a period of suspension. 
(6)	When any establishment which does not meet the licensing qualifications set forth in this chapter any time such knowledge becomes known to the city. 
(7)	By an act or omission by a licensee, owner of more than ten percent interest in the licensed establishment, willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or of any provision of this ordinance. 
(8)	By an act of omission by an employee of a licensee, where such acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, which constitutes a violation of federal or state laws or of any provision of this chapter. 
(b)	A license may be revoked by the city clerk or designee if a license has been suspended two or more times in any consecutive 12-month period. 
(c)	An application for renewal of a license may be denied by the city clerk or designee when a licensee has been chronically delinquent or chronically in default in monthly excise tax reporting and remittance. Chronically is deemed to be five months of the same 12-month calendar. 
(d)	A license may be suspended by the city clerk or designee when the chief of police or designee deems a business to be operating or conducting business in a manner contrary to the public welfare, safety, health, or in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. Any combination totaling three or more of the following occurrences within any 30-day period shall constitute prima facie evidence as to constitute a nuisance: 
(1)	Breach of the peace, disturbance or altercation resulting in violence occurring on the premises. 
(2)	Permitting the solicitation of patrons on the licensed premises for prostitution or any other unlawful act where the license holder or the license holder's employee knew or should have known of such conduct. 
(3)	The selling or serving of any alcoholic beverage to any person that the license holder or the license holder's employee knew or should have known to be in a state of intoxication. 
(4)	The violation of any state law or regulation governing the manufacture, sale, distribution or transportation of alcoholic beverages. 
(e)	Whenever a license is suspended or revoked, a cease and desist notification shall be delivered to the licensed premise by the chief of police or designee. This notification will include the reasons for suspension or revocation, outline the licensee rights to a hearing, and detail the dates of suspension or revocation. The chief of police or designee shall take the necessary steps to see that signs are removed and that all alcoholic beverage sales cease as outlined in the cease and desist notification letter, 
(f)	Wherever this chapter permits the city clerk or designee to suspend any license issued under this chapter but does not mandate the period of such suspension the suspension period shall be 14 days (two weeks). 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-18, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-39. Hearings.
(a)	No license to sell alcoholic beverages shall be suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing before the alcohol beverage commission. Any applicant "who was denied an alcohol beverage license shall also have a right to a hearing before the alcohol beverage commission. 
(b)	The city clerk or designee shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of the decision to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)	Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within ten days after receipt of the written notice provided by the city clerk or designee. In order to defray administrative costs, the written petition must be accompanied by a filing fee of $300.00. If the filing fee is not submitted with the written petition, the petition shall not be considered to be filed. The alcohol beverage commission may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote. 
(d)	A hearing shall be conducted on each appeal within 45 days of the date of filing of the written petition of the applicant or licensee with the office of the city clerk or designee unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the alcohol beverage commission or designee. 
(e)	The appellant at the hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire an official transcript of the appeal proceedings, such request must be made at least three days prior to such hearing. The appellant shall be solely responsible for the cost of the takedown and preparation of the official transcript. The appellant shall have the burden of proof on any such appeal. 
(f)	Should the alcohol beverage commission be unable to reach a decision by majority vote, the action taken by the city clerk or designee shall be upheld automatically. 
(g)	The findings of the alcohol beverage commission shall be forwarded to the city clerk or designee within 15 days after the conclusion of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the city clerk or designee to notify the appellant of the action of the alcohol beverage commission. 
(h)	The findings of the alcohol beverage commission shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)	Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)	Unsupported by substantial evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)	Unreasonable. 
(i)	The findings of the alcohol beverage commission shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of such finding by certiorari to the Superior Court of Walker County. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-19, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-40. Withdrawal of application.
Any license application made pursuant to this chapter may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before the license is issued, any sums deposited as an administrative processing fee shall not be refunded. After issuance of the license, no refunds will be made. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-20, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-41. Alcoholic beverage caterers.
(a)	License requirements—Resident caterers. 
(1)	Any caterer who possesses a valid city license from the city, to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages or wine by the drink for consumption on the premises within the city may apply for an off premises license that permits sales of the same off premises at authorized catered event(s) or function(s). 
(2)	Any caterer who possesses a valid license from the city, to sell malt beverages or wine by the package for consumption off the premises within the city may apply for an off premise license that permits sales of the same class of alcoholic beverages by the drink off premises at authorized catered event(s) or function(s). 
(3)	Each off-premises catering license, authorized herein, shall be valid through December 31 of the year for which they are issued. 
(4)	In order to distribute or sell malt beverages or wine at an authorized catered function, a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall file an application for an off-premises event permit to the city and shall pay a nonrefundable fee in an amount of $50.00. The application shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address and time of the event, the caterer's license number and any other information the city deems necessary to review a request for such permit 
(b)	Permit requirements—Nonresident caterers. 
(1)	A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit to the city clerk or designee. The fee for each such permit shall be $100.00 as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). 
(2)	An application for an off-premises event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's state and local license number and expiration date, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or functions. 
(3)	The original off-premises event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. 
(4)	It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute, sell, or otherwise dispense alcoholic beverages off-premises except as authorized by the off-premises event permit. 
(c)	A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
(d)	Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in article VIII of this chapter. 
(e)	Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in article VIII of this article and shall be paid within 30 days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-21, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-42. Reserved.
 
Sec. 10-43. Nonprofit civic organization temporary permit.
(a)	As used in this section, the term "bona fide nonprofit civic organization" means an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of 26 U.S.C. Sections 501(c), 501(d), or 501(e). 
(h)	To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit civic organization must be the applicant; a nonprofit authorization letter must be produced; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
(c)	Pursuant to state law, a temporary permit shall authorize the organization to sell beer and wine for consumption on the premises or to sell wine at retail for off-premises consumption, or both, for a period not to exceed three days, subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than six such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. 
(d)	Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount of $100.00, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the mayor and council. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off-premises and in connection with a catered event or function without first having obtained a license and event permit(s) as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-23, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-44. Serving hours for caterers and nonprofit civic organizations.
The serving hours under any permit issued under section 10-41 and section 10-43 shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m. unless different serving hours are set forth on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 2-24, 6-12-17)
 
Secs. 10-45—10-70. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. REGULATIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 10-71. Building requirements.
(a)	No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of such building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with city ordinances, state law and regulations. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval by the building inspector. 
(b)	Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. 
(c)	Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-72. Distance requirements.
(a)	A license to sell packaged alcoholic beverages shall not be granted to any establishment within 300 feet of any church, school building, school grounds, or college campus, or an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government. 
(b)	The term "school building" referred to in this section shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings. It includes only those structures in which instruction is offered. The term "instruction" refers to subjects commonly taught in the schools and colleges of this state. 
(c)	For the purposes of this section, distance shall be measured in a straight line from front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale, to the front door of the building of a church, government-owned treatment center or a retail package store. 
(d)	Any location licensed to sell alcoholic beverages on the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, shall not be denied continued operation under an existing license, denied any renewal of such license or no new owner of such location may be denied a new license based upon the measurements set forth in this section. 
(e)	As to any location licensed in the future, if the distance requirements in this section are met at the time of issuance of any license, the subsequent opening and or operation of a school within the distance prohibited in this section shall not prevent the continuance of an existing license or the renewal thereof or the issuance of a new license to any subsequent owner of such property. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-2, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-73. Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only.
(a)	No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person, firm or corporation other than a wholesaler licensed by the State of Georgia. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. However, this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(b)	The city clerk or designee may request, information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-3, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-74. Retail consumption dealers to store inventory only on-premises.
No retail consumption dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep any beer, wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-4, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-75. Licensees to maintain a copy of this chapter; employees to be familiar with terms.
Each licensed alcoholic beverage dealer under this chapter shall keep a current copy of this chapter in the licensed premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to its terms; and each licensee, the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages shall at all times be familiar with its terms. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-5, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-76. No adding to contents.
No one shall add to or permit the adding to any alcoholic beverage or refill any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-6, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-77. Sale on election days.
Licensees may sell alcoholic beverages on election days, provided that such sale is not within 250 feet of any polling place or the limitations imposed by this section shall be in effect beginning with the opening of the polls and ending with the closing of the polls. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-7, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-78. Order required.
(a)	Owners, managers, and employees of a licensed business shall be responsible for keeping an orderly place and shall not permit any employee, patron, or other person to cause a disturbance or engage in loud, boisterous, lewd, or obscene conduct or practice within the establishment. 
(b)	The owner and manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment shall be responsible for monitoring parking lots and other outside areas around the establishment and prohibiting patrons and other persons associated with the establishment from standing, sitting, mingling, or assembling outside the licensed premises in a manner which causes or contributes to disturbances and/or illegal acts. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-8, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-79. Removal of a partially consumed bottle of wine.
Any restaurant which is licensed to sell wine for consumption on premises may permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine per patron for consumption off premises under the following conditions: 
(1)	The patron has purchased a meal from the restaurant and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine which has been purchased on the premises with such meal. 
(2)	The partially consumed bottle of wine that is to be removed from the premises must be securely resealed by the licensee before removal from the premises. 
(3)	The partially consumed bottle of wine shall be placed in a bag or other container that is secured in such a manner that it is visibly apparent if the container has been subsequently tampered with or opened. 
(4)	A dated receipt for the meal and the purchase of the bottle of wine shall be provided by the licensee and attached to the container. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-9, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-80. Serving alcoholic beverages in the downtown commercial district.
In the downtown commercial district alcoholic beverages shall be served in glasses only. Service by bottle, cans and non-glass cup is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-10, 6-12-17)
 
DIVISION 2. MINORS
 
Sec. 10-81. Employment of underage persons.
(a)	No person shall allow or require a person in employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell, or take orders for any alcoholic beverage, 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets or convenient stores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-11, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-82. Failure to require and properly check identification.
(a)	It shall be a violation not to require and properly check identification to ensure an underage person is not sold, served, or have in his possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. 
(b)	The term "identification" in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state issued ID card. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-12, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-83. Sales to underage person prohibited.
(a)	No holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages, shall do any of the following upon the licensed premises: 
(1)	Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. 
(2)	The prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of distilled spirits to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the distilled spirits are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purpose of this subsection, the term "proper identification" in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license, or state issued ID card. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate, 
(3)	Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(b)	The penalty for violation of this section by an individual shall be a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation. 
(c)	Any licensed establishment where three or more violations of this section, or O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows; 
(1)	For the second offense within any 36-month period, a minimum 30-day suspension. 
(2)	For the third violation within any 36-month period, a minimum 90-day suspension. 
(3)	For the fourth offense within any 36-month period, the license will be revoked. 
(d)	If there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessors) if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-15, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-84. Purchase or possession of alcoholic beverages by underage persons.
(a)	No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)	No person under the age of 21 years shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent their age in any manner for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-14, 6-12-17)
 
DIVISION 3. CONSUMPTION ON-PREMISES
 
Sec. 10-85. Poured alcohol transported by employees.
Poured alcoholic beverages will be transported from point of dispensing to the customer by the licensee's employees only. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-15, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-86. Open area and patio sales.
(a)	Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed, consumption on premises, establishment in an enclosed patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the city clerk or designee, 
(b)	The requirement for approval of a patio/open area type environment is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink without the licensee's knowledge. 
(c)	The height of the structure required in subsection (b) of this section shall be a minimum of three and one-half feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection department and the city's fire department as required by their governing regulations or codes. 
(d)	The only exit from this type area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises or through an approved fire exit (not for general public use unless an emergency exists). The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(e)	If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city clerk or designee. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's building, development and fire codes. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-16, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-87. No outside consumption.
(a)	It is prohibited for customers to leave alcoholic beverage establishment premises, with open alcoholic beverages and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open alcoholic beverages are carried out. 
(b)	It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)	It is prohibited for the manager or any employee of an alcoholic beverage establishment to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 3-17, 6-12-17)
 
Secs. 10-88—10-100. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. DISTILLED SPIRITS CONSUMPTION
 
Sec. 10-101. Locations.
Distilled spirits sold by the drink for consumption on the premises are permitted only in restaurants which maintain adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment to serve food as required in this article. The restaurant must provide a regular seating area for at least 75 persons and at least 2,500 square feet of heated space devoted to eating and food preparation with a minimum of 25 percent of any such area to be devoted to a kitchen and food preparation area. The restaurant must employ sufficient personnel to serve food as required in this chapter. The restaurant must serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week (with the exception of holidays, vacations, and periods of relocating). The restaurant must derive at least 75 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed on the premises. The restaurant must be in the C-l and C-2 zoning districts of the city limits of Rossville, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 4-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-102. Investigative and administrative costs.
(a)	Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a check or cash in the amount of $150.00 for investigative and administrative costs. This amount may be changed by the mayor and council from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)	The fee shall not be refundable if the license is denied or if the licensee withdraws the application. 
(c)	Anyone applying for more than one license shall pay only one investigative and administrative fee. 
(d)	Any applicant for a new license under this chapter that already holds an existing license, shall have the investigative and administrative fee waived. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 4-2, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-103. Hours and days of sale.
(a)	Distilled spirits shall only be sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Saturday sales shall be between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. 
(b)	Distilled spirits shall only be sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(c)	Distilled spirits shall not be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the mayor and council. 
(d)	Distilled spirits may be sold for consumption on the premises from 11:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. on January 1st of any year other than any year when New Year's Eve falls on a Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 4-3, 6-12-17; Ord. No. 523, § 1, 9-13-21)
 
Sec. 10-104. Consumption on premises sales only.
Persons holding a license to sell distilled spirits for consumption on the premises shall not be permitted to sell any alcoholic beverage by the package or bottle. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 4-4, 6-12-17)
 
Secs. 10-105—10-120. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. BEER AND WINE CONSUMPTION
 
Sec. 10-121. Permitted locations.
Beer and/or wine sold for consumption on the premises is permitted only at the following locations, with the noted limitations: 
(1)	In restaurants located in the C-1 and C-2 Zoning Area zones permitting the sale of beer and wine by the drink that maintain adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining rooms equipment to serve food as required in this article, that provides a regular seating capacity of at least 75 persons and at least 2,500 square feet of heated space devoted to eating and food preparation with a minimum of 25 percent of any such area to be devoted to a kitchen and food preparation area, that must employ sufficient personnel to serve food as required in this chapter, the restaurant is required to serve at least one meal per day at least five days per week (with exception of holidays, vacation, and periods of relocating), it must derive at least 75 percent of its gross income from the sale of such meals prepared, served, and consumed on the premises. 
(2)	An event approved and sanctioned by the city occurring on city or public property, or an event in which the city's personnel oversees such event if properly permitted. 
(3)	An event of a bona fide nonprofit civic organization if properly permitted. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 5-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-122. Investigative and administrative costs.
(a)	Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a check or cash in the amount of $150.00 for investigative and administrative costs. This amount may be changed by the mayor and council from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)	The fee shall not be refundable if the license is denied or if the licensee withdraws the application. 
(c)	Anyone applying for more than one license shall pay only one investigative and administrative fee. 
(d)	Any applicant for a new license under this article that already holds an existing license shall have the investigative and administrative fee waived. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 5-2, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-123. Hours and days of sale.
(a)	Beer and/or wine shall only be sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(b)	Beer and/or wine shall only be sold for consumption on the premises between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(c)	No beer and/or wine shall be sold for consumption at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the mayor and city council. 
(d)	Beer and/or wine may be sold for consumption on the premises from 11:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. on January 1 of any year other than any year when New Year's Eve falls on a Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 5-3, 6-12-17; Ord. No. 523, § 2, 9-13-21)
 
Secs. 10-124—10-150. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. PACKAGE STORE LICENSING; REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 10-151. Type of retail establishment.
No beer and wine shall be sold at retail, except in establishments located in zoning districts in which these establishments are permitted as a conforming use or in districts where an existing establishment exists as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 6-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-152. Hours and days of sale.
(a)	Retail package licensees may engage in the sale of beer and wine between the hours of 7:00 a.m. Monday through 11:59 p.m. Saturday. 
(b)	Retail package beer and wine shall not be sold at any time in violation of any local ordinance or regulation or of any special order of the mayor and city council. 
(c)	Retail package licensees may engage in the sale of beer and wine on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 6-2, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-153. Investigative and administrative costs.
(a)	Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a check or cash in the amount of $150.00 for investigative and administrative costs. This amount may be changed by the mayor and council from time to time by ordinance. 
(b)	The fee shall not be refundable if the license is denied or if the licensee withdraws the application. 
(c)	Anyone applying for more than one license shall pay only one investigative and administrative fee. 
(d)	Any applicant for a new license under this article that already holds an existing license, shall have the investigative and administrative fee waived. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 6-3, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-154. Delivery by retailer beyond licensed premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person issued a license under this chapter to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverages by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 6-4, 6-12-17)
 
Secs. 10-155—10-170. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. WHOLESALER LICENSING
 
Sec. 10-171. Special provisions applicable to wholesale purchases.
(a)	Any person desiring to sell at wholesale any alcoholic beverages in the city shall be licensed by the State of Georgia and maintain on file with the city clerk or designee a copy of their current state wholesaler license. 
(b)	No person who has any direct financial interest in any license for the retail sale of any alcoholic beverages in the city shall be allowed to sell at wholesale within the city limits. 
(c)	No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to any person other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. Provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(d)	No alcoholic beverage shall be delivered to any retail sales outlet in the city except by a duly State of Georgia licensed wholesaler. The name of the wholesale distributor shall be clearly marked on the delivery vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 7-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-172. Hours and days of sale.
Wholesalers shall not engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages except between 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. There shall be no sales of alcoholic beverages on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 7-2, 6-12-17)
 
Secs. 10-173—10-190. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. EXCISE TAXES
 
Sec. 10-191. Tax levied, amount, payment; duties of dealers and wholesalers.
(a)	Scope of section. In addition to all other taxes or license fees heretofore or hereafter imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the city in the business of selling distilled spirits, malt beverages and/or wine, there is imposed and levied upon all hereinafter described dealers within the city an excise tax to be computed and collected as hereinafter set forth. The taxes imposed by this section shall not be levied with respect to the following: 
(1)	Wine sold to and used by established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental service only; 
(2)	Any sale of wine which is exempt from taxation by the state or under the Constitution of the United States; 
(3)	Wine sold to persons outside the state for resale or consumption outside the state; or 
(4)	Wines or malt beverages which contain less than one-half of one (0.5) percent alcohol by volume. 
(b)	Basis for computation of tax.
(1)	The tax levied hereunder shall be computed on the basis of $0.22 per liter for distilled spirits and wine sold or delivered as hereinafter set forth. The $0.22 per liter shall be pro-rated down on fractional parts of liters, so that each bottle or each individual size container shall be taxed on the basis of $0.22 per liter. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any such licensee to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any liquor or wine on which such tax has not been paid. 
(2)	Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold from a barrel or bulk container, the tax levied hereunder shall be computed at the rate of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15½ gallons; where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces shall be imposed. 
(c)	Computations, payment, duties of wholesale dealer and distributor. The tax imposed shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering distilled spirits or wine and/or malt beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business in the city: 
(1)	Keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales, shipments or deliveries of spirituous liquors and wine and malt beverages to each retail dealer in the city. Such records are to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
(2)	Collect from each retail dealer in the city at time of delivery of distilled spirits or wine or malt beverages, the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold the same in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as herein provided. 
(3)	On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show and reflect all sales and deliveries of alcoholic beverages to or for retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of said report. Said report shall show the name and address of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city for all taxes collected or due, as shown on said report. 
(4)	The excise tax levied in this section is hereby levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city and it is the intent of this article to so levy this tax as to require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery by the retailer to the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, as hereinbefore required, hereunder is not paid on or before the tenth day of each calendar month, a ten percent penalty on the gross tax plus delinquent amounts shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H.15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release of H.15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. 
(d)	Noncompliance by wholesale dealer; distributor. If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor in writing and if the reports are not made and the taxes are not remitted within five days from the date of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city and the retail licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor for whom the taxes have not been paid shall be subject to having their license suspended or revoked as herein provided. 
(e)	Unlawful retail sales. It shall be a violation of this article for any person, or entity to sell at retail within the city alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine on which the taxes herein provided for have not been paid. 
(f)	Unlawful deliveries. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor to deliver any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine to any retail dealer in report and pay any tax levy hereunder to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this section. 
(g)	Violations and penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or who shall assist any retail dealer in alcoholic beverages in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this ordinance and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and any such person so convicted shall also be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 8-1, 6-12-17)
 
Sec. 10-192. Excise tax on sale of distilled spirits by the drink.
(a)	In addition to all other taxes or license fees imposed upon retail dealers engaged in the sale of distilled spirits by the drink there is imposed an excise tax upon the sale of said drinks in the amount of three percent of the total cost of such drink which is charged to the public. Such taxes shall be collected by the licensee under this article and any such licensees shall remit the same to the city clerk on or before the tenth day of the succeeding month along with the appropriate returns showing a summary of the licensee's gross sales derived from the sale of distilled spirits by the drink. Gross sales shall include all credit card sales and those sales shall be reported and taxes collected thereon shall be submitted to the city clerk to the same extent as required of cash sales. It shall be duty of each licensee required to make a report and pay any tax levy hereunder to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales taxable under this section, and such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax due. It shall be the duty of every licensee to keep and preserve such records for a period of three years and to provide such returns and reports as may be required by the city clerk. Licensees collecting the tax provided for in this section shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of deduction should be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under chapter 8 of title 48 as provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-133. The city clerk is hereby authorized to create such reports and returns as may be necessary to adequately provide for the collection of the excise tax provided in this section. 
(b)	In the event the city clerk deems it necessary to verify the excise tax submitted to the city pursuant to this section, for any month, he or she shall notify the licensee of such need for verification and the licensee shall submit a verified comprehensive report to the city clerk, prepared by an auditor, reflecting all sales under this section by the licensee and the taxes submitted to the city. The licensee shall have 30 days to submit such a report to the city clerk following such a request. 
(c)	Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and on conviction thereof in the municipal court shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, and licensees failing to remit excise taxes due and payable to the city as outlined in of this section shall be charged a ten-percent penalty and interest shall accrue at the rate of one percent per month (12 percent per annum) until all fees are collected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 498, § 8-2, 6-12-17)
 
Chapter 14 AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 14-1—14-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 14-31. Application.
The provisions of this article shall only apply to behavior in public. No restriction on behavior in one's home or other private place is in any way intended. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-12)
 
Sec. 14-32. Certain classifications of public nudity not affected.
The provisions of this article shall not prohibit public nudity in the course of a theatrical or dramatic performance, play, drama, ballet or motion picture at any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or mainstream performance house as those terms have been applied by decisions of the state and United States Supreme Courts. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-13)
 
Sec. 14-33. Nudity prohibited.
(a)	Except in the course of a theatrical or dramatic performance at any theater, concert hall, museum of fine arts, school, institution of higher learning or mainstream performance house, no person over the age of seven years shall, at any live public performance within the city display his uncovered genital or pubic area, uncovered cleft of the buttocks, or, in the case of a female, uncovered breasts below the top of the areola. The term "uncovered" shall mean not fully covered with an opaque covering. The term "uncovered cleft of buttocks" shall mean any portion of the cleft of the buttocks which is not covered by an opaque covering at least three inches in width at its narrowest point. 
(b)	Additionally, no male shall perform in public at any live performance within the city with his genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, whether or not opaquely covered. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-14)
 
Sec. 14-34. Live sex acts prohibited.
There is hereby prohibited in the city live entertainment in which any person performs acts of or acts which simulate any of the following: 
(1)	Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual act which is prohibited by law. 
(2)	The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-15)
 
Sec. 14-35. Establishments subject to regulations.
Any establishment which pays persons to dance or appear live in public in a state of partial nudity, which is defined as a state of undress such that in the case of a female, her entire breast is not opaquely covered, or in the case of male or female, the entire hips are not opaquely covered, for the purpose of entertaining its guests, shall be subject to the regulations set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-16)
 
Sec. 14-36. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensed premises means the four corners of and footprint for the building in which the activities licensed hereby shall be performed and shall not include the exterior of the building which shall be used only for the purposes of parking, ingress and egress and not for any of the other purposes related to the license. 
Licensee means the person authorized to provide, offer, perform or present partially nude dancing pursuant to a license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
Minor means, for the purpose of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 21 years, partially nude dancing means dancing live at a public establishment with less than the entire buttocks covered opaquely, or, in the case of females, less than the entire breast covered opaquely. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-17)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 14-37. Zoning and premises location.
(a)	Premises for which an application is made for the licensing of partially nude dancing at the time of the application and at the time the license is granted, if granted, shall be located only in an I (general industrial) district as the same is now or hereafter delineated and defined by the zoning ordinances of the city and shall not be located: 
(1)	Within 600 feet of any tract or parcel of land which is zoned for residential purposes; 
(2)	Within 1,000 feet of any tract or parcel of land upon which is located a church (defined as a place where at least ten persons gather at least weekly to worship, and have so gathered at least one month prior to the application for license under this article), school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or public playground; 
(3)	Within 100 feet of any tract or parcel of land upon which is located another establishment which is licensed, regulated or permitted for the operation of partially nude dancing pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(4)	On a tract of land which shall contain not less than one acre and which shall have not less than 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)	For the purpose of this section, the term "distance" shall mean direct airline measurement from property line to property line, using the closest property line of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any tract of land capable of being described by location and boundary and designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-20)
Cross reference(s)—Zoning, app. A. 
 
Secs. 14-38—14-60. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
 
Sec. 14-61. Required.
It shall be unlawful to provide, offer, perform, present or allow to be provided, offered, performed or presented in a live, public performance, a partially nude dance or dancer or to advertise or cause the same to be advertised in the city unless or until a valid license is issued pursuant to and in compliance with the provisions of this article after payment of the appropriate license fee and only while such license shall continue in force and shall not have been revoked, terminated or shall not have expired. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-18(a))
 
Sec. 14-62. Application.
Any person desiring to obtain a license for partially nude dancing shall make an application to the clerk or his designated representative for a license pursuant to the provisions of this division and prior to or at the time of submitting such application, shall pay a nonrefundable application fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation of the applicant and the report required by this article. The application shall be referred to the mayor and council for consideration in accordance with the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-18(b))
 
Sec. 14-63. Fee.
The license fee for the operation of partially nude dancing entertainment or for the presentation of partially nude dancing shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-18(c))
 
Sec. 14-64. Renewal.
Any license issued under this division must be renewed annually not later than February 1 of each year. Such license will be considered for renewal only if the current licensee is in full and complete compliance with all of the provisions of this article and all other appropriate ordinances of the city and state law. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-18(c))
 
Sec. 14-65. Nontransferability.
The license issued under this division shall not at any time be assigned under any circumstances. Any transfer shall require the issuance of a totally new license after such investigation at the time of such requested transfer or assignment as the city may deem necessary or appropriate. If the licensee is a corporation, any change in the ownership of stock in the corporation, or any change in the officers of the corporation or any change in the accrual of financial benefit to any other persons, firms, or corporations must receive the prior written consent of the city or its designated officer or agent. If the licensee is a partnership or other legal entity, no change in the ownership of any interest, however remote or however direct or indirect shall be effective unless or until such change in ownership has been approved by the city or its designated representative. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-18(d))
 
Sec. 14-66. Display of license.
The license issued pursuant to the provisions of this division together with all other licenses issued by the city shall be conspicuously displayed for inspection by patrons or appropriate governmental officials at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(10))
 
Sec. 14-67. Suspension, revocation.
If the licensee or if any dancers, waiters, waitresses, bartenders, busperson, or other employee of the licensee or if any stockholder, officer or agent of the licensee, if a corporation, or if any partner, co-owner, joint venturer, or otherwise related to the licensee shall violate any of the provisions of this article or shall be convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude, whether a felony or misdemeanor and other than traffic violations (unless such traffic violation is related to alcoholic beverages or controlled substance abuse) or shall otherwise fail to comply with the provisions hereof, the license granted pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked, terminated, suspended or otherwise limited by the mayor and council after a public hearing is held for that purpose in accordance with the appropriate requirements of the due process clause of the Constitution of the United States and the state constitution which provided that a conviction of any felony or crime involving moral turpitude of an employee of an establishment licensed under this article shall be grounds for revocation of the licensed establishments, in which case the conviction shall also be grounds for revocation of the license of the establishment. Upon any such violation by the licensee shall in the opinion of the mayor and council constitute such a violation and shall immediately place in jeopardy or pose an immediate threat to person or to property, sufficient to justify immediate action, the mayor and council may by informally providing limited due process temporarily suspend such license provided they shall within a period of 30 days thereafter, proceed to afford to the licensee a full due process hearing. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-21)
 
Secs. 14-68—14-90. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. OPERATIONAL REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 14-91. Compliance with law.
Any partially nude dance establishment licensed in the city must be operated pursuant to and in strict conformity with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations and in addition, in strict conformity with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19)
 
Sec. 14-92. Employment of minors.
The licensee under this article shall not employ, engage or contract with any person to perform or to render services in conjunction with the licensed premises who is under the age of 21 years either as a dancer, waiter, waitress, or busperson or in any other capacity. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(1))
 
Sec. 14-93. Employment restrictions for dancers.
(a)	Any person employed by a licensee under this article as a waiter, waitress, busperson or other employee of the licensed establishment shall not while so employed or for a period of one month after being employed or at least one month prior to such employment perform as a dancer in the licensed premises. 
(b)	A dancer shall not at any time be employed by the licensee as a waiter, waitress, or busperson or in any capacity for a period of 30 days after having performed as a dancer in the licensed premises or in any premises in the state in which partially nude dancing is offered or allowed. 
(c)	It is the intent of this provision that dancers shall perform no function other than that of dancing or providing the entertainment licensed hereby and shall not at any time provide services as waiters, waitresses, bartenders, buspersons or otherwise in or about the licensed premises. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(2))
 
Sec. 14-94. Permit required for dancers.
Any person who shall desire to appear as a partially nude dancer in the licensed premises or who shall appear as a partially nude dancer in any establishment licensed under this article, prior to performing must register with and obtain a permit from the police department of the city and at the time of application must be at least 21 years of age. The applicant for a permit shall file with the chief of police or his designee an application which shall state, truthfully and correctly, the age and current address of the applicant; all prior addresses of the applicant within the immediately preceding three-year period and the marital status of the applicant during such period; any convictions of applicant for violation of federal, state or local laws excluding traffic violations other than violations involving alcohol or controlled substances within the immediately preceding three years; and any other information reasonably requested by the police chief or his designee in conjunction with such application. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(3))
 
Sec. 14-95. Obligation of licensee.
The licensee shall have the continuing obligation and responsibility of ensuring that each dancer performing shall at all times have a valid permit as required by this division. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(4))
 
Sec. 14-96. Employment status of dancers; revocation of permit.
For the purpose of this article, dancers who shall appear in the licensed premises shall be considered as employees of the licensee regardless of the employment relationship the licensee may undertake to define or that licensee shall consider such dancers as independent contractors. The permit of any person as a partially nude dancer pursuant to the provisions of this article may be revoked upon a finding by the chief of police or his designee that material information furnished on the application of such applicant was false or untrue or that such person has been charged with or has violated laws or has been convicted of the violation of any law which, had such violation appeared on the original application, would have prevented the granting of the permit. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(5))
 
Sec. 14-97. Nondancing employees; permits.
Waitresses, waiters, buspersons, or other employees of the licensee shall be required to have such permits and be subject to such rules and regulations as may now exist or may hereafter be imposed by appropriate ordinances enacted by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(6))
 
Sec. 14-98. Employment records.
A licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of not less than three years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers in the licensed premises. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(7))
 
Sec. 14-99. Minors prohibited.
No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to or at any time be present in or upon the licensed premises. It shall be the continuing obligation of the licensee and the employees and agents of the licensee at all times to take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that all persons in or on the premises shall be at least 21 years of age and shall be capable of proving their age at any time by the presentation of their valid driver's license or other proof deemed appropriate by the chief of police of the city or his designee that such person is in fact 21 years of age or older. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(8))
Cross reference(s)—Curfew for minors, § 50-76 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-100. Closing hours.
The establishment licensed under this article shall be closed from 12:01 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday and shall be closed from 12:00 midnight Saturday night through 4:00 p.m. on Monday. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(9))
 
Sec. 14-101. Performance restricted to stage, location.
All partially nude dancing or performances licensed under this article and authorized in the licensed premises shall occur on a raised platform or stage intended for that purpose, such platform or stage to be at least two feet above the level of the floor, and no partially nude dancing or performance shall occur thereon in closer proximity than ten feet to any patron or any person whether an employee or otherwise of the licensee. Only one dancer shall dance or perform on such raised surface or stage at any given time. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(11))
 
Sec. 14-102. Personal contact between performers, customers.
No patron, participant or employee of the licensee or otherwise shall touch, fondle, caress or have any physical contact with a dancer at any time on the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(12))
 
Sec. 14-103. Gratuities for dancers prohibited.
No patron shall directly pay, give, or extend any payment or gratuity to any dancer; no dancer shall solicit from or request any such payment, gratuity or extension from a patron. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(13))
 
Sec. 14-104. Illumination of premises.
All areas of the licensed premises shall be fully lighted at all times that patrons are present, entertainment is being provided, dancers are present in the premises or the premises are open for business. Full lighting as used herein shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 candles per square foot within the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(14))
 
Sec. 14-105. Illumination of parking areas.
All parking areas around the licensed premises shall be fully lighted in all parts and at all times shall be fully visible from the public street. No parking shall be allowed in a part of the premises not visible from the public street, so that a police officer may monitor the parking lot without having to enter the premises. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(15))
 
Sec. 14-106. Loitering.
No loitering shall be allowed by anyone outside the premises. The public shall not be allowed in any place outside the building housing the licensed establishment not fully lighted and visible from the public street. The term "loitering" shall mean to linger outside the building housing the licensed establishment for a period longer than five minutes without leaving the premises or entering the building. 
(Code 1976, § 4½-19(16))
 
Secs. 14-107—14-200. Reserved.
 
Sec. 14-201. Definitions.
The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Amusement game room means any location where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit non-cash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. § 16-25-35 (d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 (2) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. 
Location means a business within the city that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-202. Issuance of license.
Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)	Name, address, and age of the applicant, and date of the application; 
(2)	Address or place where the bona fide coin operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that address or place; 
(3)	Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)	Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; and 
(5)	List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of this article. The city shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with section 74-36 et seq. of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-203. Distance.
Every amusement game room in the city shall comply with the proximity provision for business licensed to sell alcohol set out in section 10-58 of the Code of Ordinances. After a hearing, the mayor and council may waive the application of this provision to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-204. Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location.
No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than six bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering non-cash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 (d)(1)(B), (C), or both at the same location. After a hearing, the mayor and council may, after consideration of the nature and character of the business, waive the application of this provision to an individual location. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-205. Gross receipts from amusement machines and from business.
Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that set out separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. Income from the amusement game or games shall not constitute for than 50 percent of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of income requirement. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-206. Notice requirement.
Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following similar words: "Georgia law prohibits giving or receipt of any money for winning a game or games on an amusement machine; giving or receipt of money for free replays won on an amusement machine; giving or receipt of money for ay merchandise, prize, toy, gift certificate, or novelty won on an amusement machine; or awarding any merchandise, prize, toy, gift certificate, or novelty of a value exceeding $5.00 for a single play of an amusement machine." 
Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
The owner or operator of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35, and by this article, and of the penalties for violation O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-207. Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses and stickers for individual machines.
Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state commissioner of revenue of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2 or 48-17-9. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-208. Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms.
In addition to penalties set out in the O.C.G.A. provisions for failure to comply with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 (a.1) through (i), the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, and a hearing before the mayor and council, may be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)	First offense: Suspension for not more than six months of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred. 
(2)	Second offense: Suspension for not more than 12 months of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred. 
(3)	Third offense: Suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game in the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six months. 
Penalties for violation of the provisions of sections 14-203 through 14-207 of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction by the municipal court of the the city are as follows: 
(1)	First offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(2)	Second offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location for not more than three months, or both. 
(3)	Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for not more than six months, in any combination of these penalties. 
The fines listed in the penalties for violation of this article may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the the city. Suspension or revocation of the owner or operator's license for offering any amusement game at the location where the violation occurred, and suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city may be imposed by the mayor and council after a hearing. 
Offering one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for offering of any amusement game at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 30 days or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Sec. 14-209. Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated amusement machines.
The municipal court of the city is authorized impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning or possessing such bona fide coin operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning or possessing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine: 
(1)	First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)	Second and subsequent offenses: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 420, § II, 3-12-07)
 
Chapter 18 ANIMALS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 18-1. Horses, cattle, etc., running at large; staking, driving and leading requirements.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any horses, cattle, sheep, goats or other livestock to run at large on the streets of the city, or to be staked so that such animals can go upon the streets of the city, or to drive or lead any such animals or livestock along or on the sidewalks in the city, or to drive or lead any such animals or livestock along and over the streets of the city, unless fastened to a rope, chain or other substantial leading device. Any such rope, chain or other substantial leading device must be securely held by a responsible person during the entire time that such animals or livestock are being led or driven along and over the streets of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 5-1)
State law reference(s)—Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-2. Poisoning animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city which is for the primary purpose of killing or causing harm to any dog, cat or other domesticated animal. 
(Code 1976, § 5-6)
State law reference(s)—Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
 
Sec. 18-3. Manner of keeping animals.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any horse, cattle, sheep, goats or other livestock within the city. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any chickens or turkeys within the city. 
(c)	Should a complaint arise that anyone is maintaining any animal in violation of this section, the owner or keeper of the animal will be promptly summoned to the municipal court. If after hearing the judge or other hearing officer determines that such animal or animals are being held within the city, the owner or other person involved will be given a period of time not to exceed 15 days, to either dispose of the animal or chicken or turkey or to remove such animal or animals from the city. If after such period of time is expired the owner or keeper of the animal has failed to either dispose of the animal or to remove the same from the city, a new citation shall be issued and served upon the owner or keeper setting a time and place for hearing on the complaint before the municipal court judge. If the municipal court judge determines at the hearing that the owner or keeper has failed either to dispose of the animal or fowl or to remove such from the city, the judge shall order such animal or fowl impounded and disposed of. 
(d)	The violation of any order of the municipal court judge, or judge pro tem, under this section shall be considered a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1976, § 5-7)
 
Sec. 18-4. Vicious dogs, other animals.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain or harbor within the city a vicious dog or other vicious animal. It shall be prima facie evidence of viciousness if a dog or other animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites persons or animals not on the owner's premises. For the purposes of this chapter the term "vicious animal" means any animal, including dogs, which shall bite or in any other manner attack or attempt to attack any person within the city; except that any animal that bites, attacks or attempts to attack any person who is unlawfully upon its owner's or keeper's premises or which is provoked to attack shall not be deemed a vicious animal. After a judicial determination by the municipal court that an animal is vicious, the owner or keeper of such vicious animal shall immediately destroy such animal in a humane manner or shall immediately turn such animal over to the county animal control officer, or any official designated by the mayor and council for humane destruction. 
(Code 1976, § 5-8)
State law reference(s)—Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 
 
Sec. 18-5. Dead animals, disposal of carcass.
(a)	All carcasses shall be disposed of in a manner which complies with the rules and regulations of the county health department and the rules and regulations of all departments and agencies of the state whose primary purpose is to protect and promote the health of the citizens of this state. 
(b)	It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has an interest in any animal which has died to leave the body or carcass thereof anywhere inside the city without proper disposal thereof as provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 5-9)
Cross reference(s)—Solid waste, ch. 66. 
State law reference(s)—Dead Animal Disposal Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-5-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-6. Poultry running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to allow chickens or turkeys to run at large within the city. Any chicken or turkey found running at large in the city may be impounded and disposed of under the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 5-10)
 
Sec. 18-7. Keeping dangerous or wild animals prohibited.
(a)	The keeping, maintaining or housing of dangerous or wild animals within the city is hereby prohibited, and each day of the violation of this section shall be a separate offense. 
(b)	For purposes of this section, dangerous or wild animals shall be defined as: Pit Bull or Pit Bull Terrier or any mixed breed of dog which contains an element of a Pit Bull dog, venomous snakes or other reptiles, alligators, crocodiles, poisonous spiders, birds of prey, wild cats, apes larger than chimpanzees, wild boars, bears, wolves, foxes, and poisonous amphibians. 
(c)	Residents shall have seven calendar days to remove said animal from the City of Rossville after being notified of city code. 
(d)	An animal control officer or any law enforcement officer may immediately impound any vicious animal found to be kept, maintained, or housed in the City of Rossville and issue a citation to the property owner where the animal is found to be kept, maintained, or housed if said animal had attacked or bit another person or animal not on the owners property, or if they have not complied with this Code. 
(e)	The city court shall fine the offender not less than $50.00 for the first offense, not less than $200.00 for the second offense, and not less than $750.00 for the third offense or any offense thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 5-11; Ord. No. 428, 8-11-08)
State law reference(s)—Wild animals, O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 et seq.; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-7. 
 
Secs. 18-8—18-40. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. DOMESTICATED ANIMALS
 
Sec. 18-41. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means any domesticated dog, cat, raccoon, skunk, opossum or squirrel. 
County animal control officer and/or control officer means such person as designated by the county board of commissioners and/or the city as an official or officer whose primary responsibility is to enforce the animal control ordinances of the county, and/or of the city; to assist in enforcing the animal control ordinances of the various municipalities within the county and/or city; to maintain the animal pound of the county and/or city; and/or to catch, collect or otherwise pick up animals in the county and/or city which are in violation of the ordinances of the county and/or city and in the respective municipalities within the county which are in violation of the ordinances of the respective municipalities. 
Licensed veterinarian is a person with a Doctor of Veterinary Medicine Degree licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the State of Georgia or in the State of Tennessee. 
Nuisance means, but is not limited to, defecation, urination, disturbing the peace, destroying private property, emitting noxious or offensive odors, emitting noxious or offensive sounds and noises, or otherwise endangering or offending the well-being of the inhabitants of the city. 
Owner of an animal is a person who owns, harbors or keeps or knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about his premises for more than five days. 
Premises means a parcel of land and the structures thereon. 
Registered animal shall mean an animal licensed by the city as provided in this article. 
Vaccination is protection against rabies by inoculation with antirabies vaccine, given in an amount sufficient to provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year. 
Vicious animal means any animal which shall bite or in any other manner attack or attempt to attack any person within the city; except that any animal that bites, attacks or attempts to attack any person unlawfully upon its owner's or keeper's premises, or which is provoked to attack, shall not be deemed a vicious animal. 
(Code 1976, § 5-21)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 18-42. Identification tag required.
(a)	All animals over 90 days old within the city shall wear a collar or harness to which is attached a metal identification tag of the kind hereinafter prescribed. Identification tags will be provided by the city upon presentation of a certificate of inoculation or vaccination for rabies to an employee of the city designated by the city clerk at the city hall and upon a payment of a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. The application for the identification tag shall state the name and address of the owner and the name, breed, age, color and sex of such animal. The license so granted by the city shall expire on June 30 of each calendar year and shall be renewed on or before July 1 of each year. 
(b)	Animals belonging to nonresidents of the city who do not keep such animals within the city for 15 consecutive days shall be exempt from the provisions of this section; provided, however, all the other provisions of this chapter must be complied with. 
(c)	All moneys collected for the issuance of identification tags and licenses shall go into the city treasury to help defray the expense of animal and fowl control. 
(Code 1976, § 5-22)
State law reference(s)—Rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
 
Sec. 18-43. Inoculation.
All animals over 90 days old within the city shall be inoculated annually so as to provide immunity from rabies for a period of at least one year. All inoculations shall be administered by a licensed veterinarian or an authorized representative of the public health department. 
(Code 1976, § 5-23)
State law reference(s)—Inoculation of dogs and cats against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
 
Sec. 18-44. Tags.
(a)	Each city identification tag shall be so contrived as to permit it to be securely attached to the animal's collar or harness and shall have its respective number, the year in which issued and the words "City of Rossville" indented and impressed thereon. The design or color of such tags shall be varied from year to year so as to permit easy ascertainment as to whether or not the tag is current. 
(b)	A valid city identification tag shall be securely attached to the animal's collar or harness, which collar or harness must be secured to and on the animal at all times. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner to see that the same is so attached and secured at all times. 
(c)	A valid rabies vaccination tag shall be securely attached to the animal's collar or harness, which collar or harness must be secured to and on the animal at all times. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner to see that the same is so attached and secured at all times. 
(Code 1976, § 5-24)
State law reference(s)—Rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 
 
Sec. 18-45. Record of tags.
A complete record of animal tags issued by the city shall be kept by the city. Such record shall show when the tag was issued; the period of time for which the tag is valid; to whom the tag was issued and the address of such person; for what particular animal the tag was issued; and if the owner and keeper of the animal are different persons, then the name and address of each person shall be entered. 
(Code 1976, § 5-25)
 
Sec. 18-46. Misuse of tag.
It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a valid tag from any animal which has been tagged under the provisions of this article, or to place a tag upon any animal for which the same was not issued, or to procure a tag from the city or from any licensed veterinarian by misrepresentation, or to disfigure any tag, or to alter the figures or words upon any tag. This provision shall apply to both the tag issued by the city and the tag for rabies inoculation issued by a licensed veterinarian or an authorized representative of the public health department. 
(Code 1976, § 5-26)
 
Sec. 18-47. Restraint of animals.
The owner or keeper of each animal within the city shall be responsible for keeping it from becoming a nuisance or from endangering or injuring any other person or property, and to that end each animal must at all times: 
(1)	Be tied on the owner's or keeper's property so that it cannot reach the property of any adjoining owner or other public right-of-way; or 
(2)	When allowed off the property of the owner or keeper, be accompanied by the owner or other responsible keeper and be restrained on a leash, rope, chain or other substantial leading device held by the owner or keeper or be in a vehicle driven or parked from which it cannot escape. 
(Code 1976, § 5-27)
 
Secs. 18-48—18-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. IMPOUNDMENT
 
Sec. 18-81. Authorized.
Any animal found in this city in violation of any provision of this chapter may be impounded by duly authorized officers of the city. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-1, 5-28)
 
Sec. 18-82. Right of entry.
Employees and agents of the city charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall have the right to go upon private property within the city for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter when necessary. 
(Code 1976, § 5-34)
 
Sec. 18-83. Notice to owner.
Upon impoundment of any animals for the violation of any provision of this chapter, the chief of police shall determine the ownership of such animal by all reasonable means. The owner, if known, of any animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be given written notice of such impoundment. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-2, 5-28)
 
Sec. 18-84. Redemption authorized.
The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall redeem the same after receiving notice of such impoundment by claiming the same, providing acceptable proof of ownership, and payment of all fees and charges incurred pursuant to such impoundment. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-2, 5-3)
 
Sec. 18-85. Redemption period.
Animals not registered under this chapter impounded under the provisions of this article shall be held for a period of three days. Registered animals so impounded shall be held for a period of five days. After such retention period, the animal may be disposed of as provided in this article. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-2, 5-3, 5-29)
 
Sec. 18-86. Charges.
The charges for the impoundment, keeping, feeding, and selling of any animal impounded under the provisions of this article shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 5-4)
 
Sec. 18-87. Sale of nonredeemed animals.
(a)	Any animal which is not registered under this chapter impounded under the provisions of this article which is not redeemed by its owner may be sold by the city at public auction. Notice of such sale shall be posted at the city hall and at the place of impoundment of such animal. Such animal shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash. The proceeds of such sale shall be paid over to the city clerk, who shall pay out all expenses and shall hold any balance subject to the use and order of the mayor and council. 
(b)	Any registered animal impounded under the provisions of this article which is not redeemed by its owner may be disposed of by: 
(1)	Adoption, 
(2)	Sale, or 
(3)	Destruction in such a humane manner as deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1976, §§ 5-2, 5-29)
 
ARTICLE IV. HUMANE CARE OF ANIMALS
 
Sec. 18-88. Violations relating to caring for animals.
(a)	Failure to provide humane care. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to refuse or fail to provide such animal humane care. 
(b)	Animal suffering. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to permit the animal to live in conditions that cause suffering to the animal, or to directly cause any suffering of an animal. 
(c)	Abandonment. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to abandon such animal on any street, road, highway or public place, or on private property when not in the care of another person. 
(d)	Unattended animals. It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to leave such animal in any location unattended for longer than 24 hours. It shall be unlawful to keep or board animals on property that is not residentially occupied or is otherwise commercial property that is the location of an operating business, such that the property is visited daily during the week and at least once on the weekend. 
(e)	Accumulation of waste matter. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to permit the accumulation of waste matter from animals to collect and remain on the property of the owner or custodian, or on the property of others so as to cause or create an unhealthy, unsanitary, dangerous or offensive living condition on the owner's or custodian's property, or to abutting property of others. It shall be unlawful to allow animal waste matter to run off into any river, stream, lake, pond or other watercourse in the City of Rossville, or to run off onto any other person's property. 
(f)	Failure to provide adequate shelter. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to fail to provide adequate shelter from the elements for that animal, as appropriate to the species. Providing adequate shelter requires providing sufficient food and water, disposing of waste, providing sufficient temperature control (whether heat, ventilation, or cooling) to prevent suffering by the animal, and not maintaining conditions conducive to disease and infection. 
(g)	Unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to permit or cause unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions by virtue of the size or number of animals maintained at a single location or due to the inadequacy of the facilities. 
(h)	Rabies tag. Dogs and cats shall wear current, valid rabies tags attached to their collars at all times, except when removal is necessary for cleaning, grooming or other veterinary care. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of a dog or cat to allow the animal to be outdoors without wearing a collar with a current rabies tag showing that the animal has been inoculated for rabies within one year of any such time as the rabies tag may be checked. 
(i)	Proper disposal. It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of any animal to fail to properly dispose of that animal upon its death. Proper disposal means in a method provided by the Georgia Code at O.C.G.A. § 4-5-5, and includes burning, incineration, burial or rendering of the carcass within 24 hours after death or discovery. Dead animals that are buried must be buried at least three feet below the ground level, have not less than three feet of earth over the carcass, and must not contaminate ground water or surface water. 
(j)	Separate violation per animal. Each animal kept in violation of this section shall count as a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 2-8-21)
 
Sec. 18-89. Sick, injured or contagious animals.
(a)	Impoundment of sick or injured animals. In any situation deemed appropriate by the animal control officer involving a sick or injured animal whose owner cannot be located and the condition of such animal is such that death or great suffering to the animal is likely, the animal control officer may take custody of such animal and may secure veterinary services for such animal. The owner of such animal shall be responsible for reimbursement of all expenses related to treatment and boarding of the animal. 
(b)	Destruction of sick or injured animals. Any sick or injured animal, deemed by a licensed veterinarian to be suffering to such an extent that the humane destruction of the animal is appropriate and the owner of the animal cannot be located, shall be humanely destroyed by the veterinarian in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. 
(c)	Infected or contagious animals. Any animal impounded by the animal control officer that is, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian, infected with a disease likely to cause death or great suffering to the animal, or which is a contagious disease, or which will likely spread to other animals, shall be isolated and the owner of such animal shall be notified. If the owner cannot be located or the owner fails to take immediate steps to remove the animal from impoundment, the infected animal shall be humanely destroyed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 4-11-5.1. 
(d)	Reimbursement. The owner of the animal shall be responsible for reimbursement to the city for all expenses involving the boarding, treatment and destruction of any such animal. 
(e)	Notification of bites. It shall be the duty of any person bitten by a wild or domestic animal to immediately notify an animal control officer. It shall be the duty of the owner, custodian, or any person having possession and knowledge of any animal which has bitten any person or animal, or of any animal which exhibits any signs of rabies, to notify the animal control officer and to confine such animal in accordance with this article. 
(f)	Impoundment and quarantine. The animal control officer shall be authorized to impound and quarantine dogs that have been bitten by wild animals or bitten by dogs or cats that do not have current records of vaccination against rabies. Management of animals exposed to rabies shall be according to the procedures set forth in the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition, which is incorporated herein by reference as if set forth fully herein. The protocols for livestock, dogs, cats and ferrets possibly exposed to rabies, as well as the protocols for animal to animal exposure and human exposure shall be enforced as set forth in the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition. The animal control officer shall be authorized to take any and all steps set forth in said manual up to and including euthanizing and testing of animals. 
(g)	Animals impounded for rabies quarantine. Animals impounded for rabies quarantine shall be isolated pursuant to the procedures of the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition. If the animal shows signs of rabies or dies during confinement, it will be sent off for testing. If the animal survives and does not show signs of rabies, it will be returned to the owner upon payment of fees. 
(h)	Quarantine/isolation procedures. In certain circumstances, the animal control officer may allow the animal owner to quarantine the animal that has been bitten in lieu of the animal being euthanized and tested. The quarantine period varies depending on the circumstance, as set forth in the Georgia Rabies Control Manual, latest edition. In that case, the animal must be placed in a secure enclosure where no other animal or person can be exposed to the virus which can be transmitted into bite wounds, open cuts in skin, and onto mucous membranes. The animal must be kept in a secure enclosure approved by the animal control department and when deemed necessary may require two layers of fencing, separated by at least one foot. Food must be pushed in from a distance, and the animal cannot be approached by any person. Other protocols for quarantine shall be provided by the animal control officer. If the animal escapes from the enclosure, it will be impounded and euthanized for testing. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 2-8-21)
 
Sec. 18-90. Cruelty to animals.
(a)	Cruelty to animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously strike, beat, abuse, intentionally run down with a vehicle, or cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to an animal through any act, omission or willful neglect, except that reasonable force may be used to defend his or her own person or property, or the person or property of another, from injury or damage being caused by a dog; or kill any dog causing injury or damage to any livestock, poultry, or pet animal as authorized by Georgia law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5. "Willful neglect" means the intentional withholding of food and water required by an animal to prevent starvation or dehydration. 
(b)	Poisoning. No person, except a licensed veterinarian for humanitarian purposes, shall intentionally administer poison to any animal or knowingly leave any poisonous substance of any kind or ground glass in any place with the intent to injure any animal. This provision is not applicable to licensed exterminators using poisons as part of a pest control program or the use of commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control insects and wild rodents. 
(c)	Investigation. The animal control officer shall investigate complaints pertaining to cruelty to animals. The animal control officer may request the assistance of the sheriff's department or the appropriate law enforcement officers of a participating municipality. 
(d)	Necessary pain. In the case of activities where physical pain is necessarily caused, such as medical and scientific research, food processing, customary and normal veterinary and agricultural husbandry practices, pest elimination, and animal training and hunting, failure to employ the most humane method reasonably available shall constitute cruelty to animals and shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 2-8-21)
 
Sec. 18-91. Enforcement.
(a)	Authorization. Animal control officers and law enforcement officers of the city shall be enforcement officials for this article. These officials shall have the authority to investigating complaints, impound and destroying animals, issuing citations, and take other lawful action as required to enforce the provisions of this article. It shall be a violation of this article to interfere with any law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties. 
(b)	Citations upon affidavit. Upon the sworn affidavit of any citizen alleging a violation of this article, an animal control officer or law enforcement officer may issue a citation to the owner of the animal requiring the owner to appear before the municipal court of the city for an adjudication of the complaint on a date and time certain. 
(c)	Inspection warrants. Animal control officers may apply for search and seizure warrants, or inspection warrants when they reasonably believe a violation of this article is occurring. The officer shall apply to the municipal court only upon cause and with an affidavit particularly describing the place, dwelling, structure, premises, or vehicle to be inspected and the purpose for which the inspection is to be made. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either a statement that consent to inspect has been sought and refused or facts or circumstances reasonably justifying the failure to seek such consent. Cause shall be deemed to exist if there is reason to believe that a condition of nonconformity with the provisions of this article exists with respect to the particular place, dwelling, structure, premises or vehicle. 
(d)	Violations. It shall be a violation of this article to: 
(1)	Fail to comply with any provision of this article; 
(2)	Fail to comply with any lawful order of an animal control officer or law enforcement officer unless such order is lawfully stayed or reversed; or 
(3)	Fail to pay costs imposed by the animal control officer unless payment thereof is lawfully stayed. 
(e)	Multiple animals. When multiple animals are in violation of this article or are maintained in circumstances that violate this article, each animal shall constitute a separate violation, or in the alternative, a higher fine shall be imposed on the single violation. In addition, multiple violations on the same animal shall result in a higher fine. 
(f)	Penalties. Any person violating the terms of this article, or rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, may be punished by civil penalty or by criminal citation and fine, not to exceed $1,000.00. Separate offenses shall be deemed to be committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Each animal shall constitute a separate offense, and each violation of a specific provision of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 2-8-21)
 
Chapter 22 BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 22-1. Fire limits.
The city limits is declared to comprise the fire limits of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 6-1)
Cross reference(s)—Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 22-2. No structure moved on streets without prior approval.
No house, dwelling, edifice or other structure of whatever kind, character or description shall be moved through the streets of the city for any purpose whatsoever without the prior approval of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 6-5)
Cross reference(s)—Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 70. 
 
Secs. 22-3—22-35. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. CONSTRUCTION CODES
 
Sec. 22-36. Adopted.
(a)	That the latest edition of the following State Minimum Standard Codes, as adopted and amended by the State of Georgia, Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by the city: 
(1)	International Building Code (ICC); 
(2)	National Electrical Code (NFPA); 
(3)	International Fuel Gas Code (ICC); 
(4)	International Mechanical Code (ICC); 
(5)	International Plumbing Code (ICC); 
(6)	International Residential Conservation Code (ICC); 
(7)	International Energy Conservation Code (ICC); 
(8)	International Fire Code (ICC). 
(b)	Additionally, the latest editions of the following Codes, as adopted and amended by the State of Georgia, Department of Community Affairs, are hereby adopted by the city: 
(1)	Standard Excavation and Grading Code; 
(2)	Standard Swimming Pool Code (for commercial swimming pools only); 
(3)	Standard Amusement Device Code; 
(4)	International Property Maintenance Code (2012 edition); and 
(5)	International Existing Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 437, §§ I, II, 12-14-09; Ord. No. 502, § 1, 8-13-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 437, §§ I, II, adopted Dec. 14, 2009, repealed former § 22-36, and enacted a new § 22-36 as set out herein. Former § 22-36 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 22-36.1. Amendments.
Residential Code Section
R101.0 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Residential Code for One and Two-family Dwellings of the City of Rossville, Georgia and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as "this code." 
Fuel and Gas Code Section 101 (FGC)
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Mechanical Code Section 101 General
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Mechanical code of the City of Rossville, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Plumbing Code Section 101 General
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Plumbing Code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Building Code Administration Section 101 General
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be knows as the Building code of the City of Rossville, Georgia, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
International Property Maintenance Code
Section 101.1 Insert: City of Rossville 
Section 103.5 Insert: Fee Schedule; Initial Inspection: No Charge 
Re-Inspection: $40.00 
Failure to meet repair deadline: $141.00 per deadline failed 
Condemn/Demolish owner responsibility (if the City of Rossville has to demolish a structure a lien for all cost involved including, but not limited to, wages, abatement and/or testing, demolition and attorney fees) 
Section 302.4 Insert: Twelve (12) inches 
Section 304.14 Insert: March 1st to December 1st 
Section 602.3 Insert: September 1st to May 1st 
Section 602.4 Insert: September 1st to May 1st 
(Ord. No. 438, 2-8-10; Ord. No. 502, § 2, 8-13-18)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 438, adopted Feb. 8, 2010, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, said provisions have been included as § 22-36.1, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 22-37. Enforcement.
The administrative procedures attached to the ordinance from which this section was derived, and which attachment is on file in the office of the city clerk, shall govern the administration and enforcement of the minimum codes adopted by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 342B, 4-27-97)
 
Sec. 22-38. Permit and inspection fees.
Permit and inspection fees and any other charges imposed or due under the various construction codes adopted by this article shall be as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
 
Sec. 22-39. Public utilities.
(a)	No public utility may furnish temporary electrical, water or gas connection, for construction purposes, unless the contractor has been issued a construction permit by the chief building official. 
(b)	No public utility may furnish permanent electrical, water or gas connections until the contractor has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
(c)	No public utility may furnish power to a mobile home site until the owner has been issued either a building permit or a certificate of occupancy by the chief building official. 
 
Sec. 22-40. Water supply and sewage disposal facilities.
(a)	Building permits will not be issued until plans for water supply and sewage disposal have been approved by the county board of health. 
(b)	Certificates of occupancy will not be issued until the completed water supply and sewage disposal facilities have been approved by the board of health. 
State law reference(s)—Regulations for septic tanks in unincorporated areas; conformity prerequisite to building permit, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.1. 
 
Secs. 22-41—22-70. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES 
 
Sec. 22-71. Purpose of article.
It is the purpose of this article to require the use of ultra-low flow plumbing fixtures in all new construction or when replacing plumbing fixtures during renovation or remodeling of existing buildings; to require the certification of plumbing fixtures regarding flow rates and serviceability standards; to promote compliance with state laws for the purpose of conserving water; to maintain the integrity of drinking water supplies; and to reduce wastewater flows. 
 
Sec. 22-72. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial building means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building, and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
Plumbing fixtures means any toilet, urinal, showerhead, bathroom, lavatory and kitchen faucet and replacement aerators. 
Residential building means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Toilet means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl with a seat, used for the disposal of human waste. 
Urinal means any fixture consisting of a water-flushed bowl used for the disposal of human waste. 
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 22-73. Standards for fixtures.
No plumbing fixture shall be installed which does not meet the standards listed in this section or the state plumbing code, whichever is stricter. This includes all plumbing fixtures installed in newly constructed buildings or when replacing plumbing fixtures during remodeling or renovation of existing buildings, except as noted in section 22-75. The effective date of this requirement for residential buildings shall be April 1, 1992, and for commercial buildings the effective date shall be July 1, 1992. 
(1)	All plumbing fixtures installed as referred to in this section shall not exceed the following maximum water use rates: 
a. 	Toilets 	1.6 gallons per flush 
b. 	Urinals 	1.0 gallon per flush 
c. 	Showerheads 	2.5 gallons per minute, at 60 psi gauge pressure 
d. 	Kitchen faucets 	2.5 gallons per minute 
e. 	Bathroom and lavatory faucets 	2.0 gallons per minute 

(2)	The flow restriction device in a showerhead must be a permanent and integral part of the showerhead and must not be removable to allow flow rates in excess of that stated in subsection (1) of this section. 
(3)	Lavatory faucets located in restrooms intended for use by the general public shall be of the metering or self-closing type, in addition to the flow requirement listed in subsection (1) of this section. 
(4)	The flow rates for all showerheads, kitchen, bathroom and lavatory faucets shall be determined in accordance with ANSI/ASME A112.18.1M-1989 Plumbing Fixture Fittings, as amended; except that maximum flow rates may not exceed those given in subsection (1) of this section. 
(5)	All toilets and urinals shall be certified to meet the hydraulic performance standards for low consumption water closets specified in ANSI/ASME A112.19.2-1990 Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures, as amended, and ANSI/ASME A112.19.6-1990 Hydraulic Requirements for Water Closets and Urinals, as amended. 
 
Sec. 22-74. Product certification.
The manufacturer shall certify compliance with the standards in section 22-73 by labeling the fixture and packaging as described in this section and providing, upon request, appropriate certification by an independent national testing organization acceptable to the city building official. Effective April 1, 1992, all toilets, urinals, showerheads or faucets shall be clearly labeled to indicate the maximum flow rate or water usage of the fixture at the specified test pressure. Toilets and urinals shall additionally be labeled ASME A112.19.2M, as prescribed in section 8 of such standard. The label shall be affixed to the fixture and remain there until the proper building and/or plumbing inspections have been conducted. Also, the packaging must be clearly marked to identify water use rates when offered for retail. 
 
Sec. 22-75. Exceptions.
Permission for the exceptions listed in this section must be obtained from the building official. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building may be exempt from the standards of section 22-73 for the following: 
(1)	Showers and faucets installed for safety purposes, such as emergency eye wash stations, etc. 
(2)	Plumbing fixtures specifically designed for the physically handicapped. 
(3)	Fixtures specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or for installation in a correctional institution which may require more water for proper operation. 
(4)	Instances of building renovation where significant plumbing modifications would be required to accommodate the lower flows or for specialized purposes which cannot be accommodated by existing technology. 
 
Sec. 22-76. Enforcement; penalty for violation of article.
This article shall be enforced by the building official. Citations for violations may be issued by the building official or his authorized representative. Any person violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, such person, corporation, partnership or other entity found guilty of a violation of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
 
Secs. 22-77—22-100. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. BETTER HOUSING COMMISSION
 
Sec. 22-101. Created.
There is hereby created and established a better housing commission in and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Sec. 22-102. Composition.
The better housing commission shall consist of 15 residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Sec. 22-103. Appointment.
The members of the better housing commission shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the council. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Sec. 22-104. Terms.
The members of the better housing commission shall hold office for a term of three years, and until their successors are elected; provided, the members of the initial better housing commission shall be appointed for such terms and in such a manner as to provide for staggered terms with the term of five members expiring each year. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Sec. 22-105. Compensation.
The members of the better housing commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Sec. 22-106. Quorum.
Seven members of the better housing commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Sec. 22-107. Meetings.
The better housing commission shall meet at least once a month and at such other times as may be necessary. Special meetings may be called by the chairman or by five members upon giving notice to all members. The commission shall keep a record of its proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Sec. 22-108. Duties generally.
The better housing commission shall perform such duties as are imposed upon it as provided by this Code or the mayor and council in the regulating of the residential properties that appear to fall short of the proper care of house and land within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 367, § 1, 10-11-99)
 
Chapter 26 BUSINESSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 26-1. City allowed to revoke an occupation tax/business license if violations are found to exist.
(a)	Should a business applying for a business license within the city (including an owner, officer or manager of such business) be convicted of a violation of a municipal ordinance involving the conduct of the business, or of public health of safety, or a state or federal felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of a hearing before the mayor and council at which the mayor and council shall determine whether to grant an occupation tax certificate to operate such business. 
(b)	Should such a business (or owner, officer or manager of a business) be accused by indictment, presentment, accusation, warrant or citation of any offense listed in subsection (a) above, the city clerk shall notify the applicant of a hearing before the mayor and council at which the mayor and council shall determine whether to suspend the application pending disposition of such charges. 
(c)	The mayor and council may deny the application of any business where an owner, officer or manager of the business has been convicted, pleaded nolo contendere, or been sentenced under a first offender's statute to an offense listed in subsection (a) above. In deciding whether to deny the application, the mayor and council may consider whether the offense is de minimis or unintentional or unsupported by reasonable evidence. The burden of proof at such hearing shall be on the city. An adverse decision by the city council may be appealed to the Superior Court by petition for certiorari. 
(d)	The mayor and council may suspend the application of an business where the owner, manager or officer of the business has been accused by indictment, presentment, accusation, warrant or citation of any offense listed in subsection (a) above, only where the mayor and council finds by clear and convincing evidence that the offense was in fact committed, was intentional, and that, because of the offense, the conduct of business under the license is likely to cause irreparable harm to the safety or welfare of the citizens of Rossville, Georgia. The burden of proof at such hearing shall be on the city. An adverse decision by the city council may be appealed to the Superior Court by petition for certiorari. 
(e)	It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate any business within the the city without the issuance of an occupation tax certificate for such business. 
(Ord. No. 395, §§ 1—4, 10-13-03; Ord. No. 407, 6-13-05)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 395, §§ 1—4, adopted Oct. 13, 2003, enacted provisions which were not specifically amendatory of the Code, but which have been codified herein as § 26-1, for purposes of classification, at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference(s)—Taxation, ch. 74. 
 
Secs. 26-2—26-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. SALES
 
Sec. 26-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Inspector means an inspector employed by the city for the purposes of this article. 
License means a license issued pursuant to this article. 
Licensee means any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to this article. 
Publish, publishing, advertisement and advertising includes any and all means of every kind of conveying to the public, notice of sale or notice of intention to conduct a sale, whether by word of mouth, by newspaper advertising, by magazine advertisement, by handbill, by written notice, by printed notice, by printed display, by billboard display, by poster, by radio announcement and by any and all means including oral, written or printed. 
Sale means the sale of any or any offer to sell to the public, goods, wares or merchandise of any and all kinds and descriptions on hand and in stock in connection with a declared purpose, as set forth by advertising, on the part of the seller that such sale is anticipatory to the termination, closing, liquidation, revision, windup, discontinuance, conclusion, or abandonment of the business in connection with such sale. It shall also include any sale advertised to be a "fire sale," "adjustment sale," "creditor's sale," "liquidation sale," "reorganization sale," "insurance salvage sale," "insolvent sale," "adjuster's sale," "loss-of-lease sale," "wholesaler's close-out sale," "creditor's committee sale," "forced-out-of-business sale," "removal sale," and any and all sales advertised in such manner as to reasonably convey to the public that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand the business will cease and be discontinued. 
(Code 1976, § 13-51)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 26-32. License required.
No person shall publish or conduct any sale without a license therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 13-52)
 
Sec. 26-33. Application for license.
The clerk is hereby authorized and empowered to supervise and regulate sales or special sales and to issue appropriate licenses or license therefor. Such licenses or license shall be issued in the discretion of the clerk upon written application in a form approved by the clerk and verified by the person who, or by an officer of the corporation which, intends to conduct such sale. Such application shall contain a description of the place where such sale is to be held, the nature of the occupancy, whether by lease or sublease and the effective date of the termination of such occupancy, the means to be employed in publishing such sale. Such application shall further contain, as part thereof, an itemized list of the goods, wares and merchandise to be offered for sale, the place where such stock was purchased or acquired, and if not purchased, the manner of such acquisition. Such application shall contain any additional information as the clerk may require. 
(Code 1976, § 13-53)
 
Sec. 26-34. Application fee.
Upon filing an original application or a renewal application for a license to advertise and conduct a sale or special sale, the applicant shall pay to the clerk a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. If any application or renewal application is disapproved, such payment shall be forfeited to the clerk as and for the cost of investigating the statements contained in such application or renewal application. 
(Code 1976, § 13-56)
 
Sec. 26-35. Issuance of license.
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this article and payment of the fee, the clerk shall cause the same to be examined and investigated. If after such investigation the clerk is satisfied as to the truth of the statements contained in such application and as to the form and content of the advertising to be used in connection with such sale, he may then issue a license permitting the publication and conduct of such sale. 
(Code 1976, § 13-54)
 
Sec. 26-36. Duration of license.
A license issued under this article shall be valid for a period of not exceeding 30 days. 
(Code 1976, § 13-54)
 
Sec. 26-37. Renewal license.
Upon satisfactory proof by the licensee that the stock itemized in the original application has not been disposed of, the clerk may renew such license for an additional 30-day period upon payment of the prescribed renewal fee. Such proof for a renewal license shall be furnished in a form to be issued by the clerk. Such renewal application shall contain an itemized list of stock on hand and the same shall be verified by the applicant. The clerk shall cause the same to be examined and investigated, and if satisfied as to the truth of the statements therein contained, the clerk may issue a renewal license for a period not exceeding 30 days, provided, however, that not more than three such renewals shall be granted for any such sale for the same location within a period of one year from date of the issuance of the first license. 
(Code 1976, § 13-55)
 
Sec. 26-38. Contents of advertising.
(a)	All advertisements or advertising and the language contained therein shall be in accordance with the purpose of the sale as stated in the application pursuant to which a license was issued and the wording as indicated in the application. Such advertising shall contain a statement in these words and no others: 
Sale held pursuant to Permit No. _____ of the City of Rossville, Georgia, granted on the _____ day of ________, 19___. 
(b)	In such blank spaces shall be indicated the permit number and the requisite date. 
(Code 1976, § 13-57)
 
Sec. 26-39. Display of license; books and records.
Upon commencement of any sale the license issued by the clerk shall be prominently displayed near the entrance of the premises. A duplicate of the original application and stock list pursuant to which license was issued shall at all times be available to the clerk or to inspectors, and the licensee shall permit such inspectors to examine all merchandise in the premises for comparison with such stock list. Suitable books and records as prescribed by the clerk shall be kept by the licensee and shall be at all times available to the inspectors. At the close of the business day the stock list attached to the application shall be revised and those items disposed of during such day shall be marked thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 13-58)
 
Sec. 26-40. Rules and regulations.
The clerk is further empowered to make such rules and regulations for the conduct and advertisement of such sale as in his opinion will serve to prevent deception and to protect the public. 
(Code 1976, § 13-59)
 
Sec. 26-41. Suspension or revocation of license.
The clerk shall have power to suspend or revoke at any time any license granted in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13-60)
 
Sec. 26-42. Violations of sale regulations.
Any person who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1976, § 13-61)
 
Sec. 26-43. Exemptions from regulations.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons: 
(1)	Persons acting pursuant to an order of process of court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)	Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officers, such as sheriffs and marshals; 
(3)	Duly licensed auctioneers, selling at auction. 
(Code 1976, § 13-62)
 
Sec. 26-44. Violation constitutes nuisance.
To conduct any sale under this article without obtaining the license required by this article or to violate any other provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and, for the purpose of the enforcement of this article, the clerk is hereby authorized fully to exercise all powers of collection, as authorized to be extended and granted to county court clerks or municipal officers or collectors by and in as full a manner as provided by state law. In addition to the other requirements providing for the collection of the license fee herein imposed and for the enforcement of this article, the clerk is authorized to certify to the city attorney the failure of any person to obtain a license as herein required and to pay the fee therefor or the violation of any other provisions hereof. Thereupon, the city attorney shall forthwith file a suit in a court of proper jurisdiction to enjoin such person from continuing to conduct such sale, which injunction shall remain in force so long as such person is in default. Upon the payment of such a license fee as may be due, and upon compliance with the other provisions of this article, the city attorney shall be authorized to dismiss such suit upon the payment of costs by the defendant and all expenses incurred with the institution of such suit. 
(Code 1976, § 13-63)
 
Sec. 26-45. Goods purchased for sale hereunder.
In order to carry out the purposes of this article it shall be unlawful for the applicant to add, or permit to be added to, or included in the itemized list of goods, wares, or merchandise to be offered for sale as required by this article, goods ordered in contemplation of the conduction of a sale regulated under this article. Any unusual order, purchase or addition to the stock of goods of the business hereby affected within 30 days before the filing of such an itemized list of goods shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of an intent to violate this provision. 
(Code 1976, § 13-64)
 
Sec. 26-46. Method of listing items on inventory.
To further carry out the purpose of this article, the itemized list of goods, wares and merchandise to be sold, which is required to be filed along with the application for a license or a renewal thereof, as provided in this article, shall be sufficient if such goods, wares or merchandise are listed with their total retail value in dollars by departments or categories, or if listed separately with their individual retail value thereon. 
(Code 1976, § 13-65)
 
Secs. 26-47—26-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. MASSAGE PRACTITIONERS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 26-81. List of employees to be filed.
It shall be the duty of all licensees under this article to file with the city, through its business license office, the names of all employees, their home addresses, their home telephone numbers, and places of employment, within ten days of employment. Any changes in information furnished shall be filed within ten days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-273, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-82. Record of treatments.
It shall be the duty of any person granted a license under this article to maintain correct and accurate records at the place of business of the names and addresses of the persons receiving treatment at such establishment, the type of treatment administered, and the name of the person of the establishment administering such treatment. Records shall also be maintained as required under section 26-83. Such records shall be subject to inspection at any time by any member of the business license office. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-274, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-83. Hours and place of operation; recordkeeping.
(a)	No massage shall be performed by any massage practitioner or any of his employees, apprentices or trainees as a part of conduct of business, in the home of any client or in any place except for the place of business of a licensee under this article, unless a written memorandum is first made in a log or record book kept at the place of business for the purpose of recording consecutively the date, time of treatment, place of treatment, name and address of person to receive treatment, type of treatment to be received, name of person to render treatment, and time practitioner leaves to render treatment. The practitioner shall record the time each treatment was completed immediately upon return to the place of business. 
(b)	No business of a massage practitioner shall be engaged in and no place of business shall be open for business except within and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-275, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-84. Prohibited contact.
No massage practitioner, or any of his employees, apprentices or trainees, shall manipulate, fondle or handle the sexual organs or anus of any person. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-276, 4-14-97)
State law reference(s)—Erotic stimulation of genitals, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-16. 
 
Secs. 26-85—26-105. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. LICENSE
 
Sec. 26-106. Required.
No person shall engage in the business, trade, or profession or practice the business, trade or profession of a massage practitioner unless such person shall, before engaging in such business, trade or profession, obtain a license from the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-291, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-107. Application.
Application for a license required by the provisions of this division shall include the following: 
(1)	Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)	Name and address of any person having previously employed the applicant for a period of two years or longer in a massage or physical culture studio or business. 
(3)	Qualifications, plainly stated, with all documentary exhibits annexed. 
(4)	A copy of the diploma required under section 26-109(2) must be attached. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-291, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-108. Investigation of applicant and employees.
The police department shall investigate the background and make a character reference check of the applicant for a license under this division and each employee of the applicant prior to the issuance of any license. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-292, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-109. Qualifications of applicant.
An applicant for a license under this division, prior to making application for a license, must have the following qualifications: 
(1)	The applicant must be of good moral character. 
(2)	The applicant must be the holder of a diploma earned by applicant from a state certified school, representative of the fact that applicant attended a course of study of not less than 600 credit hours, consisting of a curriculum of physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy, electrotherapy, hygiene, health service management and other such subjects; a massage therapy school approved or accredited by the American Massage Therapy Association; or an accrediting agency designated by the United States Department of Education or its successor. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-293, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-110. Revocation or suspension—Authorized.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article governing massage practitioners subjects any license issued under this article to revocation or suspension as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-271(b), 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-111. Same—Grounds.
In addition to the causes for denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this division, due cause for denial, suspension or revocation of a license for a massage practitioner shall include the following: 
(1)	The applicant or licensee is or has been guilty of fraud in the practice of massage, or fraud or deceit on his being licensed to the practice of massage. 
(2)	The applicant or licensee is or has been engaged in the practice of massage under a false or assumed name, or is impersonating another practitioner of a like or different name. 
(3)	The applicant or licensee is addicted to the habitual use of intoxicating liquors, narcotics or stimulants to such an extent as to incapacitate such person to the extent that he is unable to perform his professional duties. 
(4)	The applicant or licensee has violated or is guilty of criminal attempt or conspiracy to violate any laws relating to racketeer-influenced and corrupt organizations as defined in the Georgia RICO (Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations) Act (O.C.G.A. § 16-14-1 et seq.), crimes against the person as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-5-1 et seq., sexual offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-6-1 et seq., gambling offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq., obscenity and related offenses as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80 et seq., or contributing to the delinquency of a minor, all as defined by state law as it presently exists or may be hereafter amended, or has been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude under the laws of this state or any other state or of the federal government. 
(5)	Failure of the applicant or licensee to have or maintain initial qualifications for obtaining the license. 
(6)	The applicant or licensee is guilty of employing any person who is not a licensed massage practitioner and allowing or permitting such person to administer massage in the establishment except as may be allowed under this article. 
(7)	The premises in which the business is located are in violation of any of the federal, state, county or municipal laws designed for the health, protection and safety of the occupants. 
(8)	Failure of the applicant or licensee to actively supervise and monitor the conduct of the employees, customers and others on the premises in order to protect the health, safety and well-being of the general public and the customers. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-294, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-112. Same—Reapplication.
Any applicant or licensee under this division who has his license application denied or his license revoked shall be disqualified from reapplying for such a license for 12 months immediately following the revocation or denial. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-295, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-113. Change of location of business.
No licensee under this division shall change the location of the business without applying for and receiving a new license for such location from the business license office. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-296, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-114. Transfer.
No license issued under this division shall be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-297, 4-14-97)
 
Secs. 26-115—26-135. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 26-136. Inspections.
The city, through its employees of the city business license office, or the county police department, shall have the right to inspect the place of business and records of any licensee under this article during the hours authorized under this article for the conduct of business to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-272, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-137. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article governing massage practitioners shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-271(a), 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-138. Abatement of violations as nuisance.
Every violation of the terms of this article governing massage practitioners shall be termed a nuisance and a continuing nuisance so long as such violation may be continued. Such violation may be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided by laws of this state. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-271(c), 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-139. Injunction.
The violation of any provision of this article as it pertains to massage practitioners may be enjoined by proceedings in courts of competent jurisdiction in this state. Such actions may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-271(d), 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 26-140. Remedies cumulative.
Each of the remedies set out in this division is cumulative and is not to be construed as curtailing the right of any resident, property owner or other person from bringing any proper action for enforcement of this article as it pertains to massage practitioners. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 78-271(e), 4-14-97)
 
Chapter 30 CIVIL EMERGENCIES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 30-31. Definition.
As used in this article, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for the carrying out of all emergency functions, other than functions for which military forces are primarily responsible; to prevent, minimize and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies, energy emergencies, disasters or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin caused by enemy attack, sabotage, civil disturbance, fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination requiring emergency action to avert danger or damage, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot or other hostile action, or other causes. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue; engineering; warning services; communications; defense from radiological, chemical and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian protection, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to the preparation for and carrying out of the foregoing functions. 
(Code 1976, § 7-1)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 30-32. Unlawful acts during emergencies.
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any of the following acts during an emergency: 
(1)	Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed by virtue of this article. 
(2)	Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy, imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of this city, or prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)	Wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the emergency management agency. 
(Code 1976, § 7-8)
 
Secs. 30-33—30-55. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. EMERGENCY AUTHORITY OF MAYOR 
 
Sec. 30-56. Conditions authorizing declaration of emergency.
The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)	There is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
(2)	Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. 
(3)	Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. 
(4)	There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 2-12)
 
Sec. 30-57. Powers after declaration.
After declaration of an emergency under section 30-56, the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
(1)	Use employees of the city to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of its citizenry. 
(2)	Close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists. 
(3)	Impose emergency curfew regulations. 
(4)	Close business establishments within the affected area. 
(5)	Close any or all city-owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public. 
(6)	Do all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
 
Sec. 30-58. Effective period of emergency powers.
(a)	No emergency power as set forth in section 30-57 may be effective for more than 72 hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist, the emergency powers as set forth in such section may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than 72 hours in one declared emergency period. 
(b)	No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular, special or called meeting of the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1976, § 2-12)
 
Sec. 30-59. Specified area.
The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
 
Secs. 30-60—30-80. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
 
Sec. 30-81. Creation; membership.
An emergency management agency is hereby created and shall include the following members: 
(1)	Mayor and director of emergency management as appointed. 
(2)	Police chief. 
(3)	Fire chief. 
(4)	City or county health officer. 
(5)	City engineer. 
(6)	American Red Cross representative. 
(7)	Others, including representatives of business, labor and patriotic organizations as appointed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1976, § 7-2)
 
Sec. 30-82. Powers and duties.
It shall be the duty of the emergency management agency to: 
(1)	Develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. 
(2)	Prepare and recommend for consideration by the mayor and council ordinances necessary to implement the emergency management plan. 
(3)	Consider and recommend to the mayor and city council for approval, mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(Code 1976, § 7-3)
 
Sec. 30-83. Director.
There is hereby created the office of emergency management director. Such officer shall be appointed by the mayor or city manager with the following powers and duties: 
(1)	Represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management. 
(2)	Require and direct cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans. 
(3)	During periods of emergency, direct the services of any city officers or employees. 
(4)	During periods of emergency, obtain vital supplies and equipment lacking, needed for the protection of life and property of people and bind the city for the value thereof and, if required, to immediately requisition same. 
(Code 1976, § 7-4)
 
Sec. 30-84. Corps—Composition.
Officers and employees of the city, with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law to be charged with duties necessary for the protection of life and property in the city during such an emergency shall constitute the emergency management corps. 
(Code 1976, § 7-5)
 
Sec. 30-85. Same—Divisions.
The functions and duties of the emergency management corps shall be distributed in the divisions as listed below. Each division shall be under the direction of a chief and deputy chief appointed by the emergency management agency. The chiefs of divisions will include public officials such as sheriffs, chiefs of police and fire departments, heads of agencies dealing with transportation, communications, and other sundry services, as well as private businessmen who through their profession, knowledge and experience are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized knowledge and experience. The divisions are established as follows: 
(1)	Law enforcement division. 
(2)	Fire services division. 
(3)	Transportation division. 
(4)	Medical and health division. 
(5)	Communications division. 
(6)	Welfare division. 
(7)	Information and education division. 
(Code 1976, § 7-6)
 
Sec. 30-86. Volunteers.
All persons other than officers and employees of the city volunteering in service pursuant to the defense under this article shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
(Code 1976, § 7-7)
 
Chapter 34 ENVIRONMENT 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. NOISE CONTROL 
 
Sec. 34-31. General prohibition.
The creation of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in the city is prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to cause, make or contribute to creating any loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise, and noises of such character, intensity and duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual, or such noises as unduly disturb the quiet and peace of the citizens of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 15-19)
 
Sec. 34-32. Illustrative enumeration.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumerations shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)	Advertising. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks, airplanes or other vehicles for advertising or other purposes except where specific license is received from the proper city officials. 
(2)	Attracting attention. The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale or display or advertisement of merchandise. 
(3)	Blowing horns, etc. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only as a danger signal; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(4)	Building operations. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the proper city officials, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or less while the emergency continues. 
(5)	Business noises in residential sections. The operation of any garage, filling station, auto repair business, taxi business, plant, store, factory or other place of business, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such manner as to create loud and disturbing noises of such frequency or volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, peace or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel, boardinghouse or other type of residence. 
(6)	Compressed air device. The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced. 
(7)	Exhaust discharge. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)	Keeping of animals. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(9)	Loading or unloading operations. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle, or repairing any vehicle, or opening and destroying bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)	Noises near schools, churches, etc. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, library or sanitarium, or court while the same are in session, or adjacent to any hospital or any church during services, which unreasonably interferes with the work or worship at such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital, church, library, sanitarium or court street. 
(11)	Peddlers, hawkers, etc. The shouting, loud-talking, crying and soliciting of peddlers, hawkers, taxi drivers, solicitors and vendors, which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood. 
(12)	Playing of radio, phonograph, etc. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence. 
(13)	Sounding of bell or gong. The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof. 
(14)	Sounding of steam whistles. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or Stop-work, or as a warning of danger. 
(15)	Use of vehicles. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner, or to repair any such vehicle in such manner, as to create loud or unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, riveting or other loud or disturbing noises. 
(Code 1976, § 15-20)
 
Sec. 34-33. Exceptions.
Upon application, duly filed with the council, in its discretion, permits may be granted allowing speaking, singing, or blowing of instruments for such period of time and in such volume as it deems proper. 
(Code 1976, § 15-21)
 
Secs. 34-34—34-65. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. NUISANCES 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 34-66. Scope.
In addition to any other definition of "nuisance" heretofore declared by the statutory or common law of the state, or the ordinances of the city, all continuous or repetitive violations of this Code of Ordinances which cause hurt, inconvenience or danger within the corporate limits of the city, to the public at large, or a portion thereof, are hereby declared to be nuisances. 
(Code 1976, § 14.5-1)
 
Sec. 34-67. Petition to abate.
An action to abate a public nuisance within the city may be commenced by the filing of a petition in the name of the city, containing a list of specific facts alleged to constitute a nuisance. The petition shall be filed with the municipal court of the city. The judge of the municipal court shall then issue a summons, requiring all defendants named in the petition to file and serve on the petitioner an answer to the petition within 30 days of service upon the defendant. The municipal court shall also issue a notice to the defendants of a hearing on the petition, which shall be set no earlier than 30 days after service of the petition. 
(Code 1976, § 14.5-2)
 
Sec. 34-68. Manner of service of summons and petition.
A copy of the petition required by section 34-67 and of the summons and notice of trial shall be served on all defendants named in the petition. If the petition involves real property, a copy of the petition, summons and notice of hearing shall be served on all persons having an interest in such property, as shown by the public records. Service may be made within the city by any city police officer. Service may be made without the corporate limits of the city through the use of any means or method authorized for the service of complaints filed in the superior courts of the state. Where the petition alleges a nuisance maintained upon real property located within the city, notice of the filing of the petition shall be tacked in a prominent location upon such real property. 
(Code 1976, § 14.5-3)
 
Sec. 34-69. Power of judge to abate.
Upon the hearing of any petition filed under the provisions of this article, should the judge of the municipal court, upon proof submitted, determine that the nuisance in fact exists, as alleged in the petition, the judge shall have full power to abate such nuisance. In ordering the repair or demolition of buildings or structures, the judge of the municipal court shall follow the criteria listed for the determination of dangerous or unsafe buildings in the city; and the judge shall include in his order written findings of fact. In case of buildings or structures ordered to be repaired or demolished, or of property ordered to be cleaned, improved or obstructions or debris removed, a copy of the order shall be served on the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee, agent and all other persons having an interest in such property, any of whom may, at his own risk, take action to comply with such order to prevent the acquiring of a lien against the property by the city. If the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee or agent fails to comply with the order within ten days, the judge of the municipal court shall order the employees and agents of the city to take action to bring the property into compliance with such order. The expense incurred, including reasonable labor costs, in bringing about such compliance shall be charged against the subject land or other property as a municipal lien, which shall be superior to all liens except liens for the state, county and municipal taxes and municipal special assessments. Such costs shall also be the personal liability of the owner of such property. 
(Code 1976, § 14.5-4)
 
Sec. 34-70. Effect on other legislation.
The measures and procedures in this article provided do not supersede or repeal any other measures or procedures which are provided by this Code for the elimination, repair or correction of the conditions referred to in this article; but the measures and procedures herein provided shall be in addition to all other powers and authority of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 14.5-5)
 
Secs. 34-71—34-89. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. VEGETATION, REFUSE CONTROL
 
Sec. 34-90. Litter control.
(a)	General provisions.
(1)	Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare through the regulation and prevention of litter. The objectives of this section are: 
a.	Provide for uniform prohibition throughout the City of Rossville (referred to as the "city," henceforth) of any and all littering on public or private property; and 
b.	Prevent the desecration of the beauty and quality of life of the city and prevent harm to the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare, including the degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(2)	Applicability. This section shall apply to all public and private property within the city. 
(3)	Compatibility with other regulations. This section is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this section should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(4)	Severability. If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this section. 
(b)	Definitions.
Litter means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal, plastic, and glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or intentionally or unintentionally discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A., § 16-7-51, paragraph 6. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; timberlands or forests; and residential, commercial, industrial, or farm properties. 
(c)	Prohibition against littering public or private property or waters. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)	The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)	The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)	The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(d)	Vehicle loads causing litter. No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(e)	Disposal of construction waste. All waste generated by a site dedicated to construction and/or demolition, as classified by the appropriate permit issued by the city, shall be disposed by the permittee in the proper landfill, in accordance with Part 122 of the Federal Regulations pertaining to waste disposal. 
(f)	Violations, enforcement and penalties.
(1)	Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this section. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this section, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(2)	Evidence.
a.	Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
b.	Except as provided in subsection a., whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any article or articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. 
(3)	Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
a.	By a fine of not less than $200.00 and not more than $1,200.00; and 
b.	In addition to the fine set out in subsection a., above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
c.	In the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to: 
1.	Pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of way for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; or 
2.	Pick up and remove any and all litter from any public property, private right-of-way, or with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter. Pick up and removal shall include any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; and 
d.	The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(4)	Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 514, 8-14-20)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 514, adopted August 14, 2020, is being treated as superseding § 34-90, egregious litter, which derived from Ord. No. 474, adopted August 12, 2013. 
 
Sec. 34-91. Accumulation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have, allow or permit the accumulation of trash, filth, weed, undergrowth or other noxious matter which may cause disease or menace the public health or create a fire hazard to be or remain upon or within his premises within the city whether such premises are occupied or unoccupied, or such person has charge of the same as owner, tenant or agent; or to allow any growth of weed, grass, undergrowth or noxious plants which conceal or are capable of concealing or will harbor or capable of harboring cans, vessels, receptacles, urns, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets and the like which hold or are capable of holding water in which mosquitoes, rats, mice, or other rodents may breed. 
(Code 1976, § 11-1; Ord. No. 470, § I, 7-10-17)
 
Sec. 34-92. Declaration of nuisance.
It shall be unlawful to maintain any vacant lot or other premises within the city on which rubbish is allowed to accumulate, weeds, or long grass is allowed to grow, or any water is allowed to collect and be stagnant in which mosquitoes breed, or are likely to breed, and nay such premises or vacant lot on which such rubbish, weeds long grass stagnant water is allowed to remain is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the health of the people of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 11-2; Ord. No. 470, § II, 7-10-17)
 
Sec. 34-93. Punishment for violation.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this division shall be liable to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a penalty. Each and every violation is considered a separate citable offense, each and every day until violation is remedied. 
(1)	First violation in a 12-month period is subject to a penalty of $150.00. 
(2)	Second violation in a 12-month period is subject to a penalty of $300.00. 
(3)	Third violation in a 12-month period is subject to a penalty of $600.00. 
(4)	Fourth violation in a 12-month period is subject to a penalty of $1,000.00. 
(5)	All violations after the fourth violation in a 12-month period is subject to a penalty of $1,000.00. 
A person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of the ordinance shall, upon conviction, be fined as stated above per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days per violation, or both. 
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this division, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Code 1976, § 11-3; Ord. No. 470, § III, 7-10-17)
 
Sec. 34-94. Abatement by the city.
If the owner of such lots, parcels or tracts of land coming under the provisions of this division shall fail to remove therefrom all grass, weeds, trash, and rubbish and refuse to fill in all excavations and depressions thereon, or cut and remove prohibited vegetation, the city may clean the lot, tract or parcel of land, and cut and remove vegetation, and place the same in a safe and presentable condition. The costs of such action on the part of the city shall be a lien and a charge against such property, and execution may issue against such property to cover the cost to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 11-4)
 
DIVISION 3. SANITARY SEWER
 
Sec. 34-95. Prohibited actions.
(a)	No stormwater, groundwater, rain water, street drainage, rooftop drainage, basement drainage, foundation drainage, pond water, spring water, yard drainage, cooling water, process water drainage, swimming pool drainage, or other unpolluted water shall be discharged to the city's sanitary sewer system. All users shall be required to maintain their private sewer lines so as to prevent infiltration of ground water or storm water as a condition of use of the system and shall immediately repair or replace any leaking or damaged lines. 
(b)	No person shall make or cause to be made a physical connection between a sanitary sewer, or an appurtenance thereof, and a water source that is not authorized under the SBCCI Standard Plumbing Code as amended by the State of Georgia. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited any waste of any character whatsoever which may obstruct or damage storm or sanitary sewer lines or which may inhibit, disrupt, or damage either system. It shall be unlawful to block or obstruct any catch basin, sewer line, or other appurtenances, or to break, injure, or remove any portion of a sewer, drain or catch basin including manhole covers or catch basin grates. 
(d)	Each day that there is noncompliance with this section shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 447, § I, 12-13-10)
 
Sec. 34-96. Inspection; search warrant; rebuttable presumption.
The city public code enforcement director and such city employees as he may direct shall have access to buildings, structures, and/or properties, or any part thereof where roof drains or other drains connected into the city sewers are laid, to verify compliance with the provisions of section 34-95 of this division and to examine the construction, condition and method of use of the same, upon cause or reasonable suspicion that there may be inadequate facilities, the facilities existing may not be properly functioning, there is an improper discharge, or upon periodic systematic inspection of a particular drainage basin or other large segment of the system through those facilities at any time of the day between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. or any other time in the event of an emergency. 
If the code enforcement director and/or such city employees as he may direct are refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof in furtherance of their duty to inspect, and the code enforcement director is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect to verify compliance with this division, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the code enforcement director may seek issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate court. 
(Ord. No. 447, § I, 12-13-10)
 
Sec. 34-97. Citation authorized.
The city code enforcement director, the director of public safety, or their designees, are hereby authorized to issue a citation returnable the city municipal court to any person found to be in violation of this division. 
(Ord. No. 447, § I, 12-13-10)
 
Sec. 34-98. Injunction; other relief.
Whenever a person has violated or continues to violate a provision of this division, the code enforcement director may petition the Superior Court of Walker County for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of a requirement imposed by this division. The code enforcement director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a person. 
(Ord. No. 447, § I, 12-13-10)
 
Sec. 34-99. Sanctions.
A person who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days per violation, or both. 
(Ord. No. 447, § I, 12-13-10)
 
Sec. 34-100. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Person means any individual, partnership, limited liability company, firm, company, corporation, association, trust estate, or any other legal entity. Each equity owner of an entity that is in violation of this division shall be deemed a person and co-violator with such entity. Governmental entities are excluded from the definition of person. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries sewage and to which storm water, surface water, pond water, spring water, groundwater and/or subsurface drainage, cooling water, or industrial process waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Sewage means the waste matter, liquid and solid from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
(Ord. No. 447, § I, 12-13-10)
 
Secs. 34-101—34-125. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL 
 
Sec. 34-126. Title.
This article will be known as the "City of Rossville Soil Erosion, Sedimentation, and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 495, § I, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-127. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
Board: The board of natural resources. 
Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission, 
Coastal marshlands: Shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 12-5-282. 
Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert. Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc. Design professionals shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
District: The Coosa River Region One Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division: The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 

Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in section 34-128(c) of this article. 
Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas) or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 34-128(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation of filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 

Operator: The party or parties that have: (a) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (b) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Outfall: The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provision of this article. 
Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Phase or phased: Subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications in the "Manual for Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodable material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Coosa River Region One Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices: Practices for the stabilization or erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control Chapter 391-3-6 at www.edu.georgia.gov. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(a)	Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(b)	Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(c)	Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 495, § II, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-128. Exemptions.
This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)	Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)	Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)	Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)	The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provision of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)	Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm, ponds; 
(6)	Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 34-129(c)(15), (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)	Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)	Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9), or (10) of this section; 
(9)	Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and toll way authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)	Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)	Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. 495, § III, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-129. Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices.
(a)	General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 34-129(b) and (c) of this article. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this ordinance and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)	Minimum requirements/BMPs.
(1)	Best management practices as set forth in (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)	A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)	Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)	The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(5)	The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsection (c)(15), (16), and (17) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)	The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conversation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)	Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)	Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)	Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)	Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)	The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)	Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)	Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)	Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)	To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)	Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)	Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)	Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)	Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)	Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)	Except as provided in paragraphs (16) and (17) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specification, and are implemented; or where bulkheads and sea walls are installed to prevent shoreline erosion on Lake Oconee and Lake Sinclair; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer; 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habit and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)	Steam crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)	Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)	There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
(i)	Stream crossings for water lines; or 
(ii)	Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)	There is established a 25-foot buffer along coastal marshlands, as measured horizontally from the coastal marshland-upland interface, as determined in accordance with Chapter 5 of Title 12 of this title, the "Coastal Marshlands Protection Act of 1970," and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where an alteration within the buffer area has been authorized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-286, for maintenance of any currently serviceable structure, landscaping, or hardscaping, including bridges, roads, parking lots, golf courses, golf cart paths, retaining walls, bulkheads, and patios; provided, however, that is such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, where a drainage structure or roadway drainage structure is constructed or maintained; provided, however that if such maintenance requires any land-disturbing activity, adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented, on the landward side of any currently serviceable shoreline stabilizations structure, or for the maintenance of any manmade stormwater detention basin, golf course pond, or impoundment that is located entirely within the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented. For the purposes of this paragraph maintenance shall be defined as actions necessary or appropriate for retaining or restoring a currently serviceable improvement to the specified operable condition to achieve its maximum useful life. Maintenance includes emergency reconstruction of recently damaged parts of a currently serviceable structure so long as it occurs within a reasonable period of time after damage occurs. Maintenance does not include any modification that changes the character, scope or size of the original design and serviceable shall be defined as usable in its current state or with minor maintenance but not so degraded as to essentially require reconstruction. 
a.	No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; provided however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; 
b.	The buffer shall not apply to crossings for utility lines that cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer, provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented; 
c.	The buffer shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity conducted pursuant to and in compliance with a valid and effective land-disturbing permit issued subsequent to April 22, 2014, and prior to December 31, 2015; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and such measures are fully implemented or any lot for which the preliminary plat has been approved prior to December 31, 2015, if roadways, bridges, or water and sewer lines have been extended to such lot prior to the effective date of this Act and if the requirement to maintain a 25-foot buffer would consume at least 18 percent of the high ground of the platted lot otherwise available for development; provided, however, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specification and such measures are fully implemented; and 
d.	Activities where the area within the buffer is not more than 500 square feet or that have a "minor buffer impact" as defined in 391-3-7-.01(r), provided that the total area of buffer impacts is less than 5,000 square feet are deemed to have an approved buffer variance by rule. Bank stabilization structures are not eligible for coverage under the variance by rule and notification shall be made to the division at least 14 days prior to the commencement of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)	Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b), and (c) of this section. 
(e)	The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 495, § IV, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-130. Application/permit process.
(a)	General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)	Application requirements.
(1)	No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Rossville without first obtaining a permit from Walker County to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)	The application for a permit shall be submitted to Walker County and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 34-129(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)	In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)	Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 34-129(c)(15), (16) and (17) have been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)	If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)	The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)	Plan requirements.
(1)	Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 34-129(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this ordinance. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)	Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)	Permits.
(1)	Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)	No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 34-129(c)(15), (16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)	Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)	If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)	The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)	The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. 495, § V, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-131. Inspection and enforcement.
(a)	The city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)	The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)	The city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)	No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)	The districts of the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), the districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)	The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 495, § VI, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-132. Penalties and incentives.
(a)	Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)	Stop-work orders.
(1)	For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)	For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; 
(3)	All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; and 
(4)	When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)	Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 34-130(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)	Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violation of this article under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 495, § VII, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-133. Education and certification.
(a)	Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)	For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbing site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)	Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)	If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittees shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. No. 495, § VIII, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-134. Administrative appeal judicial review.
(a)	Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the Walker County Zoning and Planning or Commissioner within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)	Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Walker County. 
(Ord. No. 495, § IX, 3-13-17)
 
Sec. 34-135. Effectivity, validity and liability.
(a)	Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 13th day of March, 2017. 
(b)	Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)	Liability.
(1)	Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)	The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)	No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. 495, § X, 3-13-17)
 
Secs. 34-136—34-150. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
 
DIVISION 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 34-151. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public, and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
(1)	Encourage decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that reflect the integrity of the watershed and preserving the health of water resources; 
(2)	Require that new development and redevelopment, in their post-development state, maintain the pre-development hydrologic response, as nearly as practicable, in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, nonpoint source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats; 
(3)	Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality; 
(4)	Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards; 
(5)	Encourage the use of nonstructural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of greenspace and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable; 
(6)	Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed and pose no threat to public safety; 
(7)	Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, and for the inspection of approved projects. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 1, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-151. Applicability.
This article shall be applicable to all land development, including, but not limited to site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless eligible for an exemption from this article. The article also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(1)	To prevent the adverse impacts of post-development stormwater runoff, city has developed a set of minimum post-development stormwater management standards that must be met. These standards apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.	New development that involves land development activity of 5,000 square feet of land or greater; 
b.	Redevelopment that includes the creation or addition of 5,000 square feet or greater of new impervious surface area, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; or 
c.	Any commercial or industrial new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by city. 
(2)	The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.	Developments that do not involve land development activity of more than 5,000 square feet of land, provided they are not part of a larger common development plan; 
b.	Individual single-family residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
c.	Additions or modifications to existing single-family structures; 
d.	Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities; or 
e.	Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by city. 
(Ord. No. 413, § II, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-153. Compatibility with other regulations.
This article is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this article should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 413, § II, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-154. Severability.
If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 413, § II, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-155. Stormwater management design manual.
The city will utilize the policy, criteria and information including technical specifications and standards in the latest edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and any relevant local addenda or equivalent local stormwater management design manual, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring and local maintenance experience. 
(Ord. No. 413, § II, 5-8-06)
 
Secs. 34-156—34-180. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. DEFINITIONS
 
Sec. 34-181. Definitions.
Applicant means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and occupying more than 100 square feet of area. 
Channel means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Conservation easement means a legal agreement between a landowner and a government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the land in private ownership. 
Detention means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility with the goal of controlling the peak discharge. 
Detention facility means a detention basin or structure designed for the purpose of temporary storage of stormwater runoff or stream flow and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
Developer means a person who undertakes land-disturbance activities. 
Development means land development or land development project. 
Drainage easement means a legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land-disturbing activities. 
Extended detention means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically 24 hours or greater. 
Extreme flood protection means preventing adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of 100 years or greater. It is intended to protect the public safety and welfare. 
Flooding means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
Greenspace or open space means permanently protected areas of the site that are preserved in a natural state. 
Hotspot means an area where the land use or activities with the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Hydrologic soil group (HSG) means a Natural Resource Conservation Service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, with high permeability and little runoff production, to D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
Impervious cover means a surface composed of any material that significantly impedes or prevents the natural infiltration of water into soil. Impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets and roads, and any concrete, asphalt, or compacted soil surface. 
Industrial stormwater permit means an National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
Infiltration means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
Jurisdictional wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
Land development or land development project means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing or timbering, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious cover. 
Landowner means the legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary rights in the land. 
Linear development project means a land development project that is linear in nature such as, but not limited to, (i) the construction of electric and telecommunication utility lines, natural gas pipelines, water and sewer lines, and related facilities; (ii) construction of tracks, rights-of-way, bridges, communication facilities and other related facilities of a railroad company. 
Locality means county or city. 
Maintenance agreement means a legally recorded document that acts as a property deed restriction, and which provides for long-term maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
New development means land-disturbing activities, structural development (construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure), and/or creation of impervious surfaces on a previously undeveloped site. 
Nonpoint source pollution means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point, such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge. Pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers and pesticides, heavy metals, oil and grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants are delivered from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agricultural, silvicultural, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
Nonstructural stormwater practice means any natural or nonstructural vegetated feature or nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides stormwater quantity and/or quality control or benefits. This includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Off-site facility means a stormwater management facility located outside the subject property boundary described in the permit application. 
On-site facility means a stormwater management facility located within the subject property boundary described in the permit application necessary to control stormwater runoff for that site. 
Overbank flooding means flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain. 
Overbank flood protection means preventing an increase in the frequency and magnitude of damaging out-of-bank flooding. It is intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through 25-year frequency storm events. 
Owner means the owner or owners of the property or lesser estate therein, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, assignee of rents, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of a property. 
Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of the state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Post-development refers to conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist after completion of the land development activity on a specific site or tract of land. 
Pre-development refers to the conditions that exist at the time that plans for the land development of a tract of land are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, etc.), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
Redevelopment means structural development, creation or addition of impervious surfaces, replacement of impervious surface not part of routine maintenance, and land-disturbing activities associated with structural or impervious development. Redevelopment does not include such activities as exterior remodeling as long as there is no additional impervious surface being added and there is no land-disturbing activity. 
Regional stormwater management facility or regional facility means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple projects and/or properties, where the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Runoff means stormwater runoff. 
Site means the parcel of land being developed, or a designated planning area in which the land development project is located. 
Stop-work order means an order issued which requires that construction activity, including but not limited to grading activity, building construction, etc., relevant to the subject of the violation on a site be stopped. 
Stormwater better site design means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing the impact of the site design, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater management means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion and water quality degradation, and in a manner to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
Stormwater management facility means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
Stormwater management measure means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
Stormwater management plan means a document containing material for describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and methods for complying with the provisions of this article. 
Stormwater retrofit means a stormwater management practice designed for an existing development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
Stormwater runoff or stormwater means flow on the surface of the ground resulting from precipitation. 
Structural development means construction, installation or expansion of a building or other structure. 
Structural stormwater control means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow. 
Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 2, 5-8-06)
 
DIVISION 3. POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 34-182. Permit application requirements.
No landowner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Unless specifically exempted by this article, any land owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided by the city for that purpose. Unless otherwise exempted by this article, a permit application must be accompanied by the following in order to be considered: 
(1)	Stormwater concept plan consultation meeting certification in accordance with section 34-183; 
(2)	Stormwater management plan in accordance with section 34-184; 
(3)	Maintenance agreement in accordance with section 34-185; 
(4)	Performance bond in accordance with section 34-186; 
(5)	Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with section 34-187. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-183. Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting.
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the land owner or developer shall meet with the city for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system. This meeting shall the following representatives from the city, the planning director, environmental manager, county coordinator and road supervisor. At a minimum the developer and the design professional shall attend this meeting. This consultation meeting shall take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early step in the development process. The intent of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 
To accomplish this goal the following information shall be included in the concept plan, which shall be submitted in advance of the meeting: 
(1)	Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys or from a soil scientist; boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces. 
(2)	A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
(3)	A sketched or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. Local watershed plans and relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. Upon completion of the meeting, the landowner/developer will receive a certification that the consultation meeting has taken place. This certification shall be included in the permit application. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-184. Stormwater management plan requirements.
The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article. This plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a Georgia licensed professional engineer (PE), who will verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the stormwater design manual. The stormwater management plan ensures that requirements and criteria in this article are being complied with and that opportunities are being taken to minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps (including but not necessarily limited to a color copy of the USGS map of the project area), narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. This includes: 
(1)	Common address and/or map and parcel number and legal description of site; and 
(2)	Vicinity map. 
(3)	Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. An existing condition hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which includes: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; total acreage of site; acreage of each drainage area, including off-site drainage; soil types and land cover of areas for each subbasin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
(4)	Post-development hydrologic analysis. A post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which includes: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total acreage of site; acreage of each drainage area, including off-site; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each subbasin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 4 for each subbasin; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. 
(5)	Stormwater management system. Description, drawings and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system, including: A map and/or drawing or sketch of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of nonstructural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrictor size; narrative describing that appropriate and effective structural stormwater controls have been selected; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (should include stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in division 4; and drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow. 
(6)	Post-development downstream analysis. Provide the assumptions, results and supporting calculations for a downstream peak flow analysis to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
(7)	Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan in accordance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act and the the city Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance or NPDES permit for construction activities shall be submitted. The plan should also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
(8)	Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
(9)	Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, a list of parties responsible for maintenance, funding, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
(10)	Maintenance easements. The applicant must ensure access from public right-of-way to all stormwater management facilities and practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the 30-feet wide maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even with the transfer of title to the property. 
(11)	Maintenance agreements. The applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with the specifications of this article. See section 34-185. 
(12)	Evidence of acquisition of applicable local and non-local permits. The applicant shall provide documentation to The city that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-185. Stormwater management maintenance agreements.
Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility or practice as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance agreement, or conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility or practice. This formal maintenance agreement must be approved by the city and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. The agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor or owner. If portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each property owner, governmental agency, or other legally established entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance. As part of the agreement, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often, routine maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and should also include "failure to maintain" provisions. In the event that maintenance or repair is neglected, or the stormwater management facility or practice becomes a danger to public health or safety, or is causing the degradation of water resources or the environment, the city reserves the authority to perform the work and to recover the costs from the owner. The city, in lieu of a maintenance agreement, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this section and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-186. Performance bonds.
The city may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of credit or such other acceptable legal arrangement prior to issuance of a permit in order to insure that the stormwater facilities and/or practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. 
(1)	The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent. 
(2)	The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure, after proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to initiate or maintain appropriate actions, which may be required of the applicant in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
(3)	If The city takes such action upon such failure by the applicant, the city may collect from the applicant for the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of such action exceed the amount of the security held. 
(4)	Within 60 days of the completion of the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan in the form of certified as-built report and survey, such bond, cash escrow, letter of credit or other legal arrangement, except for the landscaping survivability shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated. 
(5)	The landscaping portion of the stormwater management plan shall be inspected one year after installation with replacement in accordance with the final plans and specifications prior to final release. 
(6)	These requirements are in addition to all other provisions of the city ordinances relating to the issuance of such plans and are not intended to otherwise affect the requirements for such plans. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-187. Application procedure.
(a)	Land owners or developers wishing to submit an application, must first attend a consultation meeting with The city for discussion of a stormwater concept plan. This meeting shall include the planning director, environmental manager, count coordinator, and road supervisor from the county, as well as owner/developer and design professional. 
(b)	Applications for stormwater management permits must be filed with the city on any regular business day. 
(c)	A copy of this permit application shall be forwarded to the appropriate review agency for review. 
(d)	Permit applications shall include the following: Three copies of the stormwater management plan, maintenance agreement and any required review fees. 
(e)	The city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved. 
(f)	If the permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement(s) are disapproved, the city shall notify the applicant of the decision in writing. The applicant may then revise the permit application, stormwater concept plan, or the maintenance agreement(s) and submit the required changes. If additional information is submitted, the city shall inform the applicant as to whether or not the documents are approved or disapproved. If the permit application, stormwater management plan or maintenance agreement(s) are approved by the city, all appropriate land development permits may be issued and the following conditions apply: 
(1)	The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land clearing, construction, land development and drainage will be done according to the approved plan. 
(2)	The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan. 
(3)	The city shall be allowed, after giving notice to the owner, occupier or operator of the land development project, to conduct periodic inspections of the project. 
(4)	The person responsible for implementing the approved plan shall conduct monitoring and submit reports as The city may require to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the plan provides effective stormwater management. 
(5)	No changes may be made to an approved plan without review and written approval by the city. 
(6)	A certified inspection of all aspects of the structural stormwater control facility, including surface as-built surveys, and geotechnical inspections during subsurface or backfilling and compaction activities shall be required. 
(7)	It must be understood that in the event that the design fails, it is the responsibility of the owner/developer to get a revised plan from a design professional and to resubmit that plan to the city for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-188. Application review fees.
The fee for review of any stormwater management application shall be based on the fee structure established by the city. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-189. Modifications for off-site facilities.
Every applicant shall provide for on-site post-development stormwater management as required by this article in division 4, unless provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site or regional facility. The off-site or regional facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. A stormwater management plan must be submitted to the city, which shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the modification will not result in the following impacts to downstream areas: 
(1)	Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and property; 
(2)	Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
(3)	Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; 
(4)	Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat; 
(5)	Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 3, 5-8-06)
 
DIVISION 4. POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA
 
Sec. 34-211. Performance criteria.
The following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites, unless otherwise provided for by this article. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-212. Water quality.
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. Stormwater management systems, which can include both structural stormwater controls and better site design practices, must be designed to remove 80 percent of the average annual post-development total suspended solids (TSS) load and be able to meet any other additional watershed- or site-specific water quality requirements. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this performance standard if: 
(1)	It is sized to capture and treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume, which is defined as the runoff volume resulting from the first 1.2 inches of rainfall from a site; and 
(2)	Appropriate structural stormwater controls are selected, designed, constructed, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city must be adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-213. Stream channel protection.
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
(1)	Twenty-four-hour extended detention storage of the one-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event; this requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to an man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
(2)	Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control; and 
(3)	Preservation of the applicable stream buffer. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-214. Overbank flooding protection.
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the postdevelopment peak discharge rate to the predevelopment rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, 24-hour storm under section 34-213 is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where all downstream conveyances and receiving waters have the natural capacity to handle the full build-out 25-year storm through a combination of channel capacity and overbank flood storage without causing flood damage. However, the developer must have his design engineer do a study to prove that this is truly the case. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-215. Extreme flooding protection.
Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. This requirement may be adjusted or waived by The city for sites where all downstream conveyances and receiving waters have the natural capacity to handle the full build-out 100-year storm through a combination of channel capacity and overbank flood storage without causing flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-216. Structural stormwater controls.
All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the the city reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to protect downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff, or increased nonpoint source pollution loads. Applicants shall consult the Stormwater Management Design Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-217. Stormwater credits for nonstructural measures.
The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under section 34-212. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements, which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credit are included in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-218. Drainage system guidelines.
Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)	Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
(2)	All culverts, pipe systems, and open channel flow systems shall be sized based on all on-site upstream areas being developed in accordance with the approved plans and the off-site upstream areas being fully developed in accordance with the future land use plan using the methods included in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. Upstream storage may be included when determining flows, provided that the engineer calculates the reduced flows by routing the developed flows through any stormwater management facility rather than assuming the reduction will occur. 
The engineer must show that detention facilities used in the analysis will remain, be properly maintained, and the storage volume and outlet structure is based upon current conditions. 
(3)	Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Stormwater Management Design Manual. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-219. Dam design guidelines.
Any land-disturbing activity that involves a property, which proposes a dam shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 4, 5-8-06)
 
DIVISION 5. CONSTRUCTION INSPECTIONS OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
 
Sec. 34-241. Construction inspections.
Construction inspections for the post-development stormwater management system shall utilize the final approved stormwater management site plan and specifications for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 5, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-242. Notice of construction commencement.
The applicant must notify the city in advance before the commencement of construction or land development activities. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or certified by a professional engineer or their designee who has been approved by the city. All inspections shall be documented and written reports prepared that contain the following information: 
(1)	The date and location of the inspection; 
(2)	Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
(3)	Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
(4)	Any violations that exist. 
If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No additional work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the city. 
In addition, the person responsible for carrying out the plan may be required to provide inspection monitoring and reports to ensure compliance with the approved plan and to determine whether the measures required in the plan provide effective erosion and sedimentation control and stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 5, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-243. Post construction final inspection and as built plans.
Upon completion, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant is responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved final stormwater management site plan and specifications. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 5, 5-8-06)
 
Secs. 34-244—34-260. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 6. ONGOING INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF STORMWATER FACILITIES AND PRACTICES
 
Sec. 34-261. Long-term maintenance inspection of stormwater facilities and practices.
Stormwater management facilities and practices that are included in the executed maintenance agreement and plan must undergo ongoing inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. 
A stormwater management facility or practice shall be inspected on a periodic basis by the responsible party in accordance with the maintenance agreement and plan. In the event that the stormwater management facility has not been maintained and/or becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the person responsible for carrying out the maintenance plan by registered or certified mail to the person specified in the maintenance agreement. The notice shall specify the measures needed to comply with the plan and shall specify the time within which such measures shall be completed. If the responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the city, after a 30-day notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition, and recover the costs from the owner. 
Inspection programs by the city shall be established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to: routine inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are not limited to: reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water, groundwater, and material or water in stormwater management facilities; and evaluating the condition of stormwater management facilities and practices. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 6, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-262. Right-of-entry for inspection.
Pursuant to the maintenance easement agreement, the property owner shall grant to the city the right to enter the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner for the purpose of inspection. This includes the right to enter a property when it has a reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this article is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 6, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-263. Records of maintenance activities.
Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall provide records of all maintenance and repairs to the city. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 6, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-264. Failure to maintain.
If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance agreement, the city, after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility or practice in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility or practice becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the city shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall have 30 days to effect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner. After proper notice, the city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property, and may be placed on the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the county. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 6, 5-8-06)
 
DIVISION 7. VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
 
Sec. 34-286. Enforcement.
Any activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article or the approved final stormwater management site plan and permit, or failure to act, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 7, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-287. Notice of violation.
If the city determines that a permittee under this article has failed to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit and the provisions of this article, it shall issue a written notice of violation to the applicant. Where a party is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a permit thereof, all notices under the provisions of this article may be served upon the persons in charge on site. 
The notice of violation shall contain: 
(1)	The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
(2)	The address or map and parcel number when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
(3)	A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
(4)	A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
(5)	A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
(6)	A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of service of notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 7, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-288. Penalties.
Penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed include: 
(1)	Stop-work orders. Persons receiving a notice of violation for a land development activity will be required to halt all development activities. This "stop-work order" will be in effect until the city confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner may result in revocation of the permit and can result in civil or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(2)	Restoration of lands. Persons receiving a notice of violation for a land development activity may be required to restore land to its previous condition, if applicable, or in accordance with a notice to comply, Stop-work order, or permit requirements. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall be covered by the performance bond, or become a lien upon the property until paid, or both. 
(3)	Holds on certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be granted until all corrections to all stormwater management provisions have been made in accordance with the approved plans, notice to comply, Stop-work order, or permit requirements, and accepted by the city. 
(4)	Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The permit issued under this article may be suspended, revoked or modified by The city upon finding that the holder is in violation of the terms of the permit or any portion of this article. 
(5)	Civil penalties. After due notice, any person who violates any provision of this article, any condition of a permit or stop-work order, shall be liable for a civil penalty of not more than $1,000.00 against the person for each violation. Each day constitutes a separate violation. 
(6)	Injunction. The city may apply to the circuit court to enjoin a violation or a threatened violation of the provisions of this article without the necessity of showing that an adequate remedy at law does not exist. 
(7)	Criminal penalties. After due notice, any person who violates any provision of this article or program adopted pursuant to the authority of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or up to 30 days imprisonment for each violation or both. Each day constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 413, § 7, 5-8-06)
 
Secs. 34-289—34-300. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 8. NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE
 
Sec. 34-301. Purpose/intent.
The purpose of this division is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as required by federal and state law. This division establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process. The objectives of this article are: 
(1)	To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user; 
(2)	To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system; and 
(3)	To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 414, § I, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-302. Definitions.
For the purposes of this division, the following shall mean: 
Authorized enforcement agency. Employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this division. 
Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land-disturbance of five acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES stormwater phase II permits will be required for construction projects resulting in land-disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 34-310 of this article. 
Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit. A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
Person. Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
Storm drainage system. Publicly-owned facilities by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
Stormwater pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
Wastewater. Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater, discharged from a facility. 
(Ord. No. 414, § II, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-303. Applicability.
This division shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 414, § III, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-304. Responsibility for administration.
The city shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
(Ord. No. 414, § IV, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-305. Severability.
The provisions of this division are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this division or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
(Ord. No. 414, § V, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-306. Ultimate responsibility.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this division are minimum standards; therefore this division does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 414, § VI, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-307. Discharge prohibitions.
Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)	The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - typically less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing Pollutants. 
(2)	Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
(3)	Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the authorized enforcement agency prior to the time of the test. 
(4)	The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
Prohibition of illicit connections.
(1)	The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)	This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)	A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 414, § VII, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-308. Suspension of MS4 access.
Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge, which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this division may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(Ord. No. 414, § VIII, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-309. Industrial or construction activity discharges.
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
 
Sec. 34-310. Monitoring of discharges.
(a)	Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)	Access to facilities.
(1)	The city shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this division as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)	Facility operators shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
(3)	The city shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
(4)	The city has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)	Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)	Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this division. 
(7)	If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this division or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 414, § X, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-311. Requirements to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants by the use of best management practices.
The city will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XI, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-312. Watercourse protection.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XII, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-313. Notification of spills.
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the United States said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XIII, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-314. Enforcement.
(a)	Notice of violation. Whenever the city finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)	The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)	The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)	That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)	The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)	Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)	The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XIV, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-315. Appeal of notice of violation.
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XV, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-316. Enforcement measures after appeal.
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XVI, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-317. Cost of abatement of the violation.
Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 15 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the county by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the first day following discovery of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XVII, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-318. Injunctive relief.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this division. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XVIII, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-319. Appeal of notice of violation.
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this division, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XIX, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-320. Violations deemed a public nuisance.
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this division is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XX, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-321. Criminal prosecution.
Any person that has violated or continues to violate this division shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $1,500.00 dollars per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 30 days. 
The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XXI, 5-8-06)
 
Sec. 34-322. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies listed in this division are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 414, § XXII, 5-8-06)
 
Chapter 38 FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 38-1. Gasoline tanks, etc., on city property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, erect or install gasoline pumps, tanks, or underground storage tanks on or under any sidewalk, street, or any other property belonging to the city. 
(Code 1976, § 9-1)
 
Sec. 38-2. Obstructing fire house approaches.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully or knowingly to put any trash or obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any fire department station or place where fire department equipment is located. 
(Code 1976, § 9-2)
State law reference(s)—Obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1. 
 
Sec. 38-3. Obstructing fire hydrants.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with building material or in any other manner whatsoever any cistern or fire hydrant which would obstruct approaches to the same by any member of the fire department. No person shall put any posts or installation of any nature whatsoever nearer than 18 inches to any fire hydrant without first obtaining written permission from the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 9-3)
 
Sec. 38-4. Vacating streets on sounding of alarm.
When alarms for fires are given, or fire breaks out in the city, upon the sounding of fire whistles or alarms in the city, it shall be unlawful for people to congest the street in front of a fire engine, but shall vacate the streets in favor of the fire engines. 
(Code 1976, § 9-4)
 
Sec. 38-5. Persons allowed in vicinity of fire.
No person, except firefighters, members of the mayor and council, members of the police department, the owners of the property, their agents, and the agents of insurance companies, shall be allowed within 200 feet of any fire without being ordered there by the fire chief or officer of the fire department in charge at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the fire chief or other person in the fire department in charge at a fire shall be arrested and on conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 9-5)
 
Secs. 38-6—38-35. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 38-36. Chief and officers vested with police powers.
The chief of the fire department and other officers of the fire department are hereby vested with the powers of police officers and are authorized to make arrests within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 9-20)
 
Sec. 38-37. Rules and regulations.
(a)	The fire chief shall establish rules and regulations for the general operation of the fire department, which, upon approval of the mayor and council, shall be obeyed by all members of the department. Any member of the department who violates any such rule or regulation shall be subject to immediate suspension by the fire chief who shall report such incident at once to the council and the matters shall then be determined as in other such cases. 
(b)	The chief of the fire department may make provisions in the rules and regulations for the use of volunteers in the fire department. 
(Code 1976, § 9-21)
 
Sec. 38-38. Cooperation with state officials.
The fire chief, together with all other city officials, department heads, and employees, shall lend their cooperation to the state safety fire commissioner, state fire marshal, and his deputies or assistants, whenever called upon by them in the enforcement of the state safety fire law, and the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1976, § 9-22)
 
Sec. 38-39. Authority to cut electric wires.
The chief of the fire department, and officers acting under authority from him, are authorized to cut any electric wire which they shall deem necessary to cut on the occurrence of any fire, without expense to the city for so doing; provided, nothing herein contained shall imply that the city authorizes any person to undertake the risk of cutting wires or renders itself liable for any injury to the person so doing. 
(Code 1976, § 9-23)
 
Sec. 38-40. Fire hydrants; examination and subsequent report and repairs.
The chief of the fire department shall be responsible for an examination of all fire hydrants in the city, such examination to be made at least every six months, and shall file a report concerning the condition of the fire hydrants with the city council. However, if any fire hydrant is in need of immediate repair, he shall immediately notify the mayor who shall take immediate action to have the fire hydrant repaired. 
(Code 1976, § 9-24)
 
Sec. 38-41. Firefighters in private vehicles; obedience to traffic regulations, lights on vehicles.
All personnel of the fire department in proceeding to perform their duties as members of the fire department in their private vehicles shall obey all traffic laws and ordinances; however, all firefighters shall be allowed to have and display on their privately owned vehicles red lights so as to enable them to proceed with dispatch in performing their duty. 
(Code 1976, § 9-25)
 
Secs. 38-42—38-75. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS 
 
Sec. 38-76. Authority to execute.
The chief of the fire department is hereby authorized to contract and enter into a mutual aid agreement such as is set out in section 38-78, and pursuant to the authority vested in the fire department by state law. 
(Code 1976, § 9-10)
 
Sec. 38-77. Territorial scope.
The fire chief may contract with any or all cities of any states so far as may be authorized under the laws of the cities and states and so long as the contract is not in conflict with the mutual aid agreement as set forth in section 38-78. 
(Code 1976, § 9-11)
 
Sec. 38-78. Form.
Mutual aid agreements shall be in substantially the following form: 
MUTUAL AID AGREEMENT 
This agreement, made and entered into by and between the undersigned fire departments, pursuant to the authority vested in them in O.C.G.A. § 25-6-2. 
Witnesseth: That for and in consideration of securing to all of the parties hereto the benefits of mutual aid in fire prevention, in the protection of life and property from fire, in firefighting and other emergency operations wherein the fire service might be called upon to perform, it is herewith mutually agreed that: 
1. 
Upon request by an authorized representative of any fire department which is a party to this agreement to any other representative of any other fire department which is a party to this agreement, firefighting equipment and personnel of said fire department may be dispatched to any point within the fire department area of a requesting department. 
2. 
Any dispatch of equipment and personnel pursuant to this agreement is subject to the following conditions: 
(a)	Any request for aid hereunder shall include a statement of the amount and type of equipment, and number of personnel needed and shall specify the location to which the equipment and personnel are to be dispatched; but, the amount and type of equipment and number of personnel to be furnished shall be determined by a representative of the responding organization. In making the determination, the representative of the responding organization shall have the right to refuse to provide any equipment or personnel, if, in his opinion, to do so would endanger the health and safety of the area for which his fire department normally provided fire protection. 
(b)	The responding organization shall report to the senior officer in charge of the requesting organization at the location to which the equipment is dispatched and shall be subject to the orders of that official. 
(c)	Each party waives all claims against every other party for compensation for any loss, damage, personal injury, or death and for property damage occurring as a consequence of the performance or nonperformance of this agreement. 
(d)	No party shall be reimbursed by any other party for any costs incurred pursuant to this agreement. 
(e)	The responding organization shall be provided with fuel and to the extent reasonably necessary, meals from the requesting organization. 
(f)	A responding organization shall be released by the requesting organization when the services of the responding organization are no longer required or when the responding organization is needed within the area for which it normally provides fire protection. 
(g)	Any procedural agreements which do not change the meaning and operation of this agreement may from time to time be attached to this agreement and become a part hereof. 
(h)	This agreement and the parties' respective obligations hereunder is and are subject to ratification and authorization by the respective governmental authorities having jurisdiction over them. 
(Code 1976, § 9-12)
 
Chapter 42 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 42-1. Authorization.
Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council of the City of Rossville, Georgia, does ordain as follows. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-1; Ord. No. 424, Art. 1, § A, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 1, § A, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. I, § 42-1, and enacted a new § 42-1 as set out herein. The former Art. I, § 42-1 pertained to statutory authorization. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-2. Findings of fact.
(a)	The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)	These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-2; Ord. No. 424, Art. 1, § B, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-3. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)	Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)	Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)	Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion, 
(4)	Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)	Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-3; Ord. No. 424, Art. 1, § C, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-4. Objectives.
The objectives of this article are: 
(1)	To protect human life and health; 
(2)	To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)	To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas, 
(4)	To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)	To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)	To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(7)	To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-4; Ord. No. 424, Art. 1, § D, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-5. Definitions.
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in 42-7. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)	Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)	Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)	Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)	Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before April 23, 1987. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management code or ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for that community's participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP)]. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before April 23, 1987. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)	The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)	The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the federal insurance administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study the official report by the federal insurance administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)	Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)	Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)	Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)	Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.	By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.	Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this ordinance, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after April 23, 1987 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community as a basis for community participation in the (NFIP)]. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or April 23, 1987. [i.e., the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)	Built on a single chassis; 
(2)	Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)	Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)	Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-5; Ord. No. 424, Art. 6, 9-10-07)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 42-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Rossville, Georgia. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-6; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § A, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-7. Basis for area of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated September 5, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 5, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for (Unincorporated Walker County) are hereby adopted by reference. 
Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. (none applicable) 
The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: the clerk's office in city hall, City of Rossville, Georgia. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-7; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § B, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § B, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. I, § 42-7, and enacted a new § 42-7 as set out herein. The former Art. I, § 42-7 pertained to basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-8. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-8; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § C, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-9. Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-9; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § D, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-10; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § E, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-11. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-11; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § F, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-12; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § G, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-13. Penalties for violation.
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided for in section 1-11, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-13; Ord. No. 424, Art. 2, § H, 9-10-07)
 
Secs. 42-14—42-45. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 42-46. Designation of local administrator.
The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-23; Ord. No. 424, Art. 3, § A, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-47. Permit procedures.
Application for a development permit shall be made to the on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)	Application stage: 
a.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.	Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.	Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of section 42-82(2); 
d.	Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)	Construction stage: 
For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. 
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-24; Ord. No. 424, Art. 3, § B, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 3, § B, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. II, § 42-47, and enacted a new § 42-47 as set out herein. The former Art. II, § 42-47 pertained to permit procedures for building cosntruction. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-48. Reserved.
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 3, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, repealed § 42-48, which pertained to permit procedures for other developments. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-25)
 
Sec. 42-49. Duties and responsibilities of the local administrator.
Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)	Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
(2)	Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)	Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-7, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(5)	Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 42-47(2). 
(6)	Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with 42-47(2). 
(7)	When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 42-47(1)c. and 42-82(2) or 42-84(2). 
(8)	Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)	Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)	For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)	Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)	All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-26; Ord. No. 424, Art. 3, § C, 9-10-07)
 
Secs. 42-50—42-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
 
Sec. 42-81. General standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)	New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)	New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)	Elevated buildings - All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.	Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.	Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.	The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
3.	Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.	So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.	The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(6)	Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(7)	New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)	New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)	On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and; 
(10)	Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-37; Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § A, 9-10-07)
 
Sec. 42-82. Specific standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)	New construction and/or substantial improvements - Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-81(4), "elevated buildings". 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)	Non-residential construction - New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 42-49(6). 
(3)	Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles - Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.	All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.	Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.	The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.	The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.	All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. 42-81(6), above) 
d.	All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.	Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.	Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.	The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a. and c., above. 
(4)	Floodway - Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-7, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.	Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. 
Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.	Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article 3. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-38; Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § B, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § B, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. III, § 42-82, and enacted a new § 42-82 as set out herein. The former Art. III, § 42-82 pertained to specific standards for A zone flood hazard areas. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-83. Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-7, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)	When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 42-7, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)	No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)	In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-81(4). 
a.	All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-39; Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § C, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § C, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. III, § 42-83, and enacted a new § 42-83 as set out herein. The former Art. III, § 42-83 pertained to specific standards for floodways. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-84. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO-zones).
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 42-7, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)	All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 42-81(4). 
The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)	New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in section 42-47(1)c. and (2). 
(3)	Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-40; Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § D, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § D, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. III, § 42-84, and enacted a new § 42-84 as set out herein. The former Art. III, § 42-84 pertained to standards for unnumbered "A" zones. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-85. Standards for subdivisions.
(a)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)	All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)	For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-41; Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § E, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § E, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. III, § 42-85, and enacted a new § 42-85 as set out herein. The former Art. III, § 42-85 pertained to standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-86. Standards for critical facilities.
(1)	Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)	All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-42; Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § F, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 4, § F, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. III, § 42-86, and enacted a new § 42-86 as set out herein. The former Art. III, § 42-86 pertained to standards for subdivision proposals. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Sec. 42-87 Variance procedures.
(a)	The zoning board of appeals as established by city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)	The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)	Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Walker County, Georgia, as provided in Section 5-4-1 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(d)	Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)	Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)	Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)	In reviewing such requests, the zoning board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)	Conditions for variances:
(1)	A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.	A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.	A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.	A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)	The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighted carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)	Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)	The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)	Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1976, § 9½-53; Ord. No. 424, Art. 5, 9-10-07)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. No. 424, Art. 5, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, amended the former Art. III, § 42-87, and enacted a new § 42-87 as set out herein. The former Art. III, § 42-87 pertained to variances. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
Chapter 46 MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 46-1. Occupying trailer as a residence prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and illegal for any person to place, park or station any manufactured/modular home, mobile home, motor home, van or house trailer, either temporarily or permanently, on any street or private lot, tract or parcel in the city, with the intent and purpose of occupying same as a place of residence except in districts having zone designated for same. Homes to be placed and occupied as permanent residents in zone R-5. 
(Code 1976, § 14-1; Ord. No. 411, § 1, 9-12-05)
 
Sec. 46-2. Parks and camps prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or indirectly, for himself, or as agent, or by and through agents, to engage in the occupation and business of operating and maintaining a manufactured, modular, mobile home or trailer park or camp, whether or not said occupation and business is conducted for a profit, within the city. The term "manufactured, modular, mobile home or trailer park or camp" shall mean any place whereupon or wherein motor vehicles with or without such other vehicles attached thereto and such other vehicles unattached to motor vehicles are stopped and parked for the purposes and services that are usually furnished at such places. 
(Code 1976, § 14-2)
 
Chapter 50 OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 50-1. Air guns and archery equipment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge or shoot any slingshot, BB gun, air rifle, or guns discharged by forcing of air, gas, pressure or any other manner, or bow and arrow in the city. 
(Code 1976, § 15-1)
 
Sec. 50-2. Registration of firearms sales.
(a)	All wholesale and retailer sellers, vendors and merchants selling, exchanging, or anywise changing ownership or title to any and all kinds or types of firearms within the city, or conveying and transferring title thereto, shall, before actual delivery of such firearms, make and keep on file in his place of business a record and registration of such firearms. Such record and registration shall disclose the name of purchaser, buyer or vendee; the make, model, serial number, and caliber of such firearms. 
(b)	Within 24 hours after the sale, delivery, and registration of such firearms, the seller, vendor, or merchant shall transmit to the chief of police a true and exact copy of the registration record provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 15-2)
State law reference(s)—Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq. 
 
Sec. 50-3. Reserved.
 
Sec. 50-4. Disorderly conduct.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to violate any of the following subsections of this section: 
(1)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby any person's safety of life, limb or health is placed in danger; 
(2)	Any person who shall act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)	Any person who shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health, or property of another; 
(4)	Any person who shall assemble or congregate with another or others for the purpose or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(5)	Any person who shall frequent any public place with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; 
(6)	Any person who assembles for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or who shall aid or abet therein; 
(7)	Any person who shall use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates a turmoil; 
(8)	Any person who shall by acts of violence interfere with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; or 
(9)	Any person who shall congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. 
(b)	Any person who shall violate any subsection of this section may be charged with the offense of disorderly conduct and, on conviction thereof, may be found guilty of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 344, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 50-5. Disorderly houses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, rent or let any house, hall or room, within the city, for the congregating of disorderly or noisy persons, or where disorderly, riotous or noisy persons assemble to the disturbance of the neighborhood or some part thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 15-9)
 
Sec. 50-6. False alarms.
No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm of fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such act. 
(Code 1976, § 15-12)
 
Sec. 50-7. Loitering.
It shall be unlawful for any person, irrespective of age, to loiter or loaf, upon any of the public streets, sidewalks or alleyways, or other public place within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 15-17)
State law reference(s)—Ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities not preempted, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24; loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
 
Sec. 50-8. Skateboards.
(a)	Generally. It shall be unlawful to ride or operate any skateboard on any street within the city. 
(b)	Ramps. It shall be unlawful to erect, place or use any ramp or other device designed for use in connection with the riding of skateboards on any street or right-of-way of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 15-27)
 
Secs. 50-9—50-40. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. FORTUNETELLING, ETC. 
 
Sec. 50-41. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Astrology means a pseudoscience which pretends to enable men to judge of the effects and influences of the heavenly bodies on mundane affairs and human character and to foretell events by their situations and conjunctions. 
Clairvoyance means the practice of holding one's self out as possessing a power to place another person in a mesmeric trance of discerning objects which are not present to the normal senses. 
Dream book means any book containing information on how to interpret dreams and choose lucky numbers ordinarily used in buying lottery tickets. 
Fortuneteller means one who practices forecasting of the future of others. 
Palmistry means the practice of telling fortunes by the lines and marks in the palm of the hand; and the practice of judging character from the shape of the hand. 
Phrenology means the science of the human mind, and being a doctrine founded on a presumed knowledge of the functions of different portions of the brain obtained by comparing their relative forms and magnitudes, as indicated by measurements of cranial diameters in different directions in different individuals with the propensities and intellectual powers which these individuals are found respectively to possess. 
(Code 1976, § 15-3)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 50-42. Prohibited.
No person shall engage in the practice of fortunetelling, phrenology, clairvoyance, astrology, or sell dream books within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 15-4)
 
Sec. 50-43. Advertising point of origin for services.
No person residing or conducting business within the city shall place any commercial advertisement in a newspaper, telephone directory, city directory, use radio, television, handbills or any other medium of circulation and hold himself out to the public that the city is the point of origin to obtain services or information concerning any of the practices coming under the provisions of this article, except as to "dream books." 
(Code 1976, § 15-5)
Cross reference(s)—Advertising generally, ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 50-44. Advertising mail order service of dream books.
No person residing or conducting business within the city shall advertise the mail order service, sale of, manufacture of, display for retail, using the city as point of origin for any of the practices regulated by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 15-6)
Cross reference(s)—Advertising generally, ch. 6. 
 
Secs. 50-45—50-75. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. CURFEW OF MINORS 
 
Sec. 50-76. Imposed.
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places or public buildings, places of amusement or entertainment, eating places, vacant lot or any other place normally accessible to the general public for public use, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle or by any other means, during the following periods of time: 
(1)	For minors age 15 and under, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)	For minors age 16 and 17, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. No. 343, § 1, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 50-77. Exceptions.
The provisions of section 50-76 shall not apply when a minor is: 
(1)	Accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)	Upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of a minor; 
(3)	Participating in or returning home by the most direct and efficient route, from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)	Returning directly home, by the most direct and efficient route, from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places described in subsection (1) of this section during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)	On the sidewalk abutting a minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police officer about such minor's presence; 
(6)	Attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of first amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; and 
(7)	In interstate travel through the city. 
(Ord. No. 343, § 2, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 50-78. Parental responsibility.
Except in circumstances set out in section 50-77, it shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places or public buildings, places of amusement or entertainment, eating places, vacant lots or any other place normally accessible to the general public for public use, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle or by any other means, during the following periods of time: 
(1)	For minors age 15 and under, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)	For minors age 16 and 17, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. No. 343, § 3, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 50-79. Notice of violation.
Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any police officer finding a minor under the age of 18 years violating the provisions of this article shall warn the minor to desist from such violation and to immediately return home and shall cause a written notice to be served upon the parent, guardian or person in charge of a minor, setting forth the manner in which the provisions of this section have been violated. For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed properly served upon the parent, guardian or person in charge of a minor if a copy of the notice is served upon him personally or if a copy is sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to his last known address. 
(Ord. No. 343, § 4, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 50-80. Penalty for violation of article.
Any parent, guardian, or person having the care and custody of a minor who shall permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, a minor to violate the provisions of this article after receiving written notice that such minor has previously violated this article, shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 343, § 5, 4-14-97)
 
Secs. 50-81—50-100. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. UNFIT BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 50-101. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
Applicable codes means (1) any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 8 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; (2) any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 25; and (3) any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 2 of title 8 after October 1, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
City means the City of Rossville and the incorporated territory of the city. 
City clerk means the duly appointed city clerk of the City of Rossville or his designee. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. article 2 of Cchapter 13 of title 16, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7, this code section, and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9 through 41-2-17, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means mayor and city councilmembers of Rossville. 
Municipal court means the "Police Court, City of Rossville," or "recorder's court". 
Municipality means the incorporated area of the City of Rossville. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means: 
(1)	Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(2)	Persons having of record in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located any vested right, title, or interest in or lien upon such dwelling, building, or structure or the lot, tract, or parcel of real property upon which the structure is situated or upon which the public health hazard or general nuisance exists based upon a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)	Persons having paid an occupational tax to the governing authority for a location or office at the subject building or structure; or 
(4)	Persons having filed a property tax return with the governing authority as to the subject property, building, or structure. 
Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the municipality, county, or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the City of Rossville. 
Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8 and 41-2-9 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. to exercise the powers prescribed by such ordinances or any agent of such officer or officers. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where her property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 1, 4-12-10)
 
Sec. 50-102. Duties of owners; appointment of public officer procedure for determiningpremises to be unsafe or unhealthful.
(a)	That it is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the jurisdiction, or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances; 
(b)	That the mayor and city councilmembers of the City of Rossville appoint and designate the city building inspector and his designee as public officers to exercise the powers prescribed by this article; 
(c)	That whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality or by five residents of the unincorporated area of the county if the property in question is located in the unincorporated area or the county charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in relm against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the owner and parties in interest in such dwelling, building, or structure. 
(1)	Such conditions may include the following without limiting the generality of the foregoing: 
a.	Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
b.	Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
c.	Dilapidation; 
d.	Disrepair; 
e.	Structural defects; and 
f.	Uncleanliness. 
(d)	The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner and parties in interest that a hearing will be held before the municipal court for the City of Rossville or some other court of competent jurisdiction, at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(e)	That if; after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)	If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
(f)	For purposes of this article, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement maybe established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. chapter 39A of title 43, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction; 
(g)	That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."; 
(h)	If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
(i)	That the amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 2, 4-12-10)
 
Sec. 50-103. Service of complaints.
(a)	Complaints issued by the public shall be served in the following manner. In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, or structure within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be served in one of the following ways: 
(1)	Personal service upon each owner and party in interest if such parties are residents of the county. Service shall be perfected at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. Service may be made by the public officer designated by ordinance to abate nuisances or by any law enforcement officer of the county or municipality whose ordinance is being enforced; and a return of service, filed with the city clerk, shall be deemed sufficient proof that service was perfected; 
(2)	Pursuant to the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 4 of Title 48 of the Code of Georgia (O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-75 through 48-4-81); or 
(3)	Statutory overnight delivery. 
(b)	If any owner or party of interest is a resident of this state but resides outside of the county, service shall be perfected by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to the most recent address shown in county tax filings and mailed at least l4 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)	Nonresidents of this state, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, mailed at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(d)	In the event either the owner or any party in interest is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or is a nonresident of this state he or she shall he served as provided for in subsection (c) of this section. If such owner or party in interest has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(e)	In the event of unknown persons or unborn remainder men who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property or interest is located shall be personally served at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the judge of the probate court to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remainder men. 
(f)	In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown, and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this Code section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection (c) of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(g)	A notice of lis pen dens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located at the time of filing the complaint in the appropriate court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pen dens notices provided by law. 
(h)	Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this article on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 3, 4-12-10)
 
Sec. 50-104. Powers of the public officer.
The public officer is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including the following powers in addition to others herein granted: 
(1)	To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)	To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)	To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)	To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances; and 
(5)	To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the recorders court of the City of Rossville to enforce any provisions of its charter, or its ordinances or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
(Ord. No. 440, § 4, 4-12-10)
 
Chapter 54 PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 54-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Peddler means any person, whether or not a resident of the city, traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place-to-place, from house-to-house, or from street-to-street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who without traveling from place-to-place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance. Anyone who solicits orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to purchasers as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
Solicitor means any person, whether or not a resident of the city, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from place-to-place, from house-to-house, or from street-to-street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares, and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such person has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or not. Such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, boat, hotel room, lodginghouse, apartment, shop or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The term "solicitor" shall include the term "canvasser." 
(Code 1976, § 16-1)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 54-2. Soliciting or peddling on private premises.
(a)	The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by solicitors or peddlers, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupants of such private residences for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise or disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a nuisance. 
(b)	The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale, or soliciting of orders for the sale, of milk, dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce so far as the sale of the commodities named herein is now authorized by law. 
(Code 1976, § 16-4)
 
Secs. 54-3—54-35. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. PEDDLERS
 
Sec. 54-36. Permit—Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of peddler within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 16-2)
 
Sec. 54-37. Same—Application.
Applicants for permits under this article must file with the city clerk a sworn application in writing, in duplicate, which shall give the following information: 
(1)	Name and description of applicant; 
(2)	Address, legal and local; 
(3)	A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold; 
(4)	If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship; 
(5)	The length of time for which the right to do business is desired; 
(6)	If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the same, together with license number and other means of identification; 
(7)	A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner; 
(8)	The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of this county, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business responsibility, or, in lieu of the names of references, any other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility; 
(9)	A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 16-3)
 
Secs. 54-38—54-70. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
 
Sec. 54-71. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Charitable includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. 
Promoter means any person who promotes, manages, supervises, organizes, or attempts to promote, manage, supervise, or organize a campaign or solicitation. 
Religious, religion does not mean and include the word "charitable," but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. 
Solicit, solicitation means the request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea of representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as those purposes are defined in this article. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value on the plea or representation that it will be used for a charitable or religious purpose as herein defined: 
(1)	Any oral or written request. 
(2)	The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement, or publication. 
(3)	The making of any announcement to the press, over the radio, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale or social gathering, which the public is requested to patronize or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious purpose connected therewith. 
(4)	The sale of, offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership, merchandise, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable or religious purpose, or where the name of any charitable or religious person is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale, will go or be donated to any charitable or religious purpose. 
Solicitation is deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section. 
(Code 1976, § 16-20)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 54-72. Permit—Required.
No person shall solicit contributions within the city without a permit from the city clerk authorizing such solicitation; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any established persons organized and operating exclusively for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the pecuniary profit of any person if the solicitations by such established person are conducted among the members thereof by other members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for the making of such solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular assemblies or services of any such established person. 
(Code 1976, § 16-21)
 
Sec. 54-73. Same—Application.
An application for a permit to solicit shall be made to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city. The application herein required shall contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a detailed statement of the reasons why such information cannot be furnished: 
(1)	The name and address of the headquarters of the person applying; 
(2)	The purpose of the solicitation; 
(3)	The name and address of the persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to be connected with the proposed solicitation; 
(4)	An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation; 
(5)	The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation; 
(6)	The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such solicitation, and the names and addresses of all such persons; 
(7)	A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city; 
(8)	Such other information as may be reasonably necessary and required by the city clerk in order for the clerk to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare. 
(Code 1976, § 16-22)
 
Sec. 54-74. Same—Investigation of application.
The city clerk shall examine all applications filed under this article and shall make, or cause to be made, such further investigation as he deems necessary for him to perform his duties hereunder. Upon request by the mayor any applicant shall make available for inspection by the council or any person designated by the mayor as his representative, all of the applicant's books, records and papers at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1976, § 16-23)
 
Sec. 54-75. Same—Standards for issuance.
The city clerk shall issue the permit required by this article for whenever he shall find the following facts to exist: 
(1)	All of the statements made in the application are true; 
(2)	The applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and integrity, or if the applicant is not an individual, every person responsible for such organization is of good character and has a reputation for honesty and integrity; 
(3)	The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under responsible and reliable persons; 
(4)	The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or enterprise; 
(5)	The solicitation is promoted solely by a desire to finance the charitable cause described in the application and will not be conducted primarily for private profit. 
(Code 1976, § 16-24)
 
Sec. 54-76. Use of fictitious name.
No person shall, directly or indirectly, solicit contributions for any purpose by misrepresentation of his name, occupation, financial condition, social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed under this article. 
(Code 1976, § 16-25)
 
Chapter 58 SECONDHAND GOODS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Secs. 58-1—58-30. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. JUNK DEALERS 
 
Sec. 58-31. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Junk dealer means any person engaged in buying, selling, or dealing in any matter commonly known as junk, or buying and selling any part of any railway car, streetcar, steam locomotive, or plumbing fixtures, bottles, rags, or stove parts, or scrap iron, or tin. 
Junkyard means any person buying and selling, or in any way dealing in secondhand motor vehicles not in running condition, or parts of motor vehicles not in use, or any old motor vehicle parts or accessories, or old motor vehicle seats, or cushions. 
(Code 1976, § 12-20)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 58-32. Permit.
No person shall engage in the junk business without first applying to the city clerk for a junk dealer's permit, and without paying in advance the license occupational charge, and when applying for such permit, the applicant shall give his full name and address, the names of all partners, and if a corporation, the applicant shall state whether such corporation is a state or foreign corporation, and such applicant shall agree to be bound by the provisions of this article, and shall further specify in what part of the city the applicant expects to maintain the junkyard, and shall give such other information as the city clerk may deem necessary. The application shall then be referred to the council for a hearing, and if in its judgment the applicant is entitled to such permit and has agreed to comply with this article, a permit shall be granted to such applicant. 
(Code 1976, § 12-21)
 
Sec. 58-33. Motor vehicle junkyards prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle junkyard within the city limits. 
(Code 1976, § 12-22)
Cross reference(s)—Traffic and vehicles, ch. 78. 
 
Sec. 58-34. License fee.
Any person engaged in the junk business in the city shall pay a junk dealer's occupational license tax. 
(Code 1976, § 12-23)
 
Sec. 58-35. Employing or dealing with minor.
Any person engaged in the junk business shall not have in his employment any person under 18 years of age, nor shall any person engaged in the junk business purchase or receive from any minor under 18 years of age any article of junk. 
(Code 1976, § 12-24)
 
Sec. 58-36. Combustible substances.
No person engaged in the junk business shall have possession of or use on or about such junkyard, or junk house, old kerosene, gasoline, old oil, or any other thing which is combustible or an explosive. 
(Code 1976, § 12-25)
Cross reference(s)—Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
Sec. 58-37. Fences.
All persons engaged in the junk business shall keep such junk house or junkyard enclosed with a fence at least ten feet high, which fence shall be well constructed and so erected as to hide the unsightly view of such junkyard from the public. 
(Code 1976, § 12-26)
 
Sec. 58-38. Cleanliness of premises.
All persons engaged in the junk business shall at all times keep the premises in a clean condition, and shall never expose to the public view unsightly piles of junk, rags, iron, bottles, tins, or paper, and shall not allow any offensive or obnoxious odors to exist around such junkyard or junk houses. 
(Code 1976, § 12-27)
Cross reference(s)—Environment, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 58-39. Setback.
All persons engaged in the junk business shall see that their junkyards or shops shall be set back at least 100 feet from the side or sides of the street or streets adjoining such junkyards or shops. 
(Code 1976, § 12-28)
 
Secs. 58-40—58-70. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. MISCELLANEOUS SALES OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
 
Sec. 58-71. Flea markets.
(a)	Generally.
(1)	All persons before beginning the business of operating, maintaining or promoting an indoor mall type flea market shall first file an application with the city clerk for a license to conduct such business. Such application shall be made on a form supplied by the city clerk and shall contain such information necessary to properly regulate the business; 
(2)	No outdoor flea markets will be allowed in the city limits of Rossville, Georgia; 
(3)	The chief of police or his designee shall cause an investigation to be made into the information contained in the application of the promoter including the background, character, and reputation of said promoter. Upon completion of the investigation the chief of police or his designee shall report the results of said investigation to the city clerk, whose duty it shall be to make a decision on the issuance of the license; 
(4)	The city clerk shall have the duty and authority to revoke the license of any flea market when in the discretion of the mayor and council such revocation is necessary to prevent any violation of this article or any other ordinance of the city or any laws of the state or of the United States. The selling of firearms and fireworks is prohibited and will result in the revoking of the license; and 
(5)	The city will require the owner/promoter of the indoor flea market to keep written records, giving names and descriptions of each vendor, vendor's place of residence and street address. Such records must be made available to the city upon request. 
(b)	License fees.
(1)	The owner/promoter of an indoor flea market will be charged a flat fee of $10.00 per month, per booth rented and shall remit to the city the total amount due on the last day of each month; 
(2)	The city clerk will issue a license to the owner/promoter of said indoor flea market on a monthly basis when fees are paid; and 
(3)	It will be the responsibility of the owner/promoter of the indoor flea market to maintain and provide records to the city clerk when requested on each vendor engaged in business at the flea market. 
(Ord. No. 391, 6-9-03; Ord. No. 392, 7-14-03)
Editor's note(s)—The provisions of Ord. Nos. 391, adopted June 9, 2003, and 392, adopted July 14, 2003, have replaced the provisions of former § 58-71, which pertained to the prohibition of flea markets, and derived from § 13-89 of the 1976 Code. 
 
Sec. 58-72. Sales of personal property by sales agent.
(a)	Any person who conducts an estate, garage, yard, or other sale of personal property within the city in connection with which a fee or commission is charged by the person conducting the sale must first obtain a permit from the city clerk. The clerk shall charge a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for such permit. 
(b)	At the time of the application for permit, an inventory of items to be sold at the sale, together with a proposed length of time for conducting the sale, shall be submitted to the city clerk. No such sale may last longer than three consecutive calendar days. Additionally, at the time of application, the applicant must pay a deposit of $200.00 to be refunded upon the filing of the report required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)	Within ten days after the last day of the sale, the person conducting the sale must file a written report showing the cash received for the items sold at the sale. A copy of such report shall be forwarded to the state department of revenue. Upon filing a report, the $200.00 deposit required by subsection (b) of this section shall be refunded. 
(d)	Violations of this section shall be considered a misdemeanor and may be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 13-90)
 
Sec. 58-73. Garage or yard sales.
(a)	Registration shall be required in order to hold a garage sale or yard sale, which shall be defined as any sale of merchandise at a residence, church, or other location that is not a licensed retail establishment, prior to holding any such sale within the city. Only one registration shall be required for a sale. Registration shall be accomplished by notifying the city clerk's office in person or by telephone of the hours, duration and location of the sale. No registration fee shall be required. 
(b)	No sale shall last longer than 48 hours from the beginning of the sale until its end. 
(c)	No more than four sales per year may be held at any one location within the city. 
(d)	No more than four permits shall be issued to any one person or entity per year. 
(Code 1976, § 13-91)
 
Chapter 62 SIGNS 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 62-1. Purpose.
Regulations of the location, size, placement and certain features of signs is necessary, to enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's natural environment, and to protect property values therein. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing the display of signs which will: 
(1)	Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(2)	Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs; 
(3)	Restrict signs and lights which increase clutter or which increase the probability of accidents by obstructing vision; and 
(4)	Promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-2. Factors for consideration.
As these or any regulations can only establish the mechanical limits of signs and not enforce a level of visual quality in sign design, anyone planning a sign is strongly encouraged to consider: 
(1)	The character of the proposed sign and the audience for which the sign is to be designed. The applicant is urged to think not only of the sign in and of itself but also in terms of the effects such a sign will have upon the character of the surrounding area. 
(2)	The character of the sign structure, that is, the physical means of supporting the sign, and whether that structure could be made an integral part of the sign rather than a separate and frequently distracting element. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-3. Planning assistance.
Anyone contemplating a sign is also encouraged to contact the code enforcement officer of the city or a private firm or individual engaged in sign/graphic design for assistance in the planning of such sign. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-4. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air- and gas-filled device means any sign using either wholly or in part forced air or other gas as a means of supporting its structure. 

;i;Air- and Gas-Filled Devices;\i> 
Area of sign (sign area) means the area within a continuance perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
Awning/canopy means a structure made of cloth, metal or other material affixed to a building and/or supported by the ground. 
Wall Sign   
      Awning/Canopy

;em;;em;;em;;i;Canopy Sign;\i> 
Banner means a sign intended to be hung either with or without a frame, possessing character, letter, illustrations, or ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind excluding flags, emblems, and insignia or political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations providing that such flags, emblems and insignia are displaced for noncommercial purposes. 
Changeable copy sign means a permanently mounted sign designed to accept changeable letters, symbols, or other characters. 
Codes officer means the city inspector or other person designated by the city as the chief building and zoning inspection official or his designated representative. 
Construction sign means a sign erected and maintained on premises announcing the proposed or existing construction of a building or project. 
Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
Freestanding sign means a permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
Hanging sign means a sign which is suspended by chain or cable from an awning, canopy or marquee. 
Height of sign means, in the case of freestanding signs, the distance in vertical feet measured from the level of an adjacent street centerline to the highest point of the sign structure; provided, however, that all freestanding sign structures will be allowed to be built to a height of 40 feet. For other signs, the height is to be measured from the grade below the sign. 

Illuminated sign means a sign illuminated by an internal or external light source. 
Marquee means a permanent roof-like structure extending from part of the wall of a building but not supported by the ground, and constructed of a durable material. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;i;Marquee;\i> 
Moving sign means a sign which revolves, rotates, swings, undulates or otherwise attracts attention through the structural movement of parts, but not including flags, banners or pennants. 
Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
Nonpermitted zoning district means a zoning district in the city within which signs cannot be erected. 
Nonprofit activity means an activity, project, operation or enterprise of a temporary nature carried on by a corporation or an organization qualified as an exempt organization under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Off-premises sign means a sign that advertises a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation which is not carried out on the premises upon which the sign is located. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;(;i;Off-Premises Freestanding Sign;\i;) 
On-premises sign means a sign located on the same premises on which the advertised product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation is located. For the purposes of this chapter, this shall include: 
(1)	Actions, functions, demonstrations, displays, offerings for sale, or sales that occur on the premises; 
(2)	Actions, functions, demonstrations, displays, sales, offerings for sales, products, services or merchandise that are advertised or promoted on the premises; 
(3)	Actions, functions, products, services or merchandise that are on display on the premises; and 
(4)	Actions, functions, demonstrations, displays, sales, offerings for sale, service or merchandise about which additional information and data can be received at a location on the premises. 
Political sign means a sign identifying and urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party or candidate for public office. 
Portable sign and/or trailer display sign means any sign which is manifestly designed to be transported, including by trailer or on its own wheels, even though the wheels of such sign may be removed and the remaining chassis or support constructed without wheels is converted to an A- or T-frame sign or attached temporarily or permanently to the ground. 

;i;Trailer or Portable Sign;\i> 
Projecting sign means a sign which is affixed to a building or wall and extends more than 18 inches beyond the line of such building or wall or beyond the surface of that portion of the building or wall to which it is affixed. 

;i;Projecting Sign;\i> 
Real estate sign means a temporary sign erected by the owner, or his agent, advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent, lease or for sale. 
Road frontage means the width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
Roof line means the top of a flat roof or the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;i;Roof Line;\i> 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;i;Roof Line;\i> 
Roof sign means a sign projecting over the top of a flat roof, or over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and/or supported by or attached to the roof. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;i;Roof Sign;\i> 
Sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame sign means a sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" or some variation thereof and which is usually two-sided. 

;i;A-Frame (Sandwich) Sign 
Sign means any identification, description, illustration, or device illuminated or nonilluminated which is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise, or any emblem painting, flag, banner, pennant, balloon or placard designed to advertise, identify or convey information. 
Sign face means the part of a sign that is or can be used for advertising purposes. 
Street means any and all kinds of public ways, lanes or alleys and each part thereof, including the pavement, shoulders, curbing, gutters, storm drains and sidewalks and rights-of-way. 
Temporary sign means a sign of a nonpermanent nature which is permitted to be displayed by a business for no more than 30 days per calendar year. 
Wall face means a measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 

Wall sign means a sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than 18 inches from the outside wall of such building or structure, exclusive of lighting and catwalks, etc. The total lettering on one wall face shall constitute a wall sign and be measured independently to other wall faces. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;i;Wall Sign;\i> 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 62-5. Exempt signs.
The following types of signs are exempt from the requirements of this chapter: 
(1)	Nonilluminated real estate or construction signs not in excess of 32 square feet, provided such signs are located on the lot or building for sale, lease or being constructed, are not located on any public right-of-way, and are limited to one sign per street frontage. Such signs shall be removed within ten days after the subject lot or building is leased, sold, or construction is completed. 

;i;Real Estate and Construction Signs;\i;;eol;(32 sq. ft. max) 
(2)	Signs of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, erected by, or on the order of a public officer in the performance of his duty such as public notices, safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, traffic and street signs, property street numbers, memorial plaques, and signs of historical interest. 
(3)	Signs on private property directing traffic movement provided that such signs shall not exceed eight square feet in area nor exceed four feet in length. Such signs shall not be allowed on any public right-of-way. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;hg;;i;Entry/Exit Sign;\i;;eol;(8 sq. ft. max) 
(4)	On-premises credit card identification signs up to two square feet per card. Such signs shall be at least 12 feet from the public right-of-way of any street. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;hg;;i;Credit Card Signs;\i;;eol;(2 sq. ft. max) 
(5)	Any sign not visible from public thoroughfares or any sign within a business, office, mall or other enclosed area. 
(6)	Off-premises nonilluminated church, civic, school, hospital or other quasi-public signs not exceeding four square feet in area. However, no such sign shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;hg;;i;Off-Premises;\i;;eol;Quasi-public signs;eol;(4 sq. ft. max) 
(7)	On-premises model home, model apartment, sales office signs, etc., within a residential development provided such signs do not exceed six square feet in area and are set back at least 12 feet from the right-of-way of any street. Such signs shall be limited to one per sales office, model, etc. 

;i;On-Premises Model Home, Apartment Sales Office Sign;\i;;eol;(4 sq. ft. max) 
(8)	On-premises "no trespassing," "no hunting," and similar type public notice signs less than six square feet in area provided no such signs shall be allowed on any public right-of-way. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;(6 sq. ft. max) 
(9)	Restaurant menu signs on private property. Such signs shall not be allowed on any public right-of-way. 

;i;Menu;em;;em;Sign;\i> 
(10)	Signs on vending machines which relate to their intended use. 
(11)	Signs on gas pumps as long as the sign area of these signs does not exceed eight square feet. 

(12)	Professional nameplates not exceeding two square feet in area such signs to be nonilluminated and attached to the building. 
(13)	Special event signs for nonprofit activities with the approval of the codes officer, provided, however, that in no instance shall a portable sign be approved. 
(14)	Yard sale signs provided that these are no larger than four square feet in size and are not on any public right-of-way. Such signs shall be removed within three days of the date of the yard sale. 
Yard Sale Sign
(4 sq. ft. max) 
(15)	On-premises, "no parking," "no cruising," and other similar type public notice signs placed at shopping centers, shopping malls and parking lots. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-6. Prohibited signs and sign devices.
The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city: 
(1)	Roof signs. 
(2)	Sidewalk, sandwich or curb type signs except as temporary signs for nonprofit activities. 
(3)	Portable or trailer display signs. (See section 62-122.) 
(4)	Hanging signs, except those having less than six square feet in sign area. 
(5)	Off-premises signs of any type, including off-premises projecting signs. 
(6)	Signs on public rights-of-way except signs exempt under section 62-5 pertaining to exempt signs. 
(7)	Search lights or beacons. 

;i;Search Lights or Beacons;\i> 
(8)	Moving signs. 
(9)	Signs placed on trees, rocks, and utility poles. 

;i;Signs on Utility Poles and Trees;\i> 
(10)	Signs erected or displayed in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision of a street or intersection. 
(11)	Signs which, by reason of shape, color, or position may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which makes use of words "STOP," "DANGER," "GO," "SLOW," "CAUTION," "WARNING," or any other word, phrase, symbol or character in such manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 

;i;Signs Imitating Traffic Devices;\i> 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-7. Maintenance and appearance of signs.
All signs shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The codes officer may cause to be removed after due notice any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-8. Notice to correct.
The codes officer will give the owner 30 days' written notice to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign or signs. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the codes officer may have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-9. Enforcement and administration.
(a)	This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the codes officer or his designated representative. 
(b)	Variances may be granted in cases of undue hardship concerning on-premises signs only. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-10. Penalties for violations.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-11. Remedies.
In case any sign or other device covered by this chapter is or is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted or used in violation of any provision of this chapter, the codes officer may, in addition to other remedies, and after due notice to the appropriate person, have issued a citation for violation of this Code requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court, institute injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or to abate such violation. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Secs. 62-12—62-45. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. GENERAL REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 62-46. Maximum height.
No sign or sign structure shall be more than 40 feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-47. Location generally.
No sign shall be erected within 12 feet of any street right-of-way or a maximum of 18 feet unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-48. Maximum area.
No sign shall be erected in the city that contains a sign area in excess of 120 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-49. Manner of measurement.
For purposes of this chapter, the straight-line method of measurement shall be utilized measuring from the nearest point of the sign to the boundary line or structure involved. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-50. Electrical code compliance.
Every electric sign shall be listed and installed under the standards of an approved electrical testing laboratory or approved by the codes officer and installed in conformance with the standards of the National Electrical Code. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-51. Compliance with building codes.
No sign shall be erected that does not meet the construction requirements of the Southern Standard Building Codes (SSBC) when applicable or the codes officer in those cases when the building codes do not apply. 

(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Secs. 62-52—62-85. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. PERMIT
 
Sec. 62-86. Required.
Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-87. Application.
Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent in the office of the codes officer upon forms furnished by that office. Such application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)	The type and purpose of the sign as defined in section 62-4. 
(2)	The value of the sign. 
(3)	The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the site. 
(4)	The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(5)	The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(6)	Written consent of the owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the subject sign. 
(7)	A sketch or print drawn to scale showing all pertinent information required by the codes officer such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the building code as adopted by the city council. The codes officer may require additional information on such print or sketch to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(8)	Name, address, phone number of the sign contractor. 
(9)	Name, address, phone number of the applicant. 
(10)	An affidavit from the applicant certifying that the sign does not violate the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-88. Expiration of permit.
A sign permit shall become null and void if construction of the sign for which the permit has been issued has not begun within six months of the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-89. Fees.
No sign permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the codes officer and appropriate fees paid. The permit fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and set forth in the fee schedule to be kept in the office of the codes officer. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-90. Labels required on signs.
With each permit issued under this article the codes officer shall issue a sticker bearing the same number as the permit with which it is issued. It shall be the duty of the codes officer to affix such sticker to the sign in the corner area nearest to the street so it can be easily seen. The absence of a proper sticker on a sign erected pursuant to this section is prima facie evidence that the same has been, or is being erected or operated in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Secs. 62-91—62-120. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. NONCONFORMING SIGNS
 
Sec. 62-121. Continuance.
Any permanent sign lawfully existing or under construction on February 10, 1997, which does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this chapter may be continued in operation and maintained indefinitely as a legal nonconforming sign subject to compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-122. Portable, trailer signs.
Subject to compliance to section 62-123, no portable or trailer display sign existing on February 10, 1997, shall be allowed to remain past a maximum of one year from February 10, 1997. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-123. Maintenance, repair.
Maintenance and repair of legal nonconforming signs, including changing of copy, necessary nonstructural repairs, and incidental alterations which do not further extend or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign, shall be permitted. If a legal nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the extent of 50 percent or more of its current replacement value, the sign may not be rebuilt or used thereafter unless it conforms to all of the provisions of this chapter. If the damage or destruction of the nonconforming sign is less than 50 percent of its replacement value at that time, the sign may be rebuilt to its original condition and may continue to be displayed. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-124. Removal.
(a)	If a business ceases operation for a period of time in excess of 60 days, the sign owner, or lessee, or the property owner, shall immediately remove any sign identifying or advertising the business or any product sold thereby; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply where under the provisions of this chapter an existing conforming sign may be altered to advertise a new business or product sold thereby, and there is evidence that a new business will be in operation on the premises within 60 days. 
(b)	Upon failure of the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, to comply with this section, the codes officer shall inform in writing to the sign owner and any lessee and to the property owner, which notice shall state that such sign shall be removed within 30 days. 
(c)	If the sign owner or lessee, or property owner, fails to comply with such written notice to remove, the codes officer is hereby authorized to cause removal of such sign, and any expense incidental to such removal shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which the sign is located and shall constitute a lien upon the property. 
(d)	For the purpose of this section the word "remove" shall mean: 
(1)	The sign face, along with posts, columns or supports of freestanding signs, shall be taken down and removed from the property. 
(2)	The sign face and supporting structures of awning/canopy, marquee, projecting, roof, and wall signs shall be taken down and removed by painting over the wall sign in such a manner to completely cover up and hide from sight the sign in question. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Secs. 62-125—62-155. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. SPECIFIC REGULATIONS
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 62-156. Zoning districts.
(a)	Any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited in that district except as otherwise provided for under this chapter. 
(b)	No sign shall be erected in the following zoning districts of the city, except: R-1, R-2, R-3. 
(1)	Temporary real estate signs not in excess of six square feet; 
(2)	Temporary signs pertaining to the sale or lease of lots or dwellings within a residential development; 
(3)	Permanent signs identifying only the name of a residential development; 
(4)	Church bulletins, signs identifying schools, public nonprofit recreation facilities, churches, public buildings and facilities; 
(5)	Political signs in conformance with section 62-236; 
(6)	Customary home occupation signs. Such signs are limited to one per premise, and shall not be illuminated, shall not be in excess of one square foot in area and shall not be located less than 20 feet from any property line. In all other respects, these signs shall conform and be established in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
Cross reference(s)—Zoning, app. A. 
 
Sec. 62-157. On-premises freestanding signs.
(a)	No on-premises freestanding sign shall be erected within 12 feet of any street right-of-way, provided, however, that the setback requirement may be reduced to three feet where the road right-of-way is 100 feet or more in width. 
(b)	The allowable sign area for each sign shall be an amount equal to the ratio of 1.5 square feet per one linear foot of road frontage to a maximum of 120 square feet per sign, provided, however, that every property shall be allowed a sign with a sign area of up to 25 square feet. 
(c)	The on-premises freestanding sign structure shall have a maximum height of 40 feet. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-158. On-premises signs, excluding freestanding signs.
The maximum sign area of all on-premises signs, exclusive of freestanding signs, shall not exceed 20 percent of the square footage of the wall face upon which they are situated. 

(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-159. Wall signs.
(a)	Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the wall face upon which they are situated. 

;em;;em;;em;;em;;em;;i;Wall Sign;\i> 
(b)	Wall signs shall not extend above the eave or roof line nor shall they project beyond the edge of the wall face of the building upon which they are situated. 

(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-160. Temporary signs.
(a)	The owner or his agent must notify the codes officer prior to the placement of a temporary sign and shall acquire a temporary sign permit. Nonprofit activities shall be exempt from this requirement. Such permission may be granted to the same business for a maximum of 30 days within any calendar year. 
(b)	Temporary signs include the following: 
(1)	Signs advertising festivals, special events, etc., provided that such signs shall not be closer than 12 feet from any street right-of-way. 
(2)	On-premises signs relating to the initial opening or final closing of a business or service, provided that such sign shall not be closer than 12 feet to any public right-of-way. 
(3)	Streamers, banners, pennants, and air- and gas-filled devices. 
(4)	Construction signs. Such signs shall be removed from the site within one week of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the codes officer. 
(5)	No portable or trailer signs shall be included as a temporary sign. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Secs. 62-161—62-180. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PROJECTING SIGNS
 
Sec. 62-181. Height.
Projecting signs shall be attached to the vertical surface of a building and shall not extend higher than 12 feet or beyond the eave or roof line of the building to which it is attached whichever is lower. Projecting signs shall have a minimum height of nine feet. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-182. Compliance with building codes.
Projecting signs shall meet the requirements of the building codes adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-183. Maximum extension.
Projecting signs shall not extend further than six feet perpendicular to the wall to which they are attached. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-184. Maximum area.
The area of projecting signs shall not exceed 18 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-185. Prohibited sign.
Off-premises projecting signs are prohibited within the city. 

(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-186. Hanging signs.
A hanging sign may be attached to any awning, canopy, or marquee. The location and arrangement of all such signs shall be subject to the review and approval of the codes officer. Such signs shall have a maximum sign area of six square feet and shall have a minimum height of nine feet. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-187. Awning, canopy, marquee signs.
Signs on an awning, canopy, or marquee shall not project higher than the face of the awning, canopy, or marquee to which such sign is to be affixed. 

(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Secs. 62-188—62-210. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 3. ILLUMINATION
 
Sec. 62-211. Brightness restricted.
The light from any illuminated sign shall not be of any intensity or brightness which will interfere with the general welfare of residents or occupants of adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-212. Colored lights.
No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-213. Hazardous to vehicular operation.
Neither direct, nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-214. Standards for signs.
Every electric sign shall be listed and installed under the standards of an approved electrical testing laboratory or approved by the codes officer and installed in conformance with the standards of the electric code adopted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Secs. 62-215—62-235. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 4. POLITICAL SIGNS
 
Sec. 62-236. When permitted.
Political signs shall be permitted within any zoning district of the city subject to the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-237. When erection permitted.
A political sign shall not be erected more than 90 days prior to the election for which the sign is intended to influence. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-238. When removal required.
Any political sign shall be removed within seven days after the final election including any runoff elections for which the sign is intended to influence. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-239. Location, size—Residential areas.
Political signs shall be allowed in a residential zoning district without a permit when such signs do not exceed 16 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-240. Same—Nonresidential areas.
Political signs located outside of commercial and manufacturing zoning districts shall not exceed 16 square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-241. Setback.
Political signs shall be set back a minimum of 12 feet from any public right-of-way and shall not be attached to any sign directing or controlling traffic; any pole or post supporting such signs; to any utility pole or post; or to any tree, shrub, or plant. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-242. Permission of property owner.
Before any political sign is erected, the permission of the owner of the property upon which the sign is proposed to be erected must be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Sec. 62-243. Removal by city.
The city is empowered to remove or cause to be removed all political signs not conforming with the provisions of this division without notice to the candidate whose sign creates the nonconformance. 
(Ord. No. 340, 2-10-97)
 
Chapter 66 SOLID WASTE 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 66-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Ashes means the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other combustible materials. 
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food. 
Refuse means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, except body wastes, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid wastes, excluding ashes, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. Tree trimmings not longer than five feet in length, nor more than five inches in diameter shall be classified as rubbish. 
(Code 1976, § 10-1)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 66-2. Containers—Use required.
All refuse must be deposited in containers meeting the specifications set by the mayor and council from time to time. There must be at least one container for each family unit. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2)
 
Sec. 66-3. Same—Location.
Containers shall be placed adjacent to the alley, if there is one, adjoining the property. Otherwise, container shall be placed on or near the driveway in the rear of the residence or business, or at such other place as designated by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 10-2)
 
Sec. 66-4. Same—Duty to provide.
The owner or occupant of the premises where refuse is located shall be responsible for providing suitable containers as set forth in this chapter, and a refusal to do so shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1976, § 10-3)
 
Sec. 66-5. Same—Use by businesses.
All businesses shall be required to place all trash, garbage and waste paper of whatsoever character in containers. Each merchant or business is hereby required to obtain a suitable container for such rubbish, garbage or any other waste material that cannot be burned, said trash, garbage and other waste material to be removed by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-4)
 
Sec. 66-6. Building construction waste removal.
Trash and/or debris in the nature of building materials may not be disposed of on the city streets; such rubbish must be removed either by the parties who placed said rubbish on the streets or by the city at the expense of the parties who placed the rubbish in the street, such removal not to constitute a part of the regular pickup service of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-6)
Cross reference(s)—Buildings and building regulations, ch. 22. 
 
Sec. 66-7. Scattering, littering.
No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit anywhere within the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, alley, sewer, parkway, or other public place, or onto any private premises within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 10-5)
State law reference(s)—Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 
 
Secs. 66-8—66-40. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. YARD TRIMMINGS
 
Sec. 66-41. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to, municipal solid waste landfills. 
Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Ord. No. 335, 10-14-96)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 66-42. Disposal.
(a)	It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)	Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(c)	Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stored in the following manner: The city requires that all residents place all tree trimmings in place for pickup by the city brush truck. 
(d)	Brush pile specifications shall be no longer than six feet long by six feet high by six feet wide. There shall be no logs larger than ten inches in diameter. Brush service is for city residents only. All contracted work shall be removed by the contractor. The city will dispose of contracted labor for a fee. 
(e)	Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 335, 10-14-96; Ord. No. 452, 1-9-12)
 
Sec. 66-43. Burning.
(a)	Burning bulky refuse, construction and demolition waste, garbage, yard waste, or any other material to include leaves and brush is hereby prohibited inside the city limits of Rossville. 
(b)	Fires for cooking and warming fires are allowed only if fire is contained in a three-foot by three-foot pit, six inches deep in the ground and not stacked higher than three feet. 
(Ord. No. 452, 1-9-12)
 
Secs. 66-44—66-60. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION SITE WASTE MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 66-61. Discarded building materials and construction waste disposal requirements.
Building materials, concrete washout, paint washout, litter, sanitary waste, and other construction site wastes must be properly managed and disposed of to reduce the risk of pollution from materials such as surplus or refuse building materials or hazardous wastes. 
Practices such as trash disposal, recycling, proper material handling, and spill prevention and clean up measures must be implemented to reduce the potential for storm water runoff to mobilize construction site wastes and contaminate surface or ground water. 
The proper management and disposal of wastes should be practiced at all construction sites to reduce stormwater runoff. 
(1)	Waste management practices must be used to properly locate refuse piles. 
(2)	Covered materials that may be displaced by rainfall or stormwater runoff. 
(3)	Prevent all spill and leaks of hazardous wastes. 
Guidelines for proper handling, storage, and disposal of construction site wastes must be posted in storage and use areas on site. 
(Ord. No. 419, 11-13-06)
 
Sec. 66-62. Storage and disposal of construction site waste.
Designate a waste collection area onsite that does not receive a substantial amount of runoff from upland areas and does not drain directly to a water body. 
Designate areas for concrete trucks and equipment to wash down that will not flow into storm drains or become surface water runoff that would lead to the storm drains. Under no circumstances should concrete wash out be conducted in the road or directly into storm drains. 
Designate areas for paint cans and equipment to wash down that will not flow into storm drains or become surface water runoff that would lead to the storm drains or ground water recharge areas. Under no circumstances should excess paint be washed out in the road or directly into storm drains. 
Ensure that containers have lids so they can be covered before periods of rain. Keep containers in a covered area whenever possible. 
Schedule waste collection to prevent containers from overfilling, which would prevent them from being able to be covered. 
Clean up spills immediately. For hazardous materials, follow cleanup instructions on the package. Use an absorbent material such as sawdust or kitty litter to contain the spill. 
(1)	During the demolition phase of construction, provide extra containers and schedule more frequent pick ups. 
(2)	Collect, remove, and dispose of all construction site waste at authorized disposal areas. 
(Ord. No. 419, 11-13-06)
 
Sec. 66-63. Disposal of hazardous materials.
Steps must be taken to ensure the proper disposal of hazardous materials: 
Local waste management authorities must be consulted about the requirements of disposing of hazardous materials. 
A hazardous waste container must be emptied and cleaned before it is disposed of to prevent leaks. 
The original product label must never be removed from the container as it contains important safety information. Follow manufacturer's recommended method of disposal, which should be printed on the label. 
If excess products need to be disposed of, they must never be mixed during disposal unless specifically recommended by the manufacturer. 
Consult state and local solid waste regulatory agencies and private firms to ensure the proper disposal of contaminated soils that have been exposed to and still contain hazardous substances. 
The following practices must be used to reduce risks associated with pesticides or to reduce the amount of pesticides that come in contact with stormwater: 
(1)	Follow all federal, state, and local regulations that apply to the use, handling, and disposal of pesticides. 
(2)	Do not handle the materials any more than necessary. 
(3)	Store pesticides in a dry, covered area. 
(4)	Construction curbs or dikes to contain pesticides in case of spillage. 
(5)	Follow the recommended application rates and methods. 
(6)	Have equipment and absorbent materials available in areas where pesticides are stored and used in order to contain and clean up any spills that occur. 
The following management practices must be followed to reduce the contamination risk associated with petroleum products: 
(1)	Store petroleum products and fuel for vehicles in dry, covered areas with construction curbs or dikes to contain any spills. 
(2)	Immediately contain and clean up any spills with absorbent materials. 
(3)	Have equipment available in fuel storage areas and in vehicles to contain and clean up spills. 
(Ord. No. 419, 11-13-06)
 
Sec. 66-64. Maintenance requirements.
Containers or equipment that may malfunction and cause leaks or spills must be identified through regular inspection of storage and use areas. 
Equipment and containers must be inspected regularly for leaks, corrosion, support or foundation failure, or any other signs of deterioration and should be tested for soundness. Any found to be defective must be repaired or replaced immediately. 
If failures to the onsite BMPs occur, such as sediment build up in the road way, this must be shoveled by hand or with a road sweeper. Under no circumstances should this sediment be washed down into the storm drainage system or the creeks or streams. 
(Ord. No. 419, 11-13-06)
 
Secs. 66-65—66-80. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. DISCHARGES INTO THE PUBLIC SEWERAGE COLLECTION SYSTEM 
 
Sec. 66-81. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to control discharges into the public sewerage collection system that interfere with the operations of the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines, interfere with normal operation of pumps and their controls, and contribute waste of a strength or form that either causes treatment difficulties or is beyond the treatment capability of the Moccasin Bend Wastewater Treatment Plant. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 1, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-82. Definitions.
Food service facilities means those establishments primarily engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities: cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also included are infared heating, searing, barbecuing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, nondrinkable food product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. These facilities include restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants, carwash facility, automotive maintenance facility, or any other sewer users as determined by the city. 
Grease means material composed primarily of fats, oil, and grease (FOG) from animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil, and grease shall be deemed as Grease by definition. Grease does not include petroleum based products. 
Grease trap means a device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to collect settling solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. 
Oil/water separator means an approved and industry standard system that is specifically designed and manufactured to separate oil from water. The system shall allow the oil to be collected and removed on a regular basis as to prevent it from being discharged into the wastewater collection system. Only oil/water separators manufactured for that specific operation will be approved. Adequate support literature from the manufacturer will be required so as to allow a proper review by the city. 
User means any person or establishment including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes, or permits the contribution or discharge of wastewater into the city's wastewater collection or treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 2, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-83. Control plan for (FOG) and food waste.
(a)	Any new construction, renovation, or expansion of food service facilities shall be required to submit to the city a FOG and food waste control plan that will effectively control the discharge of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system. 
(b)	Existing facilities shall not be exempt from the requirements of this article. There will be no "grandfathering". 
(Ord. No. 432, § 3, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-84. General criteria.
(a)	Installation requirements. All existing, proposed, or newly remodeled food service facilities inside the city of Rossville wastewater service area shall be required to install, at the user's expense an approved, properly operated and maintained grease trap/interceptor. 
(b)	Sanitary sewer flows. Sanitary sewer flows from toilets, urinals, lavatories, etc. shall not be discharged into the grease trap/interceptor. These flows shall be conveyed separately to the sanitary sewer service lateral. 
(c)	Floor drains. Only floor drains which discharge or have the potential to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease trap/interceptor. 
(d)	Garbage grinders/disposers. It is recommended that solid food waste products be disposed of through normal solid waste/garbage disposal means. If a grinder/disposal is used it must be connected to the grease trap/interceptor. The use of grinders is discouraged since it decreases the operational capacity of the grease trap/interceptor and will require an increased pumping frequency to ensure continuous and effective operation. 
(e)	Dishwashers. Commercial dishwashers must be connected to the grease trap/interceptor. Dishwashers discharge soap and hot water which can melt grease and allow it to pass through an undersized grease trap. Traps must be sized accordingly to allow enough detention time to allow water to cool and grease to solidify and float to the top of the trap. 
(f)	Location. Grease trap/interceptor shall be installed outside the building upstream from the sanitary sewer service lateral connection. This will allow easy access for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at any time. A grease trap/interceptor may not be installed inside any part of a building without written approval by the city. 
Indoor grease traps may be installed under sinks if approved by the city based on flow and usage. Grease interceptors shall be installed outside the building upstream from the sanitary sewer service lateral connection. This will allow easy access for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at any time. A grease interceptor may not be installed inside any part of a building without written approval by the city.	
(g)	Pass-through limits. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from grease trap/interceptor to exceed 100 MgPL (milligrams per liter) or any amount deemed harmful to the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 4, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-85. Design criteria.
(a)	Construction. Grease traps/interceptor shall be constructed in accordance with the City of Rossville standards and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings designed for grease retention. All grease removal devises or technologies shall be subject to the written approval of the city. Such approval shall be based on demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology. 
(b)	Access. Access to grease traps/interceptor shall be available at all times, to allow for their maintenance and inspection. Access to trap/interceptor shall be provided by two manholes (one on each compartment) terminating at finished grade with cast iron frame and cover. 
(c)	Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the grease trap/interceptor shall be designed to have adequate load-bearing capacity. (Example: vehicular traffic in driving or parking areas). 
(d)	Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to a grease trap/interceptor shall enter only through the inlet pipe of the trap. Each grease trap/interceptor shall have only one inlet and one outlet pipe. 
(e)	Grease trap sizing. The required size of the grease trap shall be calculated using EPA, PDI, or approved plumbers flow charts based on gpm (gallons per minute) for kitchen/prep area fixtures. The minimum sizing requirement for a indoor grease trap is 20 gallons per minute/40 pounds grease. 
(f)	Grease interceptor sizing. All outdoor grease interceptors shall have a capacity of not less than 1,000 gallons, not to exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. If the calculated capacity exceeds 3,000 gallons, multiple units plumbed in series should not be installed. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 5, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-86. Grease trap maintenance.
(a)	Cleaning/pumping. The user at the user's expense shall maintain all grease traps/interceptor to assure proper operation and efficiency and maintain compliance with the city's pass through limits. Maintenance of grease trap/interceptor shall include the complete removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludge and solids. This work shall be performed by a Georgia or Tennessee EPD registered hauler. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the trap/interceptor from which it was removed or any other grease trap/interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is prohibited. This service shall also include a thorough inspection of the trap/interceptor and its components. Any needed repairs shall be noted. Repairs shall be made at user's expense. 
(b)	Cleaning/pumping frequency. The grease trap/interceptor must be pumped out completely a minimum of once every four months, or more frequently, as determined by the city, as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the sanitary sewer system. At least one time in every 12 months the trap/interceptor must be pumped out completely (all water, grit, grease, oil, etc.) to allow for inspection by the city. The facility is required to provide a minimum of 24 hours notice to the city so the city may schedule the inspector to be present during pump down and conduct the inspection. The frequency of cleaning for carryout only food establishment shall be determined on an as needed basis. However, carryout only food establishment shall comply with the annual pump down and inspection as required for all facilities. The carrier must be a certified and registered hauler with the City of Chattanooga Moccasin Bend Wastewater Treatment Facility. 
(c)	Disposal. All waste removed from each grease trap/interceptor must be disposed of at a facility approved to receive such waste in accordance with the provisions of this program. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any private or public portions of the city's sanitary sewer collection system. All pumpage from grease traps/interceptor must be tracked by a manifest, which confirms pumping, hauling, and disposal of waste. The customer must obtain and retain a copy of the original manifest from the hauler. 
(d)	Maintenance log. A grease trap/interceptor cleaning/maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous 24 months shall be maintained by each food service facility. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler, and disposal site and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection. Said log shall be made available to the city or city representative upon request. 
(e)	Submittal of records. Each user shall submit all cleaning and maintenance records to the city. The maintenance records shall include the following information: 
(1)	Facility name, address, contact person, and phone number; 
(2)	Company name, address, phone number, and contact name of person responsible for performing the maintenance, cleaning, pumping, or repair of grease trap; 
(3)	Types of maintenance performed; 
(4)	Dates maintenance was performed; 
(5)	Date of next scheduled maintenance; and 
(6)	Copies of manifests. 
The user shall be required to submit maintenance records to the city on a biannual basis (twice per year). Records shall be submitted by March 1 and September 15 of each year. The records shall be submitted to: 
ATTN: Stormwater Manager 
City of Rossville 
P O Box 159 
Rossville, GA 30741 
The city will perform periodic inspections of these facilities and shall notify the user of any additional required maintenance or repairs. Upon written notification by the city, the user shall be required to perform the maintenance and records of said maintenance within 14 calendar days. Upon inspection by the city the user may be required to install, at his expense, additional controls to provide a complete system which prevents discharges of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 6, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-87. Additives.
Any biological additive(s) placed into the grease trap/interceptor or building discharge line including but not limited to, enzymes, commercially available bacteria, or other additives designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat, or otherwise eliminate fats, oils, and grease shall require written approval by the city prior to use. The use of such additives shall in no way be considered as a substitution to the maintenance procedures required herein. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 7, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-88. Chemical treatment.
Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, acid, or other chemical solvents designed to dissolve or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease trap/interceptor. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 8, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-89. Sand, soil, and oil interceptors.
All car washes, truck washes, garages, service stations, car and truck maintenance facilities, fabricators, utility equipment shops, and other facilities (as determined by the city) that have sources of sand, soil, and oil shall install effective sand, soil and oil traps, interceptors, and/or oil/water separators. These systems shall be sized to effectively remove sand, soil, and oil at the expected flow rates. These systems shall be, at the user's expense, cleaned or pumped on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the wastewater collection and treatment systems. Users whose systems are deemed to be ineffective by the city shall be asked to change the cleaning frequency or to increase the size of the system. Owners or operators of washing facilities will be required to prevent the inflow of detergents and rainwater into the wastewater collection system. Oil/water separator installations shall be required at facilities that accumulate petroleum oils and greases and at facilities deemed necessary by the city. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 9, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-90. Laundries.
Commercial, institutional, or industrial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor with a wire basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that prevents passage (into the wastewater collection system) of solids one and one-half inches or larger in size such as rags, strings, buttons, or other solids detrimental to the system. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 10, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-91. Control equipment.
The equipment or facilities installed to control FOG, food waste, sand, soil, oil and lint must be designed in accordance with the International Plumbing Code guidelines, most current engineering standards, or other applicable guidelines approved by the city. Underground equipment shall be tightly sealed to prevent inflow of rainwater and shall be easily accessible to allow regular maintenance and inspection. 
Control equipment shall be maintained by the owner and/or operator of the facility as to prevent a stoppage of the wastewater collection system, and the accumulation of FOG, food waste, sand, soil, and lint in the collection lines, pump stations, and wastewater treatment plant. 
If the City of Rossville is required to clean out the wastewater collection lines, as a result of a stoppage resulting from poorly maintained control equipment (or lack thereof) the owner or operator shall be required to refund the labor, equipment, materials, and any overhead costs to the city including any fines incurred due to any sanitary sewer overflow due directly to the stoppage. 
The city retains the right to inspect and approve any and all installations of control equipment. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 11, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-92. Alteration of control methods.
The City of Rossville reserves the right to request additional control measures if existing control equipment is shown to be insufficient to protect the wastewater collection system and wastewater treatment plant from interference due to the discharge of FOG, sand, soil, lint, or any other undesirable materials. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 12, 2-9-09)
 
Sec. 66-93. Enforcement and penalties.
Any person who violates this article, in part or whole, shall be guilty of a civil violation punishable under and according to the general penalty provision of the City of Rossville Code of Ordinances. Each day's violation of this article shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 432, § 13, 2-9-09)
 
Chapter 70 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 70-1. Dedication of streets, etc.
No dedication to the city by any owner of property to be used as a street or alley or for other public use shall be valid until the same shall have been accepted in writing by the governing body. 
(Code 1976, § 18-3)
 
Sec. 70-2. Drainage onto sidewalks.
No person shall erect any drain, gutter, downspout, valley or any flat or sloping roof of any character that will in any manner drain or shed water onto any sidewalk of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 18-4)
 
Sec. 70-3. Obstructing drainage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or cause to be placed in any street or alley, any dirt, trash or other material so as to interfere with the drainage or use of such street or alley, without first obtaining a permit to do so from the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 18-5)
 
Sec. 70-4. Disposing of liquids on streets and sidewalks.
(a)	No person shall cause any water or other liquids to be disposed of on the streets or sidewalks of the city without the written permission of the mayor and council. 
(b)	The terms of this section shall not be applicable to the members of the fire department or any officer, agent, or employee of the city in the performance of a designated municipal duty. 
(Code 1976, § 18-6)
 
Sec. 70-5. Cleanliness of sidewalks; responsibility of abutting property owners, enforcement.
It shall be the duty of all occupants of improved property and owners of vacant property, in front of which the sidewalks have been paved, to keep such sidewalks clean, and to do such sweeping and scraping as may be necessary to remove clay, dirt and trash therefrom, and to render the same passable, comfortable and sightly. In addition, it shall be the duty of the mayor, after five days' written notice to any such person of the necessity for cleaning such sidewalk, to have done such work as may be necessary to render such walk clean and to render a bill covering the cost of such cleaning to the owner or agent of such property in person, or if such person or agent is a nonresident, then by mail. Upon the nonpayment of such bill within ten days after service of same as aforesaid, the city clerk shall issue an execution therefor against the owner of the abutting property, and such execution shall be a lien upon such property and shall be collected as other executions issued by the city. 
(Code 1976, § 18-7)
 
Sec. 70-6. Cutting or defacing trees.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface or destroy any shade tree on public property in the city unless authorized by the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 18-9)
 
Sec. 70-7. Conversion of public street, sidewalk to private use.
(a)	Prohibited. No person shall convert any public street, sidewalk or alley in the city to his own use, or place any obstruction in or upon them, or either of them, such as wood, barrels, boxes, timber or lumber, except necessarily for building purposes, or any other obstruction. 
(b)	Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code, and each day's violation shall be a separate offense. Additionally, any such obstruction may be summarily removed by the chief of police or upon his orders, at the expense of the owner or owners thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 18-10)
 
Secs. 70-8—70-40. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. STREET EXCAVATION AND RESTORATION OF PAVING PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 70-41. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Code enforcement officer: The person designated by the mayor who shall serve as the supervisor for the inspection or in his or her absence, the subordinate assigned or delegated direct responsibility for the administration of this article. 
Emergency: A sudden or unexpected occurrence or condition calling for immediate action. The repair of a broken or malfunctioning utility line or services shall be deemed an emergency if a repair is reasonably warranted under existing circumstances prior to the next working day. 
Excavation: Any excavation or tunneling of any public street right-of-way including, but not limited to, excavation in, cutting of, or tunneling of any street, sidewalk or curb for purposes of constructing or maintaining pipes, lines, driveways, private streets, poles, guide wires, signs, or other utilities, private structures, or facilities. 
Public works director: Person employed or otherwise engaged by the city and acting under the authority of the mayor and or the city clerk to physically inspect any excavation for conformity with the permit and other provisions of this article. 
Working day: Any day when the city office is open for the transaction of normal business. 
(Ord. No. 468, § B, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-42. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in or to tunnel under any street, curb, alley, or public right-of-way in the city without first having obtained a permit from the city clerk or his/her designees and complying with the provisions of this article. It shall be unlawful to violate or to vary from the terms of any such permit; provided, however, any person maintaining pipes, lines, driveways, or other facilities in or under the surface of any public right-of-way may proceed with an excavation without a permit when emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately, and provided further that the person shall apply for a permit on the next working day and shall otherwise and immediately thereafter comply with all other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 468, § C, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-43. Applications.
(a)	Applications for such permits shall be made to the city clerk or his/her designees and shall state thereon the location/address of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof the purpose thereof, the name of the person doing the actual excavating, and the name of the person for whom the work is being done. The application form shall contain a contractual undertaking and guaranty on the part of the applicant and, the permittee, if the permittee will comply with all the terms and provisions of this chapter and all other conditions imposed by the city with respect to the permit, whether or not the same be expressed verbatim on the face of the permit. The application shall further contain a contractual undertaking and guaranty on the part of the applicant and permittee, if the applicant and permittee, if different from the applicant, does not comply with the terms, provisions and conditions set forth, the applicant and/or permittee shall be financially liable to the city for the cost of all repairs and/or corrections made by the city and/or by its subcontractors and for all damages incurred by the city occasioned by such failure to comply. Said application shall also provide that the applicant shall guarantee the integrity of the work performed for a period of 24 months from the date upon which the refilled excavation is accepted by the city clerk or designee. 
(b)	The applicant shall disclose any foreseeable lane or sidewalk closures or detours during excavation. As a condition of issuing a permit, all applicants must agree in writing as part of the application to comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. The building official or his designee shall consider each application for a permit filed under this article, under all facts and circumstances shall grant or refuse the permit within five working days and shall endorse his action on the application. The action of the code enforcement officer in granting or refusing a permit shall be final, except as it may be subject to review at law. A permit may be refused for the following reasons: 
(1)	The proposed excavation should be redesigned to mitigate a potential safety hazard; 
(2)	The proposed excavation should be redesigned to mitigate damage within the right-of-way; 
(3)	The proposed excavation cannot be safely made in the public right-of-way; 
(4)	The proposed restoration plan does not meet the minimum standards for restoration; 
(5)	The applicant has willfully failed to comply with conditions of prior permits issued to the applicant; provided that such disqualification shall be removed upon correction of any such defects; 
(6)	For failure to satisfactorily comply with any one or more of the terms, provisions or conditions of this article; 
(7)	For other good cause in the discretion of the code enforcement officer. 
Provided that as to an excavation done in emergency circumstances the application shall be completed on the next working day; and the code enforcement or his/her designees shall review the actual work completed for conformity with the requirements hereof. 
(Ord. No. 468, § D, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-44. Application and excavation permit fee.
Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, established initially, as follows: 
(a)	Permit fee of $250.00 for transverse cuts in pavement, subject to the provisions of subsection (k), below. 
(b)	For longitudinal cuts in pavement the permit fee of $1.00 per foot shall be charged ($250.00 minimum), subject to the provisions of subsection (k), below. 
(c)	Permit fee of $50.00 for cuts in the sidewalk, subject to the provisions of subsection (k), below. 
(d)	Permit fee of $100.00 for cuts in the curb and/or curb and gutter, subject to the provisions of subsection (k), below. 
(e)	Street cut permit is not required for cuts outside the sidewalk and street pavement. 
(f)	Written notification of intent to work in a city right-of-way must be received at least 24 hours prior to beginning work, even if a permit is not required, except in emergencies. E-mail is considered a written notice. 
(g)	Permits for relocation or installation of fire hydrants will be required when requested by the city, but no fee (including administrative fees) will be required. 
(h)	Multiple cuts, each not exceeding 25 square feet in area, when required in a single block or within a work zone distance of 250 feet as part of a single project, are considered as one cut. Permit and fee will be required for a single cut under these conditions. If the cut exceeds 250 feet, or multiple cuts within a block or a work zone greater than 250 feet, then the entire lane that is disturbed by construction shall be repaved from intersection to intersection. 
(i)	Neither permits or fees will be required when work in the right-of-way is conducted as part of a city street improvement project, including resurfacing, sewer repair, where the utility is required to move their facilities as a result of the city project. Nor shall fees be required for routine maintenance and repairs by Walker County. 
(j)	Fees shall not be waived under any other conditions. 
(k)	When it is determined that non-emergency work in the city right-of-way has proceeded without the purchase of a permit, the contractor or utility shall immediately purchase a street cut permit, and the fee for the permit shall be double the normal fee; no further permits shall be issued to the contractor or utility until such time as the improper work is removed and replaced in accordance with this Code and such person shall be subject to the penal provisions of this article and each day of such failure or violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(l)	Where work in the city right-of-way is self-performed by one of the following entities, or by one of the entity's approved contractors, the fee for each permit shall be invoiced monthly. Invoicing may be provided for: 
(1)	Electric Power Board of Chattanooga (KPB); 
(2)	Tennessee-American Water Company (TAWC); 
(3)	Atlanta Light and Gas Company; 
(4)	AT&T; 
(5)	Comcast Cable Company; 
(6)	Walker County; 
(7)	Unnamed utility that might have infrastructure in the city's right-of-way. 
(m)	The amounts of all fees hereinabove provided may be increased from time to time by resolution of a majority of the city council without the necessity of amending the ordinance, and without prior notice to any person. 
(Ord. No. 468, § E, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-45. Mariner of excavating—Barricades and lights.
(a)	Any person making any excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the specifications and standards issued by the city official. In accordance with the then currently adopted version of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) sufficient and proper barricades, lights and other traffic control devices shall be maintained to prevent accidents and injury to persons or property. If any sidewalk is blocked, a temporary sidewalk shall be provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient for users. No work shall be done which deviates from the approved plans and until a change of plans has been secured from the code enforcement officer. All expenses of such safety measures and temporary sidewalk shall be borne by the applicant or owner. 
(b)	The city clerk shall provide each permittee at the time a permit is issued hereunder a copy of the permit which shall include the permit number and the expiration date. It shall be the duty of any permittee hereunder to keep the permit on site of the excavation work. It shall be unlawful for any person to produce any such permit at or about any excavation not covered by such permit, or to misrepresent the number of the permit or the date of expiration of the permit. Permits shall expire after 180 days and all excavation work performed must be j completed within 60 days of commencing. 
(Ord. No. 468, § F, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-46. Bond required.
When permits are required to excavate or in any way obstruct any street in the city, the code enforcement officer shall require from such applicant, before granting a permit, a bond with good and sufficient, as may be determined from time to time by the code enforcement office, sureties acting with consent of the city clerk, conditioned to secure the city against all loss, damage or injury of any kind which may result to the city by reason of such excavation or obstruction; provided, that public utilities and/or persons engaged in the business of contracting shall be allowed to give an annual bond, instead of a bond for each, obstruction such annual bond in every instance to be renewed at least once every 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 468, § G, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-47. Manner of excavating street.
(a)	In excavating any street, all material for paving or ballasting must be removed with the least possible injury or loss of the same and, together with the excavated materials from the trenches, must be placed where they will cause the least possible inconvenience to the public. All pavement, where trench excavations are to be made, shall be saw cut. Cutting the street with a jackhammer or a hoe-ram is not permitted. 
(b)	The permittee shall carry on the work authorized by the permit in such manner as to cause a minimum of interference with traffic. He shall provide adequate warning signs and devices to warn and guide traffic, and shall place the signs and warning devices in a position of maximum effectiveness. The latest editions of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, copies of which are on file in the public works department or at City Hall, and may be used as a guideline for proper positioning of signs and devices. 
(c)	Where difficult or potentially hazardous conditions exist, Georgia certified flagmen shall be provided to effect a safe and orderly movement of traffic. Where insufficient traffic lanes exist because of street openings, adequate bridging shall be supplied by the permittee. When traffic congestion occurs in spite of all precaution, the permittee shall be responsible for providing a flagman. In the event the building official shall discover any hazardous excavation or unwarranted traffic congestion where flagmen have not been provided, he shall direct the permittee to immediately post flagmen. A failure to post flagmen following a directive shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)	On main thoroughfares and in congested districts, sufficient traffic lanes shall be kept open at all times to permit substantially normal traffic flow. Unless this can be accomplished, work shall be done only during the period between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. or between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as the city code enforcement officer may designate. 
(e)	For backfill in roadway areas, the contractor shall provide six inches of graded aggregate base above the utility's main line. From top of graded aggregate base backfill to bottom of paving, the backfill material shall be flowable fill with a compressive strength of 200—250 psi in 48 hours. Flowable fill shall be placed a minimum of 48 hours prior to the placing of the asphalt or concrete topping. Where it is impractical to use flowable fill because of terrain, slope, width of trench, or other situations, the material for the backfill in the roadway areas may be approved for cement treated aggregate base at the sole discretion of the code enforcement. Each eight-inch layer of backfill shall be thoroughly compacted by means of a mechanical tamp. Other backfill materials may be acceptable, but prior approval for the substitution shall be determined by the code enforcement or his/her designee. 
(f)	Backfill for trenches within the sidewalk areas shall be compacted graded aggregate base instead of loose washed stone. Each eight-inch layer of graded aggregate base shall be thoroughly compacted by means of mechanical tamp. 
(g)	If a perpendicular cut reaches the centerline of the roadway, the asphalt must be replaced from curb to curb and a minimum of ten feet on each side of the centerline of the excavation. 
(h)	Repairs will be made by concrete or asphalt pavement: 
•	Depth of six inches for local streets, alleys and driveways. (Local streets are typically residential streets. 
•	Depth of eight inches for residential collectors and commercial driveways. 
•	Depth of nine inches for thoroughfares and collectors. 
•	Depth of ten inches for streets located in the central business district. 
(Ord. No. 468, § H, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-48. Liability and responsibility for repair.
(a)	Any person who shall properly make any excavation or other change to the street right-of-way, and shall have same inspected by the code enforcement officer or his/her designee and shall be relieved from any liability for any defects due to inadequate workmanship or defective materials provided the excavation shall remain free from defects for 24 months following installation. 
(b)	If a contractor, utility, or other entity makes five or more excavations within one block of a city right-of-way or within a work zone distance of 250 feet within the city right-of-way, whichever is shorter, causing disruption to any part of the pavement, within two years after said right-of-way has been resurfaced or constructed, said contractor, utility or other entity shall repave the entire street for the distance of the city block or 250 feet, said distance being the distance utilized to require the repaving. Said repaving shall be done to the standards approved by the code enforcement officer and shall be done under the supervision and control and at the direction of the city. The contractor, utility, or other entity shall bear the entire cost of such repaving. In the event any such contractor, utility, or other entity fails to repave as required herein, then such contractor, utility or other entity shall be prohibited from acquiring any permits for additional excavations in any city right-of-way until such time as the repaving required by this section is completed and approved by the city code enforcement officer. 
(c)	The permit application and permit shall require, as a condition of its issuance, that the applicant and permittee, if different from the applicant, shall be responsible for all enforcement costs of the terms of the permit including attorney fees incurred by the city in enforcing the terms, provisions and requirements of such permit, and such application and permit form(s) shall require the signature of the applicant and permittee acknowledging and agreeing to such. 
(Ord. No. 468, § I, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-49. Inspection.
It shall be the responsibility of any person granted a permit to schedule an inspection of the permitted work by the city's code enforcement officer upon such conditions as may be specified in the permit. The utility or contractor making any changes to a city right-of-way, shall, at a minimum, have the following inspections performed by the city's code enforcement officer. 
(a)	After the repairs or installation of the new conduit or piping and before the graded aggregate base fill over the pipe has been placed; 
(b)	During the placement of the flowable fill or other approved fill in the sole discretion of the city inspector; and 
(c)	Final completion. 
(d)	Should inspections be required after normal working hours or on weekends, the contractor or utility making the changes to the city right-of-way, shall reimburse the city for the code enforcement officers time at a rate to be determined in accordance with the personnel policies in effect at the time the repairs are performed. When it is determined that improper work has been performed in the city's right-of-way, the contractor or utility responsible for the work shall remove improper work and reinstall the work in accordance with the city standards. If a permit was not obtained, the contractor or utility shall purchase a permit and the fee shall be double the normal fee. No future permits will be issued to the violating contractor or utility until the improper work has been corrected. 
(Ord. No. 468, § J, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-50. Specification.
Upon issuance of each permit, the code enforcement officer or his/her designees shall specify minimum restoration standards applicable to the permit. Provided that where the work involved is greater in scope than provided for by standard specifications as determined by the code enforcement officer. The permittee shall be required to submit suitable plans of installation and street restoration for approval prior to issuance of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 468, § K, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-51. Insurance.
Each person applying and as applicable each permittee if different from the applicant for a permit shall file a certificate of insurance (or provide other proof of insurance in form and substance to be approved by the city attorney) indicating that he is insured against claims of personal injury or property damage which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether such performance be by the applicant, a contractor or subcontractor, or anyone employed by him. Such insurance or indemnity agreement shall cover collapse, explosive hazards, and underground work by equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability arising from completed operations. The minimum amount of the liability insurance for bodily injury shall not be in an amount less than $300,000.00 for each person and $1,000,000.00 for each accident and for property damages in an amount not less than $100,000.00, unless other higher limits are established by the State of Georgia, in which event such higher limits shall automatically be controlling and shall then and thereafter be here applicable as the minimum acceptable limit(s) of such insurance. 
(Ord. No. 468, § L, 2-11-13)
 
Sec. 70-52. Supervision.
The code enforcement officer, or his/her designee, shall from time to time inspect all excavations and see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. The permittee shall give notice to the code enforcement officer, or his designee, before refilling any such excavation or tunnel and said work may not commence until the inspector arrives at the site or otherwise gives permission to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 468, § M, 2-11-13)
 
Secs. 70-53—70-85. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. SIGHT OBSTRUCTIONS AT INTERSECTIONS 
 
Sec. 70-86. Declared nuisance.
Any person who plants, fixes or maintains any tree, shrubbery, or any other object upon any parkway or private property within the city adjacent to the intersection of any streets in the city, which obstructs the driving vision of the operator of any vehicle is hereby declared to be guilty of committing a nuisance. 
(Code 1976, § 19-18)
 
Sec. 70-87. Notice to owner of property to remove; duty to comply.
Whenever the mayor or council, after investigation, shall determine that any tree, shrubbery or other object planted or fixed upon any parkway or private property in the city adjacent to a street intersection, obstructs the driving vision of the drivers of vehicles passing over or through such street intersection, he shall cause to be served upon the owner or occupant of the property abutting such parkway, or the owner of the property upon which such trees, shrubbery or other objects are planted or fixed in violation of this section, a written notice requiring such owner or occupant to remove such tree, shrubbery or other object, or to trim such tree or shrubbery or reduce the height and width of other objects so as to comply with the provisions of this section. The notice herein provided for shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the property herein described and shall require the owner to comply with the directions contained in the written notice, within 15 days after the service of the notice. Such notice may and can be served by placing a copy thereof at a conspicuous place upon the property abutting the parkway, if the offending object be thereon or upon the private property upon which the offending object may exist. 
(Code 1976, § 19-19)
 
Sec. 70-88. Appeal.
The owner of any property affected by the directions of the above notice can within the time specified in such notice appeal to the mayor and council and until the council shall act upon such appeal, the appellant shall not be required to comply with the notice. 
(Code 1976, § 19-20)
 
Sec. 70-89. Failure to comply with notice; abatement by city.
If after the service of the notice as provided in this article, the owner does not comply with the directions contained in the notice within the time specified, if the traffic hazard can be removed by the trimming of trees or shrubbery and if within ten days after the hearing on appeal is had, which hearing resulted in a decision adverse to the appellant, the appellant fails to comply, the city shall trim such trees or shrubbery to such dimensions as to relieve and terminate such traffic hazard. Should it become necessary in order to relieve such traffic hazard to remove trees or shrubbery or other objects, such removal shall be made by the city, and a lien for the cost shall attach to such property abutting such parkway or on which such obstruction existed. 
(Code 1976, § 19-21)
 
Sec. 70-90. No prohibition on erection or maintenance of buildings.
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the owner of any property from erecting or maintaining buildings or structures as permitted by any laws or ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-22)
 
Secs. 70-91—70-120. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. ASSEMBLIES, PARADES AND PROCESSIONS 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 70-121. Enforcement.
Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the authority of any officer to arrest a person engaged in any acts or activities for which a permit has been granted under this article, if the conduct of such person violates the laws, or if such person obstructs the public streets and sidewalks of the city or engages in acts that cause a breach of the peace. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-122. Dispersal of activity.
Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall be obstructed by a crowd, congregation, parade, meeting, assembly or procession, or the conduct of two or more persons, except as authorized by any permit issued pursuant to division 2 of this article, the persons comprising such group shall disperse or move when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse such direction to move or disperse and such refusal shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 2, 4-14-97)
 
Secs. 70-123—70-145. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
 
Sec. 70-146. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to organize or hold or participate in any parade, meeting, assembly or procession of persons and/or vehicles on the streets or sidewalks within the city unless such activity shall have first been authorized by a written permit therefor. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 3, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-147. Application.
Any person desiring a permit required by the provisions of this division shall make application therefor to the chief of police, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)	The name and local and permanent address of the applicant. 
(2)	The name and address of the person the applicant represents. 
(3)	The exact time and date of commencement and termination of each act or activity desired. 
(4)	The purpose, location and route of such act or activity, if applicable. 
(5)	The person, group, association or body to be authorized under the permit to do such act or activity and the number of persons to participate. 
(6)	The age of any minors who may participate in such activity, and the name of the person who will be responsible for such minors. 
(7)	Such other relevant information as the chief of police may require for the investigation of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 4, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-148. Determination of issuance.
In deciding whether to issue a permit under the provisions of this division, the chief of police shall consider: 
(1)	The number of persons to participate; 
(2)	Anticipated traffic conditions at the time and date proposed for the activity; 
(3)	Schedule of other similar activities for which permits may have been issued; 
(4)	Adequacy of adult supervision for any minors scheduled to participate; 
(5)	Availability of city personnel whose presence on duty may be required by the activity and by the necessity to protect the general public; and 
(6)	Adequacy of public facilities in the location proposed for the activity to accommodate the proposed activity and the normal public use of public facilities in the proposed location. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 5, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-149. Issuance.
The permit required by this division shall be issued by the chief of police upon application therefor; provided, however, that such permit may be denied or refused if it shall appear that the applicant therefor or the act or activity requested by such application shall be violative of law. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 6, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-150. Denial, modifications.
(a)	If the chief of police determines from the application for a permit under this division that the proposed parade or march will unduly interfere with and impede traffic on the public streets, alleys and ways over which the parade or march will pass, and/or the public streets, alleys and ways that intersect the public streets, alleys and ways over which the parade or march will pass, he shall so advise the applicant in writing and give, in reasonable details, the reason he will not issue a permit for such parade or march, and shall suggest such modifications in the application which, if made, will not unreasonably interfere with and impede normal traffic on the public streets, alleys and ways by such parade or march. Such modifications may include: 
(1)	Changing or altering the route of the march or parade; 
(2)	Changing the date and/or time of day the parade or march will be made; 
(3)	Changing or altering the length of the march or parade; 
(4)	Changing the width of the parade or march, i.e., from requiring the whole width of the public street, alley or way to a lesser part of the width, to be specified; 
(5)	Any combination of the foregoing suggested areas of modifications; 
(6)	Any other modification that will cause such parade or march to not unduly interfere with and impede normal traffic on such public streets, alleys and ways of the city. 
(b)	If such suggested modifications shall be incorporated in an amended application for a permit, the chief of police shall forthwith issue a permit for such parade or march. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 7, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-151. Deviation from conditions of permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person participating in any act or activity for which a permit has been granted under the provisions of this division to deviate from or alter any of the terms or conditions of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 8, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-152. Display.
Every person having a permit issued under the provisions of this division shall have such permit in his possession during the activity permitted thereby, and shall display such permit upon the request of any law enforcement officer. Failure to display such permit shall be deemed a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 9, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-153. Revocation.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this division may be revoked by the chief of police for the violation by the permittee of any law. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 10, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 70-154. Contents; filing of copy.
Upon issuance of a permit required by this division, the permit shall contain therein all information contained in the application therefor and shall be signed by the chief of police, and a signed copy of such permit shall be kept with the application, both on file in the office of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 345, § 11, 4-14-97)
 
Chapter 74 TAXATION 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 74-1. Elderly persons payment of taxes in installments.
Elderly persons in the city who are either on social security disability or social security income for aged citizens or who would otherwise qualify for such income given an appropriate income experience are hereby granted the right to make ad valorem tax payments as follows provided that such elderly citizens are residing on their own premises: One-fourth of such tax payment shall be made on or before the date which such ad valorem taxes shall become due and subsequently after the expiration of one month from the date of the first payment, a one-fourth or 25 percent installment shall be paid, another 25 percent payment is due a month after the second payment shall become payable and the fourth and final installment payment shall be due one month later. No interest or penalties shall accrue if the terms and conditions hereinabove set forth are carried out but interest and penalties shall be included at such rates as are applicable if any provision or term of this section is not complied with. 
(Code 1976, § 18½-1)
 
Sec. 74-2. Due date; delinquency; failure to pay.
(a)	All taxes shall be due to the city on October 20 of each and every year and shall become delinquent taxes after December 20 of each and every year or shall become delinquent 60 days after the posting of tax notices to taxpayers. Interest at the rate of one percent per month shall be added to such delinquent taxes until the date the tax is paid. 
(b)	A ten percent penalty shall be added to delinquent taxes, which penalty shall become fixed immediately when the taxes become delinquent. 
(c)	If any person shall not pay his taxes or assessments of any kind when due, such delinquent taxes may be collected by fi.fa. issued by the city clerk, tax collector and executed by any police officer of the city under the same procedure provided by the laws governing execution of such process from the superior court, or by use of any other available legal processes and remedies. A lien shall exist against all property upon which the city property taxes are levied, and as of the assessment date of each year, which lien shall be superior to all other liens, except that it shall have equal dignity with those of federal, state or county taxes. In cases of hardship, the council shall have direction or the authority to waive any and all penalties imposed by the Charter or on delinquent taxes, fees, assessments or on other amounts due the city. No fi.fa. shall be issued and no property shall be sold pursuant to the above section until there shall have elapsed the period of one year from the date that the taxes became delinquent. 
(d)	All sales of real and personal property under such execution shall be made by the city police officer so appointed before the door at the regular place of holding the municipal court or such other place as the mayor and council may direct. Such property, real and personal, shall be sold to the highest bidder for cash. 
(Code 1976, § 18½-2)
 
Sec. 74-3. Bids on property at municipal tax sales; docket.
(a)	The city clerk shall attend all tax sales held by the city, and shall be authorized to bid upon property sold at such tax sales in behalf of the city, so long as such bid on behalf of the city does not exceed the amount of the tax due, including interest, penalties, costs, and expenses of the sale. 
(b)	The city clerk shall keep a tax execution docket, upon which entries shall be made whenever execution issues for delinquent taxes, containing the name of the taxpayer and an itemized statement of taxes due. Entries shall be made on such docket by the officer who conducts the sale of such property at any tax sale, showing the date of sale, the newspaper in which notice of such sale was published and the date of publications; the purchase price at the sale and the name of the purchaser. This docket shall be open to public inspection at all reasonable times. 
(Code 1976, § 18½-3)
 
Secs. 74-4—74-35. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. OCCUPATION TAXES 
 
Sec. 74-36. Required.
For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession, or occupation. 
(Code 1976, § 13-1)
 
Sec. 74-37. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
(1)	Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
(2)	Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
(3)	Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
(4)	Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
(5)	Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
(6)	Sales, use, or excise tax; 
(7)	Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
(8)	Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. section 1563(a)(2); 
(9)	Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent; and 
(10)	Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
Location of office does not include a temporary work site which serves a single customer or project. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1976, § 13-2)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 74-38. Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure.
(a)	A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as provided in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)	A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)	The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 13-3)
 
Sec. 74-39. Levied; restrictions.
(a)	An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(b)	The tax rate shall be determined by the number of employees for each business, trade, profession or occupation and will be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. Professionals will be charged per employee count, however each professional within a firm will be counted separately. 
(Code 1976, § 13-4)
 
Sec. 74-40. Paying occupation tax of business with no location in state.
Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)	Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)	Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 13-5)
 
Sec. 74-41. Identification of each line of business.
The business registration of each business operated in the local government's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city clerk's office and that line of business being noted by the city clerk's office upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner. 
(Code 1976, § 13-6)
 
Sec. 74-42. Number of businesses considered to be operating.
Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Code 1976, § 13-7)
 
Sec. 74-43. Classification of professionals.
Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)	The occupation tax based on the number of employees as set forth in section 74-39. 
(2)	A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by October 15 of each year. 
(Code 1976, § 13-8)
 
Sec. 74-44. Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government.
Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Code 1976, § 13-9)
 
Sec. 74-45. Purpose and scope of tax.
The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5—48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 13-10)
 
Sec. 74-46. When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
(a)	Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Such registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 15 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade, or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a penalty as established by the mayor and council imposed. 
(b)	The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk's office and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any kind of profession, trade, or calling subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)	In addition to the above remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1976, § 13-11)
 
Sec. 74-47. Exemption for business operated for charitable purpose.
No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 90 percent or more of the entire proceeds from such business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1976, § 13-12)
 
Sec. 74-48. Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed.
(a)	Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)	Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Code 1976, § 13-13)
 
Sec. 74-49. Evidence of qualification required if applicable.
Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificate of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1976, § 13-14)
 
Sec. 74-50. Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain.
All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 13-15)
 
Sec. 74-51. When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent.
(a)	Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this article before March 15 of each year, and on March 15 of each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalty provided in section 74-53. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)	The registration provided for by this article shall be issued by the city clerk's office, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after such occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 13-16)
 
Sec. 74-52. Display.
The receipt for the payment of the occupation tax and any applicable registration document shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or to this officer's deputies or to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1976, § 13-1)
 
Sec. 74-53. Penalty for violation.
Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the city judge, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 13-17)
 
Sec. 74-54. City clerk; subpoena and arrest powers.
The city clerk and their duly designated officer and inspectors or their successors shall be classified as deputy marshal—business inspectors with full subpoena and arrest powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to the business tax ordinance for 1995 and succeeding years. 
(Code 1976, § 13-18)
 
Sec. 74-55. Business not covered by this article.
The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)	Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)	Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. chapter 3 of title 46. 
(3)	Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)	Cooperative marketing association governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)	Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)	Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)	Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)	Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)	Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)	Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Code 1976, § 13-19)
 
Sec. 74-56. Conflicts of laws.
An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by federal or state law. 
(Code 1976, § 13-20)
 
Sec. 74-57. When due and payable; payment options.
The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the city clerk, on January 1 each year and delinquent if not paid on or before March 15 of each year. 
(Code 1976, § 13-21)
 
Sec. 74-58. Payment of tax by newly established businesses.
(a)	The full license fee shall be paid between January 1 through June 30. If a business license is acquired from July 1 through September 30, then 50 percent of the license fee is to be paid. If such license is acquired from October 1 through December 31, then 25 percent of such fee is due. 
(b)	Nothing in this section shall be construed as in any way alleviating the mandatory requirement of obtaining license to do business in the city, and is in no way to be construed as allowing a licensee to postpone the date of acquiring a license so as to pay a lesser fee. 
(Code 1976, § 13-22)
 
Sec. 74-59. Tax registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax.
Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business to do business for the current year, shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax herein provided for is at that time unpaid. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Code 1976, § 13-23)
 
Sec. 74-60. Amendment, repeal of provision.
This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the jurisdiction of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property, or business. 
(Code 1976, § 13-24)
 
Sec. 74-61. Enforcement of provisions.
It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk and the police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk and the chief of police and their assistants to inspect all the city as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Code 1976, § 13-25)
 
Sec. 74-62. Provision to remain in full force and effect until changed.
This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 1976, § 13-26)
 
Sec. 74-63. Requirement of public hearing before tax increase.
After January 1996, the council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of occupation tax as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13-27)
 
Sec. 74-64. Option to establish exemption or reduction in occupation tax.
The council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemption or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1976, § 13-28)
 
Sec. 74-65. Conflicts between specific and general provisions.
Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1976, § 13-29)
 
Secs. 74-66—74-100. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. INSURANCE COMPANIES 
 
Sec. 74-101. Insurers license fees.
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 74-102, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Code 1976, § 13-40)
 
Sec. 74-102. License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations.
For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained, which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales, offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(Code 1976, § 13-41)
 
Sec. 74-103. Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed.
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 74-101 in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1976, § 13-42)
 
Sec. 74-104. Gross premium tax imposed on life insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8-1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to any other tax levied by this article. 
(Code 1976, § 13-43)
 
Sec. 74-105. Gross premiums tax, all other insurers.
There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8-2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 74-101. 
(Code 1976, § 13-44)
 
Sec. 74-106. Due date for license fees.
License fees imposed in sections 74-101 and 74-102 shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first day of each subsequent year. 
(Code 1976, § 13-45)
 
Secs. 74-107—74-140. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
 
Sec. 74-141. Business license tax levied.
Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for each year an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Code 1976, § 13-76)
 
Sec. 74-142. Form; due date.
(a)	Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(b)	The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1, 1984, and April 1 of each subsequent year. 
(Code 1976, § 13-77)
 
Chapter 78 TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 78-1. Uniform Rules of the Road—Adoption by reference.
Pursuant to the uniform rules of the road, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-181 through 40-6-183 and 40-6-370 through 40-6-376, and 40-14-1 through 40-14-16, where applicable, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1976, § 19-1)
State law reference(s)—Adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 
 
Sec. 78-2. Same—Penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provisions of the rules of the road shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 19-2)
 
Sec. 78-3. Additional definitions.
In addition to the definitions in the statutes hereinabove adopted, the following terms when used in this chapter shall for the purpose of this chapter have the meanings respectively ascribed to them: 
Curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Freight curb loading zone means a space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight (or passengers). 
Passenger curb loading zone means a place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
School crossing means crossings commonly used by school children in going to and from school, and so designated by ordinance. 
(Code 1976, § 19-5)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 78-4. Vehicles and employees of department of sanitation to have right-of-way on streets.
All employees and vehicles of the department of sanitation when engaged or used in performance of the services rendered by such department, shall have the right-of-way in the use of the streets, and are hereby given permission to use any part thereof in the operation of such vehicles in cleaning up and washing the streets of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-14)
 
Sec. 78-5. Railroad trains—Blocking streets.
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching, and except in emergency situations, of which the city is given due notice by the railroad. 
(Code 1976, § 19-15)
 
Sec. 78-6. Same—Maximum speed limit.
It shall be unlawful to operate a railroad train, engine, or locomotive within the city at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 19-16)
 
Sec. 78-7. Same—Whistles and bells; use required.
It shall be required that the operator of any railroad train, locomotive, or engine blow steam whistles, air whistles, or any other whistles of any kind or character and ring bells at all crossings within the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-17)
 
Sec. 78-8. Towing.
No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 16 feet in length. 
(Code 1976, § 19-23)
 
Sec. 78-9. Entering or leaving street or roadway.
No driver of any vehicle shall operate same in such a manner so as to enter or leave any street or highway except at an intersection or at an alley or private drive. 
(Code 1976, § 19-24)
 
Sec. 78-10. Driving on play streets.
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the highest degree of care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof, and at no time shall such driver's speed exceed five miles per hour. 
(Code 1976, § 19-25)
 
Sec. 78-11. Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices.
(a)	No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coasters, toy vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and when so coasting such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by ordinance. 
(b)	There shall be no such skating or riding on the sidewalks except under such terms and conditions as expressly allowed by the governmental authority by resolution or ordinance. 
(c)	It shall be unlawful for persons so skating or riding to gather in crowds, or to create noise or be guilty of any disorderly conduct, or to take hold of or hang on to any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of motor vehicles along and in the streets of the city, or for two or more persons to join hands while skating on the sidewalk. Any persons so skating or riding shall give the right-of-way to, and in no way interfere with, persons walking on the sidewalks. 
(d)	Any persons violating any provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided for violation of this Code; provided, however, any such offender under the age of 17 years shall be dealt with as provided by the state law creating juvenile courts. The parent of any child and the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1976, § 19-26)
 
Sec. 78-12. Speed limits—Generally.
Vehicles shall not exceed a speed of 30 miles per hour within the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter or state law. 
(Code 1976, § 19-31)
State law reference(s)—Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
 
Sec. 78-13. Same—Maximum in parks and school zones.
No person shall drive a motor vehicle in parks in excess of 15 miles per hour, nor on streets adjoining school property during school days in excess of 25 miles per hour when a school speed zone signal is flashing, nor within 300 feet on the approach to any street adjoining school property during school days in excess of 25 miles per hour when such signal is flashing. 
(Code 1976, § 19-32)
 
Sec. 78-14. Same—Schedule.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the council by the state, through the department of public safety, and further authorized by the department of transportation, as evidenced by documents on file in the office of the city clerk, speed zones are hereby established on certain streets and roads in the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or faster than that posted for the street upon which he is driving. 
(Code 1976, § 19-34)
 
Sec. 78-15. Same—Use of detection devices.
Pursuant to the authority vested in the city, speed detection devices will be installed to enforce the speed limits authorized by this chapter. 
(Code 1976, § 19-35)
 
Sec. 78-16. Vehicles prohibited upon walking track and fenced ballfields at Rossville City Recreation Park; penalty.
All wheeled vehicles, to include automobiles, bicycles, tricycles, skateboards, scooters, motorcycles and any other vehicle upon which persons may ride, are hereby prohibited from use upon the walking track and/or within the fenced ballfields, which has been constructed at the Rossville City Recreation Park. 
(Code 1976, § 19-38(a))
 
Sec. 78-17. Storage lots—Where prohibited.
In order to provide for a more beautiful appearance along the main thoroughfares of the city, from and after passage of the ordinance codified in this section, no automotive storage facility shall be allowed on any property contiguous to the right-of-way of McFarland Avenue or Chickamauga Avenue; further, any buildings erected on property contiguous to the right-of-way of McFarland Avenue or Chickamauga Avenue shall have a masonry façade covering at least 75 percent of the area of the wall of any such buildings facing those roadways. 
(Ord. No. 412, 2-13-06)
 
Secs. 78-18—78-25. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 78-26. Definitions.
As used in this division, the term "resident" means a person who has a permanent home or abode in the city to which, whenever he or she is absent, he or she has the intention of returning. For purposes of this division, there is a rebuttable presumption that any person who, except for infrequent, brief absences, has been present in the city for 30 days or more is a resident. 
As used in this division, the term "motor vehicle" means each motor vehicle, tractor, motorcycle or trailer which is required to be registered and licensed under O.C.G.A. § 40-2-8 and O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20. 
(Ord. No. 375(A), § I, 3-12-01)
 
Sec. 78-27. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the city who owns, rents or leases a motor vehicle to fail to register his or her motor vehicle in this state as required under O.C.G.A. § 40-2-8 and O.C.G.A. § 40-2-20 within 30 days after becoming a resident of the city. 
It shall be unlawful for any resident of the city who purchases, rents, or leases a new or used motor vehicle to fail to register his or her motor vehicle in this state as required under O.C.G.A. § 40-2-8 and O.C.G.A § 40-2-20 within 30 days after acquiring the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 375(A), § II, 3-12-01)
 
Sec. 78-28. Enforcement.
Prosecutions for violations of this article shall be made upon citation as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 15-10-62 and 15-10-63, as amended. The officers of the city are hereby authorized to issue citations for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 375(A), § III, 3-12-01)
 
Sec. 78-29. Penalty.
Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 for the first violation and a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 for a second or subsequent violation. 
(Ord. No. 375(A), § IV, 3-12-01)
 
Sec. 78-30. Exemption.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a "non-resident" or "visitor" as those terms are defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-2-90. 
(Ord. No. 375(A), § V, 3-12-01)
 
Secs. 78-31—78-50. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. TRUCK ROUTES
 
Sec. 78-51. Designation of streets, parts of streets on which truck traffic prohibited, signs required.
When appropriate signs are erected giving notice thereof, all trucks are hereby prohibited upon the streets or parts of streets so designated; however, such restriction shall not apply to trucks making local deliveries within the areas so posted. 
(Ord. No. 346, § 1, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 78-52. Truck routes designated; use regulated.
(a)	Truck routes within the city shall be as designated by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(b)	All trucks other than trucks making local deliveries within the city shall use the streets designated as truck routes and no others. 
(Ord. No. 346, § 2, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 78-53. Vehicles weighing more than 8,000—Authorized routes through city designated.
All motor vehicles which, together with load, weigh in excess of 8,000 pounds, passing through, entering or leaving the city shall be restricted to such streets and parts of streets designated for such traffic by the mayor and council from time to time, subject to the exceptions set out in section 78-54. 
(Ord. No. 346, § 3, 4-14-97)
 
Sec. 78-54. Same—Duties of operator; exceptions.
Each motor vehicle, falling within the provisions of section 78-53, entering the city by any other road or street than those set out in section 78-53 shall proceed by the shortest route to the nearest street or part of street set out in section 78-53 and shall proceed thence along the streets or parts of streets named through the city subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)	Vehicles based within city. Motor vehicles having a base within the corporate limits may proceed to such base by the shortest route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 78-53 and shall likewise return to such streets or parts of streets by the shortest route. 
(2)	Servicing vehicle. Motor vehicles may leave the streets and parts of streets set out in section 78-53 for the purpose of purchasing gasoline and oil or securing repairs, but in such case they shall be permitted only upon such streets and parts of streets as are upon the most direct and shortest route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 78-53. 
(3)	Loading, unloading. Motor vehicles may leave the streets and parts of streets set out in section 78-53 for the purpose of making deliveries consigned to points upon other streets, roads and alleys in the city and for the further purpose of receiving goods or other property for transportation from points upon other roads, streets and alleys within the corporate limits, but shall proceed to such points by the shortest direct route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 78-53 and shall return by the same route. 
(Ord. No. 346, § 4, 4-14-97)
 
Secs. 78-55—78-85. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. STANDING, PARKING 
 
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
 
Sec. 78-86. Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)	Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)	Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by sudden emergency; in such emergency such vehicles shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)	For displaying advertising. 
(Code 1976, § 19-50)
 
Sec. 78-87. Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
If a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. 
(Code 1976, § 19-51)
 
Sec. 78-88. Standing in passenger curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective. 
(Code 1976, § 19-52)
 
Sec. 78-89. Standing in freight-curb loading zone.
(a)	No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight-curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. 
(b)	The driver of a passenger vehicle may stop temporarily at a place marked as a freight-curb loading zone for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any vehicle used for the transportation of materials which is waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(Code 1976, § 19-53)
 
Sec. 78-90. Parking limitation at city hall lot.
No person shall park in the city hall parking lots, except those having official business with the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-54)
 
Sec. 78-91. Parking continuously, maximum time.
(a)	It shall be unlawful for any person to park, allow or permit to be parked any vehicle upon any street within the city for a period of more than 72 hours. 
(b)	Whoever parks, allows or permits the parking of any vehicle upon the streets of the city for a period of more than 72 hours shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(c)	Any such vehicle which has been parked upon such streets for a period of more than 72 hours shall be seized by the chief of police or any of the police officers and the same shall be towed to the designated place; the cost of such towing shall be borne by the person so keeping, allowing or permitting the keeping of such vehicle upon such streets beyond such length of time. 
(Code 1976, § 19-55)
 
Sec. 78-92. Maximum parking limits generally.
(a)	Two-hour limit in business district. Parking shall not be permitted in any business district longer than two hours between 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Parking may be limited to a shorter period in any business district when appropriate signs are posted. 
(b)	Maximum time for parking of trucks. No person shall park or stand any truck or other freight-carrying vehicle in excess of one-half-ton capacity upon any public street or highway for a period longer than one hour at any time during the day or night. 
(Code 1976, § 19-56)
 
Sec. 78-93. Maximum width and height of vehicles parked without driver.
No person shall stop or stand any truck or bus with a body more than eight feet wide or ten feet high on any street or public place without the driver or chauffeur being actually present and in charge thereof. 
(Code 1976, § 19-57)
 
Sec. 78-94. Fine for short overtime parking.
The fine for short overtime parking shall be as set by the municipal judge from time to time. If, upon the expiration of ten days from the imposition of any additional fine, the violator has continued to neglect or to refuse to pay the penalties imposed, the judge shall issue a citation requiring the violator to come before the court and to be punished according to section 1-11 of this Code or to show cause why such penalty should not be enforced against him. 
(Code 1976, § 19-62)
 
Sec. 78-95. Authority to move vehicle.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street or highway in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter such officer is authorized to move such vehicle or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of such street or highway. 
(Code 1976, § 19-63)
 
Secs. 78-96—78-115. Reserved.
 
DIVISION 2. TOWING AND IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 78-116. Authority to establish vehicle pounds.
The chief of police is hereby authorized to create a vehicle pound or pounds to which vehicles may be removed by police officers in the manner hereinafter provided. Such pound or pounds shall be located on city property at such places as may be designated by the chief of police. 
(Code 1976, § 19-80)
 
Sec. 78-117. Authority to remove vehicle parked in violation of chapter.
Whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in any place within the city where parking is not permitted at that time, or whenever any vehicle shall be found parked in violation of the terms of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic, such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by any member of the police department, by means of towing the same, or otherwise, to a vehicle pound. 
(Code 1976, § 19-81)
 
Sec. 78-118. Authority to remove unattended vehicle.
Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any street, highway, bridge or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of such vehicle to the nearest vehicle pound or other place of safety. 
(Code 1976, § 19-82)
 
Sec. 78-119. Record.
(a)	It shall be the duty of the officer so impounding a vehicle immediately to report the fact of such impounding, together with any other information which will definitely identify the vehicle, to the chief of police, who shall cause a permanent record to be made thereof. 
(b)	It shall be the duty of the chief of police to keep a permanent record of all vehicles committed to the pound, the names and addresses of such owners of the vehicles, the numbers of their state license tags, and the nature and circumstance of each violation, as well as the disposition of each case, and to account for all fees collected under this division and pay the same into the city treasury taking his receipt therefor. 
(Code 1976, § 19-83)
 
Sec. 78-120. Release of vehicle.
Any person claiming a vehicle impounded under this chapter shall produce evidence of his identity and ownership or right of possession to the chief of police and pay to such officer the fees for removal and storage, for which a receipt shall be given and an order issued to the officer in charge of the pound to discharge the vehicle and to deliver the same to such person. Thereupon, the impounded vehicle shall be surrendered by the officer in charge thereof, who shall take a receipt for such impounded vehicle. Such receipt shall definitely identify the vehicle and shall become a permanent record of the police department. 
(Code 1976, § 19-84)
 
Sec. 78-121. Protest and bond.
In case protest is made against the payment of any impounding or storage fee, the chief of police may authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to discharge the same upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)	Such person shall be charged with violation of this chapter or other traffic ordinance and required to make bond for his appearance and trial before the municipal court judge. Thereupon, the chief of police shall authorize the person in charge of the impounded vehicle to deliver it to such person. 
(2)	If such person is convicted of violating this chapter or other traffic ordinance, in addition to other costs the judge shall assess as cost the fees for removal and storage which have accumulated in connection with the impounding of such vehicle. 
(Code 1976, § 19-85)
 
Sec. 78-122. Sale of vehicles.
Any vehicle that is seized pursuant to this chapter, if not claimed within 30 days from the date of seizure, shall be sold at public outcry before the courthouse in the city to the highest and best bidder for cash. The proceeds of the sale shall be first applied to the cost of towing such vehicle, the cost of storing such vehicle, and the cost incurred, if any, in the sale of said vehicle, and the remainder thereof, if any, shall be paid over to the lawful owner of such vehicle. If within a period of 90 days after the sale of such vehicle it cannot be ascertained who the lawful owner of such vehicle is, the balance of the proceeds of such sale shall go into the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1976, § 19-86)
 
Sec. 78-123. Impounding does not preclude prosecution.
The impounding of a vehicle under this division shall not prevent or preclude prosecution for violations of the penal provisions of this chapter or any other ordinance relating to traffic. 
(Code 1976, § 19-87)
 
Secs. 78-124—78-155. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 78-156. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Property means any real property within the city which is not a street or highway or public right-of-way. 
Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every public right-of-way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purpose of vehicular travel. 
Vehicle means a machine propelled by power other than human power designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and transport persons or property or pull machinery and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagons. 
(Code 1976, § 12-1)
Cross reference(s)—Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
 
Sec. 78-157. Abandonment of vehicle prohibited.
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the city, and no person shall leave any vehicle at any place within the city, for such time and under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle reasonably to appear to have been abandoned. 
(Code 1976, § 12-2)
 
Sec. 78-158. Leaving junked vehicle on street.
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, or junked vehicle on any street, alley or highway within the city, or any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1976, § 12-3)
 
Sec. 78-159. Permitting junked vehicle on property.
No person in charge or control of any property within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall allow any partially or wholly dismantled, nonoperating, wrecked, junked, or discarded vehicle to remain on such property longer than 72 hours; except that this section shall not apply with regard to a vehicle in an enclosed building; a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the city or other governmental authority. 
(Code 1976, § 12-4)
 
Sec. 78-160. Abatement.
The mayor, chief of police, or any party designated by the mayor or the chief of police, or the building official, or any member of his department designated by him, are authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any place within the city which reasonably appears to be in violation of this article, or is lost, stolen, or unclaimed. Such vehicle shall be impounded at the cost of the owner until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with this article. 
(Code 1976, § 12-5)
 
Sec. 78-161. Punishment of offender.
Any person who shall be guilty of abandonment of a vehicle under this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1976, § 12-6)
 
Chapter 80. ZONING 
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
 
Sec. 80-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and visitors thereto. To these ends, this chapter is intended to achieve, and is enacted for, the following purposes: 
(1)	To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development, redevelopment and preservation of the city in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan and with long-term objectives, principles and standards deemed beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people. 
(2)	To protect the established character and the social and economic well-being of both private and public property. 
(3)	To promote, in the public interest, the wise utilization of land. 
(4)	To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood and other dangers. 
(5)	To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets. 
(6)	To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community. 
(7)	To encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, both built and natural, and to provide for regulations that protect and enhance these aesthetic considerations. 
(8)	To expedite the provision of adequate police and fire protection, safety from crime, disaster evacuation, civil defense, transportation, water, sewerage, flood protection, schools, parks, forests, playgrounds, recreational facilities, airports, and other public requirements. 
(9)	To protect against destruction of, or encroachment upon, historic areas. 
(10)	To protect against overcrowding of land, overcrowding of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, and loss of life, health or property from fire, flood, or other danger. 
(11)	To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base. 
(12)	To promote the preservation of the unique natural and physical resources of the city including forested areas, riverbeds, streambeds, and archaeological sites. 
(13)	To achieve compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. 
(14)	To provide for protection of the constitutional rights and obligations of all citizens within the city. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-2. Interpretation of certain terms and words.
In interpreting this chapter, the word "lot" includes the words "plot" and "parcel." The words "used" and "occupied," when applied to any land or building, include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-3. Definitions.
Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meaning as defined by a standard dictionary. See section 80-239 for additional definitions relating to signs. See section 80-270 for additional definitions relating to telecommunications towers. See chapter 14, article II for additional definitions related to adult entertainment establishments. 
Accessory structure means a structure located on the same lot as the principal use, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the permitted use and which does not change the character of such use, including, but not limited to, private garages, bathhouses, greenhouses, tool sheds, storage buildings, or similar. 
Adult entertainment establishment means an establishment subject to the regulations of chapter 14. 
Alley means a minor way, public or private, used for service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street. 
Apartment means a multifamily residential use of five or more attached dwelling units for which rent is paid and no fee title is conveyed. 
Artisan manufacturing means the shared or individual use of hand tools, mechanical tools and electronic tools for the manufacture of finished products or parts including design, processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, and packaging of products; as well as the incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products. Typical artisan manufacturing uses include, but are not limited to: electronic goods; food and bakery products; non-alcoholic beverages; printmaking; household appliances; leather products; jewelry and clothing/apparel; metal work; furniture; glass or ceramic production; and paper manufacturing. 
Assembly plant means a facility that performs the fitting together, or assembling of pre- manufactured parts into a complete article, sub-assembly, or product. A "heavy assembly plant" assembles products that exceed 200 pounds per unit (e.g., cars, motorcycles, etc.) or does not have a completely enclosed production line. These definitions shall not apply if a more specific use, term or definition is contained in this chapter. 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
Boardinghouse/roominghouse means a dwelling in which lodgers, for a fee, rent a portion thereof and the right to stay for one or more nights, and where meals and some services, such as laundry and cleaning, may be provided. 
Building means any structure intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property, and usually having a roof supported by columns or by walls. 
Building frontage means the required percentage of lot width fronting a public road that must be occupied by a building façade. 
Building, accessory, means a detached structure designed for the use of which is clearly incidental to and subordinate to the principal structure or use of the land, and which is located on the same lot as the principal structure or use. 
Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which said building is located. 
Code enforcement officer means the code enforcement officer of the city, or a duly authorized representative. 
Commercial or commercial operations means an activity undertaken for profit, income, or other business purposes, including sales or manufacture of goods or items, including sale of animals, and including boarding and breeding of animals, and similar activities. 
Commercial vehicle means a duly licensed and registered vehicle used to transport passengers or property to further a commercial enterprise. A commercial vehicle must not be used as an office nor have customer entry for a retail transaction. For purposes of this chapter, the following are also commercial vehicles: 
(1)	Vehicles of more than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight; 
(2)	Vehicles with a manufacturer's rated load capacity of more than three-quarters of a ton; 
(3)	Vehicles registered as commercial vehicles, common carriers, motor common carriers, or classified as "for hire" by the state, other states, or the ICC; or 
(4)	A freight trailer, semi-trailer, flatbed, tanker trailer, log trailer or other commercial trailer or shipping container exceeding 12 feet in length. 
A recreational vehicle, farm machine or farm vehicle for agricultural uses is not a commercial vehicle. 
Conditional zoning means the imposition of conditions in the grant of a rezoning application which are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this chapter and which are related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use, height, setbacks and other non-use requirements, physical improvements to the property, and infrastructure serving the property. 
Condominium means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds, or otherwise meeting the definition of condominium in the Georgia Condominium Act, title 44, chapter 3, article 3. 
Conventional single-family housing (site-built home) means a dwelling unit constructed on the site from materials delivered to the site, constructed in accordance with the applicable standard building codes. 
Developer means the owner of, or person responsible for, a development. 
Development or to develop means subdividing a tract of land into three or more lots whether for sale or rental, whether for commercial, industrial, office or residential purposes, or some combination thereof. It shall also include redevelopment of existing development. It shall also include the construction of any commercial, industrial, multifamily or office building or structure, even if on a single lot, and shall include the construction of a manufactured house park. In order that the purposes of this chapter shall not be evaded by piecemeal development or subdivision, subdividing a tract of land existing on the date of the adoption of this ordinance into two tracts shall not be a development, but any further split of either tract shall be a development. 
Dwelling means a building or other structure designed, arranged, or used for temporary or permanent living quarters for one or more persons. 
Dwelling unit means a building or portion thereof, providing complete living facilities for one family. 
Dwelling, live-work, means a single dwelling-unit attached with direct access to a business or office wherein the dwelling portion of the space is separated from the business or office and has a separate means of ingress and egress, a separate water connection, separate bathroom facilities, and a separate kitchen. The living area of a one bedroom live-work space shall be no less than 600 square feet, and the living area consisting of two or more bedrooms shall be no less than 900 square feet. 
Easement means a grant by a property owner of the use of land for a specific purpose or purposes by the general public, a corporation, or a certain person or persons. 
Enclosure means a structure with four sides and a roof designed to enclose and shelter animals, persons or objects. 
Family means an individual or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption living together in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than six persons who need not be related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together in a dwelling unit. For purposes of this chapter, the term "family" may include five or fewer foster children placed in a family foster home licensed by the state, but shall not include fraternities, sororities, nursing homes, or rest homes. 
Farm winery means an entity having a farm winery license issued by the State of Georgia, including wholesale distribution and tasting rooms related to the farm winery, and shall include mead or honey wine as well as traditional wine. 
Flex use development means a planned development which may include multiple uses within the same tract, and it is generally intended to be located in non-residential areas. See section 80-135 for further regulations. 
Greenspace means property that has been conveyed to a land trust or the city for preservation in the governor's greenspace program. 
Group home for persons with a disability means a residence in which three or more persons with a disability reside and which is licensed by the state department of human resources as a personal care home under title 31. 
Health department means the Walker County Health Department, which reports to the Walker County Board of Health. 
Home occupation means any use customarily conducted within the principal dwelling and carried on solely by the occupant thereof. See section 80-92 for further regulations. 
Hotel means a building or structure typically multi-story, providing multiple residential dwelling units for typically short-term rental (two weeks or less), with interior access to the units. 
Industrialized housing means a factory fabricated dwelling built in one or more sections designed to fit together on a foundation but which usually does not originally have wheels for movement and which is constructed in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110) and which bears the seal of approval issued by the Department of Community Affairs. 
Industry, general, means the manufacture, assembly, repair, processing, testing or packaging of finished products, predominantly from previously prepared materials or from raw materials; includes processing, fabrication, incidental storage, and distribution of such products. In general, such uses shall occur entirely or almost entirely within an enclosed structure. Without restricting the generality of the foregoing, this would include, for example: assembly plants, feed processing plants, soft drink bottling and distribution plants, beer and liquor distribution plants, carpet manufacturing plants, and similar facilities. In cases of facilities not clearly falling into this definition, the code enforcement officer shall determine whether a facility is general industry or heavy industry. 
Industry, heavy, means a large-scale industrial manufacturing or processing activity, including especially the manufacturing or processing of raw materials for other industry, businesses or uses. Without restricting the generality of the foregoing, this would include for example: plants for the manufacture of petroleum products, pulp and paper products, stone, clay, and glass products, cement and lime products, fertilizers, animal by-products, and plants which will be engaged in the primary metal industry, metal processing, or the processing of natural gas or its derivatives. This would also include plants and facilities involved in the production (or processing) of intrinsically dangerous materials or products such as explosives, acids, and the like. In cases of facilities not clearly falling into this definition, the code enforcement officer shall determine whether a facility is general industry or heavy industry. 
Institutional-residential uses means uses that provide residential living space or dwelling units for persons in an institutional or group setting, whether for day care, 24-hour care or unassisted living, specifically defined as one of the following types: assisted-living facility, adult day care, child day care, homeless shelter, home for the aged, hospice, nursery school, nursing home, group home, protective housing facility, rehabilitation/treatment facility, residential treatment center, rest home, retirement home, and shelter care facility. 
Junk yard (salvage yard; scrap yard) means any use involving the storage or disassembly of wrecked automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles; storage, baling or otherwise dealing in bones, animal hides, scrap metal, commercial/residential appliances, used paper, used cloth, used plumbing fixtures and used brick, wood, or other building materials. Such uses shall be considered junk yards whether or not all or part of such operations are conducted inside a building or in conjunction with, addition to, or accessory to, other uses of the premises. See section 80-174 for additional regulations. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural operations and forestry. 
Land disturbance permit means a permit granted under the city soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance that provides the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of that ordinance and this chapter. 
Line, lot, means the boundary line of a lot. 
Line, yard, means a line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required setback. 
Live-work unit means a structure or portion of a structure that combines residential living space with an integrated work space used principally by the occupant of the unit wherein the dwelling portion of the space is separated from the work space and has a separate means of ingress and egress, a separate water connection, separate bathroom facilities, and a separate kitchen. The living area of a one bedroom live-work space shall be no less than 600 square feet, and the living area consisting of two or more bedrooms shall be no less than 900 square feet. 
Lot means a developed or undeveloped tract of land having defined boundaries and legally transferable as a single unit of land; does not refer to public rights-of-way. 
Lot of record means a lot described in a deed, survey or final subdivision plat recorded in the public records of the county clerk of the superior court that was in compliance with ordinances and regulations in existence at the time that the lot was created. Illegal lots that were created in violation of regulations existing at the time of creation are not lots of record. 
Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot, width of, means the distance between side lot lines. 
Manufactured house (mobile home) means a detached, single-family dwelling unit designed for long-term occupancy and constructed in one or more units with wheels for movement (whether or not such wheels are later removed) and which has plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems, whether or not such unit is subsequently installed on a foundation or other internal or external changes are made. 
Manufactured house, multi-unit, means a detached single-family dwelling unit constructed in two or more units with similar marriage walls with wheels for movement (whether or not such wheels are later removed) and which has plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems, whether or not such unit is subsequently installed on a foundation or other internal or external changes are made. 
Manufactured house stand means that area of a manufactured house lot which has been reserved for the placement of a manufactured house. 
Motel means a building or structure of typically one or two stories height providing multiple residential dwelling units typically for short-term rental (two weeks or less), with adjacent parking and external access to each unit. 
Nonconforming use means a lawful use of or vested right to use any building, structure or land existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or the adoption of any amendment thereto. See section 80-89 for further regulations. 
Open space means an area that is not used for or occupied by a driveway, an off-street parking area, a loading space, a yard, a refuse storage space, or a building. 
Ordinance means this chapter and all amendments thereto including the official zoning map of the city. 
Place of worship means a structure which is intended for conducting organized religious services for organizations with tax-exempt status, with no overnight facilities. Secondary uses such as childcare, senior services, professional counseling, hospices, schools, rehabilitation services, or similar uses are not included in this definition. The term "place of worship" does not include organizations that violate federal, state, or city laws or codes. 
Planned unit development (PUD) means a planned development which may include multiple uses within the same tract. See section 80-132 for further regulations. 
Plat means a map, plan or layout of a county, city, town, lot, section, subdivision or development indicating the location and boundaries of properties. 
Principal use means the specific, primary purpose for which land or a building is used. 
Recreational vehicle means a camper, camp trailer, travel trailer, house car, motor home, trailer bus, trailer coach or similar vehicle, with or without motive power, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy. Where a recreational vehicle is on or attached to a trailer used to carry or tow said vehicle, they shall together be considered one recreational vehicle. The term "recreational vehicle" shall not include a pickup truck used for transportation to which a camper shell has been attached. See article IV of this chapter for further regulations. 
Redevelopment means the process of developing property that has previously been developed. See Development. 
Retail business means a business consisting primarily of buying merchandise or articles in gross and selling to general consumers in small quantities or broken lots or parcels and not in bulk and not for resale. 
Right-of-way line (also r/w) means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
Setback means the open space between the lot line and the yard line, which shall be unobstructed by any structure other than as expressly permitted in this chapter. See section 80-61. Where a distinction is made between an external setback and an internal setback, the term "external setback" refers to the setback from external boundary lines and rights-of-way, and the term "internal setback" refers to spacing between multiple buildings on one larger lot (e.g., apartment buildings or townhomes). 
Sign means any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. See article IX of this chapter for further sign regulations and definitions. 
Special use means a use not ordinarily permitted but which may be permitted upon the imposition of conditions related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding lands. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, restrictions on land use; height, setback and other non-use requirements; physical improvements to the property and infrastructure serving the property. A special use must be approved in the same manner as a rezoning request prior to the issuance of a permit. See article XIV of this chapter. 
Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, road, boulevard, highway, expressway, lane, alley or other way. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
Subdivide means dividing a tract of land into three or more lots. 
Subdivision means a tract of land divided into three or more lots. 
Swimming pool means any structure intended for swimming or recreational bathing that contains water over 24 inches deep. This includes in ground, above ground, and on ground swimming pools, but the term "swimming pool" does not include inflatable temporary pools. See section 80-102 and applicable building code for additional regulations. 
Townhouse means a multifamily residential use consisting of three or more attached dwelling units for which fee simple title is conveyed and for which an incorporated mandatory homeowners' association is provided. 
Travel trailer/camper. See Recreational vehicle.
Wholesale business means a business primarily engaged in the selling of goods or articles in gross to retailers or jobbers for resale and not to the ultimate consumer. 
Yard means an open space on the same lot with a principal building open, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
Zoning map means the official zoning map of Rossville, Georgia. See section 80-26. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-4—80-24. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE II. ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 80-25. Division into districts.
(a)	For the purpose of this chapter, the City of Rossville, Georgia, is divided into the following districts designated as follows: 
R-1 Low density single-family residential district. 
R-2 Medium density single-family residential district. 
R-3 Medium density residential district. 
R-4 High density residential district. 
R-5 Single-family manufactured homes district. 
C-1 General business district. 
C-2 Business district. 
I-1 Light industrial district. 
I-2 Heavy industrial district. 
PUD Planned unit development district. 
(b)	In addition to the zoning districts above, there shall be a central business overlay district which shall have regulations which may be more or less strict than the underlying zoning classifications listed above. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-26. District boundaries; official zoning map.
The boundaries of each district are as shown on the "Official Zoning Map of Rossville, Georgia," which is hereby incorporated into this chapter by reference. The official zoning map shall be retained in the office of the code enforcement officer and shall be available for inspection by the public during regular city business hours. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-27. Rules for determining boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)	Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. 
(3)	Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways, railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said map. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-28—80-57. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE III. GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR LOTS
 
Sec. 80-58. Use; applicable ordinances.
(a)	No building, structure, land, lot or portion of a lot shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, unless the use or occupancy is in conformity with the codes and ordinances in effect in the city at the time a permit is issued, or an application is made for a permit, and all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)	There shall be only one principal use per lot. Only accessory structures that are accessory to that principal use shall be permitted. See also section 80-60. 
(c)	This chapter regulates zoning. The city building code ordinance and the city building inspector should be consulted for applicable state standard minimum codes applying to construction, repair and renovation. The county board of health and the county health department should be consulted for applicable health regulations relating to on-site sewage management systems (i.e., septic systems) and regulation for swimming pools, food service, tourist courts and other potentially applicable regulations. 
(d)	Each owner and occupant of a lot having an occupied structure shall post the street address of the property in a manner that is readily visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-59. Yards.
(a)	Yards must remain open space, unobstructed by buildings or structures, except as otherwise permitted, such as accessory buildings in the rear or side yard. 
(b)	No part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about, or in connection with, any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-60. Principal use; accessory buildings.
(a)	Only one principal use is permitted per lot or tract. 
(b)	Every building or structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot or tract as defined herein, and there shall not be more than one principal building on one lot, plus its accessory buildings. 
(c)	Accessory buildings and structures in residential zoning districts or ancillary to residential use are permitted only in the side or rear yard and shall not be less than ten feet from the side and rear property lines, and shall also meet all buffer requirements, if applicable. No part of an accessory structure may be built closer to the street than the existing front building line of the principal structure. On lots of less than two acres, there shall be no more than three accessory buildings, including any detached garages. 
(d)	Temporary accessory structures (for example, mobile storage containers) may be located in any yard (including front yards) for no longer than 14 days. After that time period, any such structure must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-61. Setbacks and rights-of-way.
(a)	No building or other structure may be erected in a front, side or rear setback, except for driveways, walkways, structural retaining walls, and patios (but not elevated decks or cantilevered overhangs). Eaves and stairs may protrude no more than three feet into a setback. 
(b)	On lots having frontage on more than one street in any district, the front setback figure shall apply to each street. 
(c)	The code enforcement officer shall be empowered to grant an administrative variance (under section 80-327) to the internal development setbacks for lots abutting new streets in new developments, but not for lots abutting external boundary lines or existing streets. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-62. Lots; creation of illegal lots.
(a)	Lot reduction. It is not permitted to reduce an existing lot below minimum standards. Specifically, no lot shall be reduced in size so that the mandatory lot frontage or depth; front, side or rear yard; width at building line; or lot area are not maintained. Lots of record that do not meet existing standards may not be reduced. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public purposes. 
(b)	Illegal lots. It is not permitted to split or subdivide any lot if any of the resultant lots are under the minimum size lot allowed in the zoning district. Creation of a new lot under the minimum size requirement of the relevant zoning district is not permitted, nor is leaving a remnant under the minimum size requirement. It is not permitted to reduce an existing lot's size under the minimum size requirement. Any subdivision or creation of a substandard lot is illegal and shall not create any vested right nor permit any nonconforming use. 
(c)	Substandard single lots. Where the owner of a lot of record or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to conform to the dimensional requirements of this chapter, such lot may be used as a building site for a single-family residence in a district where residences are permitted. 
(d)	Substandard adjoining lots. If two or more adjoining lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or amendment thereto and such lots individually are too small to meet the yard, width, and area requirements of the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted size, and the lot or lots in one ownership shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-63. Road frontage restrictions; private driveways and easements.
No new lot shall be created, nor shall any principal building be erected, on any lot which does not have immediate access and frontage, of a minimum amount as specified in article V of this chapter, on at least one existing public road or on a newly created internal street in a development. The minimum road frontage requirements are defined in article V of this chapter based on the underlying zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-64. Street façade requirements.
The following street façade requirements apply to the sides of all new nonresidential developments and structures in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts facing on Chickamauga Avenue or McFarland Avenue. 
(1)	Installation of sidewalks shall be required. Sidewalk level uses shall have at least one primary pedestrian entrance which faces, is visible from, and directly adjacent to the required sidewalk. Where a property fronts on more than one street, only one such entrance shall be required. 
(2)	The first two stories of building facades shall be brick, cast stone, concrete siding such as Hardiplank, natural wood or stone, with the exception of pedestrian entrances and windows. 
(3)	Awnings shall be of fabric, canvas, fixed metal, or similar material. Internally lit awnings and canopies that emit light through the awning or canopy material are prohibited. 
(4)	Blank, windowless walls are prohibited. All building stories with the exception of storefront treatments shall have windows and doors that equal a minimum of 30 percent and maximum of 60 percent of the total facade area with each story being calculated independently. 
(5)	All windows shall be vertically shaped with a height greater than width, including display windows but not transoms. 
(6)	Glass panels in windows and storefronts shall be clear and unpainted, and shall not be tinted such that views into the building are obstructed. 
(7)	Entry facade window trim shall not be flush with the exterior wall and shall have a minimum relief of one-quarter inch from the exterior wall. 
(8)	Window frames shall be recessed a minimum of two inches from the exterior facade. 
(9)	Porches and stoops shall not be enclosed with screen wire or glass. 
(10)	Porch and arcade columns shall be a minimum width of eight inches. 
(11)	Exterior entry steps shall have enclosed risers. 
(12)	Building foundations shall be brick, stone, stucco, or concrete with similar appearance. 
(13)	Parking structures shall conceal automobiles from visibility; shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building on all levels; shall be faced in brick, stone, cast stone, poured-in-place rubbed concrete, or pre-cast concrete faced in or having the appearance of brick or stone. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-65. Building walls facing public right-of-way.
In regards to non-residentially zoned lots fronting on McFarland Avenue or Chickamauga Avenue, principal and accessory structures must have at least 75 percent of the front of the building constructed of wood, Hardiplank siding, brick, stucco, etched-faced block, rock or stone, and at least 25 percent of any side facing a public right-of-way shall be composed of these same materials. 
In all other nonresidential zones, principal and accessory structures must have at least 75 percent of the front of the building constructed of wood, Hardiplank siding, brick, stucco, etched-faced block, rock or stone, and at least 25 percent of any side facing a public right-of-way shall be composed of these same materials, unless said structure includes a landscape strip equal to or greater than three square feet times the total lineal frontage of the building as to a public street. If the structure includes a landscape strip equal to or greater than three square feet times the total linear frontage of the building as to a public street, at least 35 percent of any side facing a public right-of-way shall be composed of wood, Hardiplank siding, brick, stucco, etched-faced block, rock or stone. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-66. Off-street parking and loading.
(a)	Off-street automobile parking. Off-street automobile parking shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established. The number of automobile parking spaces provided shall be at least as great as the number specified below for various uses. Off-street parking shall be compliant with federal regulations pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act and amendments thereto. Turning space shall be provided in all off-street automobile parking areas so that no vehicle will be required to back onto a public street when leaving the premises. The minimum size of parking spaces established to meet the requirements of this ordinance shall be eight and one-half feet in width and 18 feet in length. 
(1)	Automobile repair garages: One space for each regular employee plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area used for repair work. 
(2)	Churches, synagogues, or other places of worship, and fraternal organizations: One space for each four seats in the main assembly room. 
(3)	Funeral parlors: One space for each four seats in the chapel. 
(4)	Gasoline filling stations: Two spaces for each gas pump plus three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility. 
(5)	Hospitals and nursing homes: One space for each four beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor plus one space for each four employees, including nurses. 
(6)	Hotels: One space for each three guest bedrooms plus one space for each five employees. 
(7)	Industrial: One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
(8)	Offices: One space for each 200 square feet of floor space. 
(9)	Places of public amusement and assembly: One space for each four seats in the main assembly room. 
(10)	Residential, single-family: Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
(11)	Residential, two-family and multifamily: One space for each dwelling unit. 
(12)	Restaurants: With in-person dining: One space per 175 square feet; Without in- person dining: One space per 500 square feet. 
(13)	Retail business: One space for each 200 square feet of floor space. 
(14)	Rooming and boarding houses: One space for each two bedrooms. 
(15)	Schools: One space for each employee and one space for each ten students. 
(16)	Tourist homes and motels: One space for each accommodation. 
(17)	Trailer parks: One space for each trailer space. 
(18)	Wholesale business: Two spaces for each employee. 
(19)	Yacht club, country club: One space for every ten members. 
(20)	Location on other property: If the required automobile parking space cannot be provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such space may be provided on other off-street property provided such property lies within 500 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such automobile parking space shall be associated with the principal use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(b)	Off-street loading and unloading space. On every lot where a business, trade or industrial use is hereafter established, space with access to public street or alley shall be provided as indicated below for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley: 
(1)	Retail business: One space of at least ten feet by 20 feet for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or part thereof. 
(2)	Wholesale and industrial: One space of at least ten feet by 50 feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or part thereof. 
(3)	Bus or truck terminals: Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks that will be stored or will be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-67. Minimum requirements for outdoor display sales lots.
Uses that involve the outdoor display of items for sale, including, but not limited to, automobiles, recreational vehicles, and storage buildings, where permitted, shall comply with the following minimum requirements. 
(1)	Any such use established after the adoption of this ordinance shall be on a lot that is at least one-half acre in size. 
(2)	The portion of the lot used for display of items for sale and customer and staff parking shall be paved with asphalt or concrete. There shall be at least five paved parking spaces for customers on the front of the office and sales building on the property. 
(3)	There shall be an office and sales building on the property with a minimum size of at least 700 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-68—80-88. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IV. REGULATION OF PROPERTY
 
Sec. 80-89. Continuance of a nonconforming use.
Any pre-existing lawful nonconforming use of or vested right to use any building, structure or land existing at the time of the adoption of this chapter, or the adoption of any amendment hereto, may be continued subject to the restrictions contained in this article, even though such use does not conform with the regulations of this chapter, except that: 
(1)	A nonconforming use or structure shall not be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(2)	A nonconforming use or structure shall not be expanded, extended, or enlarged beyond the area of use, size of operation, and/or the size of the structures existing at the time the use became nonconforming except in a manner that is conforming with this ordinance. Similarly, no building containing a nonconforming use can be expanded or enlarged. 
(3)	A nonconforming use or structure shall not be re-established after discontinuance for one year regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon. 
(4)	A nonconforming use or structure shall not be rebuilt, altered, or repaired except as provided herein: 
a.	If the structure is altered or repaired, said alterations or repairs shall be in conformity with the building codes in force at the time of said alteration or repair; provided, however, that said alteration or repair shall not extend or enlarge the structure being altered or repaired; 
b.	If the structure is totally rebuilt, the replacement structure shall conform to all the requirements of this chapter, except as to the district; provided, however, said replacement structure may not occupy an area greater than the replaced structure. 
(5)	Uses and structures made nonconforming by new provisions in this chapter shall be limited to the area of use, size of operation, height, and/or size of structures as existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(6)	Uses and structures made nonconforming by prior versions of this ordinance shall be limited to the area of use, size of operation, height and/or size of structures as existing on the date of adoption of the relevant provision by the prior ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-90. Operation of business from residential district prohibited.
Unless specifically permitted as a use under the applicable provision of article V of this chapter, no business or commercial enterprise may operate in a residentially zoned district. Operation of a business or commercial enterprise shall include, but not be limited to, such activities as: having employees report to work at the property; storing commercial vehicles at the property; parking commercial vehicles at the property (other than as specifically permitted by section 80-96); conducting any manufacturing or assembly at the property; retail or wholesale sales of any sort; providing any service, maintenance or repair at the property (other than permitted home occupations); and storage of any materials, supplies, products, or components at the property. Home offices and home occupations are permitted as shown in sections 80-91 and 80-92. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-91. Home offices.
Home offices are permitted in any home, allowing the occupant to work from home or to manage a business licensed as a mobile business. No customers, suppliers or vendors shall be permitted at a home office. Employees are not permitted to report to work, receive assignments, or pick up vehicles at a home office. No nonresident of the home may work in the home office (i.e., no outside employees may work in the office). Home occupations are permitted as stated in section 80-92. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-92. Home occupations.
Home occupations are permitted in zoning districts as listed in article V of this chapter. No home occupation shall occupy more than 30 percent of the heated floor space of the principal use building. No separate building or structure may be constructed to house a home occupation. A home occupation must be a use that is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling as a residence and that does not change the character thereof or reveal from the exterior that the dwelling is being used in part for other than a residence. No nonresident of the home may work in the home occupation (i.e., no nonresident employees). There shall be no display, stock in trade, or commodity sold on the premises, and no mechanical equipment used except such as is commonly used for purely domestic household purposes. Such permissible occupations include, in general, such personal services such as are furnished by a musician, artist, seamstress, cook, or laundress, consultant, telecommuter, or other occupation which does not generate nonresidential traffic nor has non-occupant employees, but shall not include such uses as barbershops, beauty parlors, tea rooms, animal hospitals, animal grooming, or a wholesale, retail or manufacturing business. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-93. Residential living only permitted in permanent structures.
(a)	No lot may be used for temporary or permanent residential living quarters unless a permanent dwelling unit has been lawfully erected on the lot, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and applicable building and safety codes. Indications that a property is being used as temporary or permanent residential living quarters include actions such as spending significant time at the location on more than one day, repeated eating and sleeping at the location, and performing other life activities at the location repeatedly. 
(b)	Tents, boats, RVs and other structures that are not permitted permanent dwelling units cannot be occupied either on a permanent or temporary basis on a residential lot, except that tents may be occupied for no more than three days in any two-month period when erected in the rear yard of a permanent dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-94. Occupancy of recreational vehicles.
(a)	No recreational vehicle shall otherwise be occupied as a temporary or permanent residential living quarter except in conformance with this section. 
(b)	Recreational vehicles can be occupied as temporary dwellings as a temporary accessory use for no more than ten days in any two-month period, only if there is a permanent dwelling unit as a principal use on the lot, and only if the vehicle is parked in conformance with this article. No more than one recreational vehicle can be so occupied on the same lot. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-95. Recreational vehicle parking.
Recreational vehicles parked in any residential zone or residentially used area shall not be permitted to be parked in any required setback or buffer area, nor in any front-yard area. Recreational vehicles on residential property shall only be parked in the side or rear yard, within setbacks, although the code enforcement officer may administratively vary this requirement if there is not sufficient room in or access to the rear or side yards. No more than two recreational vehicles shall be parked on any single residential lot. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-96. Commercial vehicle parking.
(a)	No more than two commercial vehicles (trailers counted separately if separated from a tractor) shall be parked on any single residential lot, or on any lot in any residentially zoned lot. Commercial vehicles may not be parked on any residential lot without an occupied single-family dwelling, and may not be parked on vacant residential lots. 
(b)	Commercial vehicles parked in any residential zone or residentially used area shall not be permitted to be parked in any required setback or buffer area. Commercial vehicles on any lot under five acres must be parked in the side or rear yard area. The code enforcement officer shall be permitted to grant a hardship administrative variance to allow parking in a setback or front yard if no other room exists. 
(c)	The code enforcement officer shall be permitted to grant a hardship administrative variance to allow up to four commercial vehicles to park on one lot (for example, if four family members living there each drive a commercial vehicle home from work), but in no circumstance shall such variance be used to permit employees to report to a residential structure on a daily basis to pick up commercial vehicles for the company's operation. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-97. Use of vehicle or trailers for storage prohibited.
Neither vehicles (whether operable or inoperable) nor trailers (whether on or off their axles) may be used as storage buildings. This shall apply to all vehicles and trailers, including commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, panel vans, tractor-trailer rigs, railroad boxcars, etc. However, tractor-trailer rigs and trailers may be used for temporary storage on property zoned C-1, I-1, or I-2, only by businesses operating on the same property. Temporary storage means no particular trailer may remain longer than three months. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-98. Appearance of property.
In order to preserve the aesthetic beauty of the city, to protect against nuisances, hazards, vermin and odor, among other hazards, and to preserve the property values of surrounding property, all property in the city shall be required to comply with the following provisions: 
(1)	All property (other than where explicitly permitted, such as a junk yard or salvage yard) must be free of the following: scrap metal; junked, inoperative or broken appliances (including engines and vehicles or parts of vehicles); junked, inoperative or broken equipment (such as lawn mowers, bicycles, machines); construction or demolition debris; other waste, garbage or refuse such as old tires, discarded carpet, discarded household furniture, bottles, cans, or similar; stumps, branches, dirt, and other debris from land disturbance and grading (except incident to a permit under the city soil erosion and sedimentation ordinance for the subject property and/or pursuant to lawful construction on the subject property); and household trash (except in a trash container in good condition with a lid). Such items may be kept in an enclosed building or enclosed garage erected pursuant to a building permit or otherwise lawfully permitted, but may not be kept in the open. 
(2)	All property, whether residential, commercial or industrial, containing a grass lawn (for example fescue, rye, bluegrass, bermuda, zoysia or similar grasses), landscaping strips, or other landscaping must be maintained so that the grass is kept cut below the height of 12 inches, and so that shrubbery, weeds and other landscaping is kept cut to the point where no windows or doors in a structure are obscured or blocked. 
(3)	Storage of lumber, dumpsters, shipping containers, wood pallets, pipe, concrete blocks, other construction material, or other commercial material, or any commercial inventory (including products for sale, use or repair in off-site businesses), or materials associated with a commercial operation, shall be prohibited on residentially zoned or residentially used property, unless associated with or required by a permitted use on the property (including repair or construction of a structure that is itself a permitted use, e.g., construction of a single-family residence on said property). 
(4)	For violations of this section, an owner or resident of property may be given a citation, and, at the hearing on the citation, the municipal court may, in addition to other appropriate penalties under the law, order abatement, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. The order of abatement may provide that in the event the owner or resident fails to correct the violation within a specified time period, the city is authorized to cause the violation to be remedied and the cost of abatement be placed as a lien against the property which lien may be collected in the same manner as judgments, utility bills and tax collections. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-99. Junk, abandoned, inoperable or unregistered vehicles.
(a)	No automobile, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type without a valid license plate attached thereto shall be parked or stand on any residentially zoned property or other zoned property unless it shall be in a completely enclosed building or on property properly zoned as a junk yard, except for such off-road vehicles which by law do not require a license plate, provided the same is in operating condition. 
(b)	No automobile, vehicle or trailer of any kind or type which shall be inoperative or in a junk condition, or abandoned, shall be parked or stand on any property unless: 
(1)	It shall be in an enclosed building; 
(2)	It shall be on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)	It shall be on property lawfully occupied and used for repair, reconditioning or remodeling of vehicles in conformance with this chapter. 
(c)	A vehicle in inoperative or junk condition shall include, but shall not be limited to, any automobile, vehicle, trailer of any kind or type, or contrivance, or a part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)	Wrecked; 
(2)	Dismantled; 
(3)	Partially dismantled; 
(4)	Inoperative; 
(5)	Abandoned; 
(6)	Discarded; 
(7)	Scrapped; or 
(8)	Does not have a valid license plate attached thereto. 
(d)	Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under other provisions of law. 
(e)	In all instances where the owner of any abandoned, inoperative, or junk motor vehicle and/or trailer cannot be determined, or when such vehicle is abandoned on public property or a non-owner's property, such junk or abandoned motor vehicle and/or trailer shall be removed under the authority and provisions of O.C.G.A. ch. 40-11. If on public property, such vehicle may be removed after five days; if on private property, it may be removed after 30 days. 
(f)	In all instances where the owner of any junk, inoperative, unregistered, or abandoned motor vehicle and/or trailer refuses to remove, enclose or register (or, if requested, refuses to give consent for the city to remove) any such vehicle or trailer currently in violation of this article, the city shall be empowered to seek an order from superior court authorizing the city to remove and dispose of such vehicle or trailer. In addition, if the vehicle or trailer is determined to be a health hazard or a nuisance, the city shall be empowered to seek an order from superior court authorizing the city to remove and dispose of such vehicle. Such orders shall be authorized if the vehicle has been in violation of this article for more than 20 days. 
(g)	For purposes of repair or restoration, one inoperable and unregistered vehicle may be kept in the rear yard of a property, provided it is not visible from the street, is screened from all neighbors by a privacy fence in the rear yard, and is repaired or restored, removed, or placed in a fully enclosed building within six months. Such vehicle shall not be stored in any side yard or any setback or buffer area. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-100. Storage of tires.
The storage of new or used tires on any property is prohibited unless the same are stored within an enclosed building or garage. It is illegal to discard or abandon tires on any property other than a lawful landfill. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-101. Sale of autos and vehicles.
In a residential zoning district or residentially used area, sales of autos and other vehicles from such property shall be limited to no more than six vehicles per year. No more than two such vehicles shall be parked in the front yard of any property at any one time. Any greater number of sales or vehicles displayed for sale shall constitute a commercial operation. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-102. Swimming pools.
Swimming pools are permitted as accessory uses in residential zoning districts. Swimming pools are only permitted to be located in the side or rear yards of a property. All portions of a swimming pool (including the pool itself, any recirculation pumps, sumps, heaters, filtration or treatment systems, chemical tanks, or pool-related machinery) shall be set back at least ten feet from the side and rear property lines. Swimming pools shall further comply with applicable board of health regulations and the city building code ordinance. Private swimming pools (in ground or above ground), hot tubs and spas containing water more than 24 inches in depth shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 48 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self-closing and self-latching. Where the self-latching device is a minimum of 54 inches above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches from the gatepost. Above-ground pools shall have a lockable, removable ladder. No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-103. Display of retail goods in yards.
In the C-2 zoning district, external display of retail inventory or other goods for sale shall only be permitted within ten feet of the principal structure on the property, and only during regular business hours when the retail business is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-104. Timbering operations in nonresidential zoning districts.
Timbering operations (meaning cutting, hauling and/or harvesting timber) shall be a permitted activity in nonresidential zoning districts (that is, C-1, C-2, I-1, and I-2), provided that no timbering operations shall be permitted in the area of any required buffer listed in the relevant zoning district. Crossing the buffer perpendicularly shall be permitted, but the buffer area shall otherwise remain undisturbed. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-105—80-121. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE V. USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS; SPECIAL DISTRICTS
 
Sec. 80-122. Uses.
The following districts designate certain uses and special uses within each district. A use not specifically named within a district is not permitted. Any question of interpretation as to the appropriate district for a use shall be determined by the code enforcement officer. The minimum lot sizes, setbacks and other area and yard requirements for each district are provided for each district. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-123. R-1 low density single-family residential district.
(a)	Purpose. The R-1 residential district is established primarily to encourage the development of single-family developments, for conventional or industrialized homes. The R-1 district is a residential district. 
(b)	Area, yard, height and buffer requirements. See table of area, yard and height requirements, section 80-133(b). 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-124. R-2 medium density single-family residential district.
(a)	Scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-2 district regulations. The R-2 district is intended to provide areas for higher density single-family residential uses. 
(b)	Use regulations. Within the R-2 district, land and structures shall be used in accordance with the table of permitted uses. Any use not specifically designated as permitted shall be prohibited. 
(c)	Development standards. See table of area, yard and height requirements, section 80-133(b). 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-125. R-3 medium density residential district.
(a)	Purpose. The R-3 residential district is established primarily to provide for the development of smaller lot residential developments, for conventional and industrialized or attached and detached homes. 
(b)	Area, yard, height and buffer requirements. See table of area, yard and height requirements, section 80-133(b). 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-126. R-4 high density residential district.
(a)	Scope and intent. Regulations set forth in this section are the R-4 district regulations. The R-4 district is intended to provide land areas for high density apartment dwellings which will: 
(1)	Encourage attractive apartment development; 
(2)	Encourage the provision of recreation areas and facilities; 
(3)	Be located in areas of intense development near or adjacent to downtown, retail shopping, arterial and major collector streets; and 
(4)	Be located so as to provide a transition between medium to high density residential areas and nonresidential areas. 
(b)	Use regulations. Within the R-4 district, land and structures shall be used in accordance with the table of permitted uses. Any use not specifically designated as a permitted use in this section shall be prohibited. 
(c)	Development standards. See table of area, yard and height requirements, section 80- 133(b). 
(d)	Minimum buffer requirements. In addition to required setbacks, a 25-foot wide buffer shall be required along all property lines which abut a single-family district or use to provide a visual screen and a ten-foot buffer adjacent to all other districts other than R-4. 
(e)	Minimum open space requirements. Twenty percent of gross acreage shall be set aside as open space, and provisions shall be made for common areas within said open space for the use of residents of the development. Streets, parking areas, required yards, and required buffer zones shall not be counted as part of the minimum open space. Such area may serve as passive areas and/or developed for recreational purposes such as pools, playground equipment, walking trails, or basketball and tennis courts. 
(f)	Gable or hip roofs. Gable or hip roofs shall have a minimum roof pitch of 6:12. Both gable and hip roofs shall provide overhanging eaves on all sides that extend a minimum of one foot beyond the building wall. 
(g)	Other required standards.
(1)	Principal structures within the R-4 district shall have a minimum of 50 percent finish product on the exterior walls of the buildings consisting of brick, stone, hard-coat stucco, or fiber cement siding. 
(2)	A metal panel exterior finish product shall not be allowed on metal buildings exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area constructed or placed on lots within the R-4 district. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-127. R-5 single-family manufactured homes district.
Within R-5 single-family residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)	One-family dwellings. 
(2)	Any use permitted in R-1 district provided it is served by public water and public sewer. 
This district to be known as residential five (R-5) as shown on the zoning map of Rossville, Georgia, is established to accommodate placement of manufactured/modular home and related facilities in a safe and healthy residential environment consistent with existing land use and density patterns. 
(a)	Intent. It is the intent of this section to encourage the provision of affordable housing in a general residential environment by permitting the use of manufactured/modular homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family as defined herein, in residential five (R-5) districts in which similar dwellings constructed on the site are permitted, subject to the requirements and procedures set forth herein to assure similarity in exterior appearance between such residentially designed manufactured/modular homes and dwellings which have been constructed under these and other lawful regulations on adjacent lots in the same or general area within the district R-5 zoning classification. 
Manufactured homes built to housing and urban development (HUD) standards and meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family either individually or specific model, shall be permitted in residential five districts (R-5) subject to the requirements and limitations set forth in this section which are applicable to manufactured homes and the requirements and limitations apply generally to residential use in such zoning classifications or districts, including minimum lots, yard and building spacing, percentage of lot coverage, off-street parking requirements and approved foundations as described herein. 
Permitted locations. Manufactured/modular homes, which meet the standards established in this section shall be allowed in R-5 districts. 
Compatibility standards for manufactured/modular homes meeting the definition of dwelling, single family are as follows: 
(1)	Manufactured homes qualifying as dwelling, single family shall be compared to site built and other housing in the general area within the same zoning or residential district or area. Approval shall be granted upon the finding that the manufactured/ modular home is substantially similar in size, siding material, roof material, foundation and general aesthetic appearance to site built housing which may be permitted in the same general area under this section or proposed development in the same zoning district. 
(2)	All towing devices, wheels, axles and hitches must be removed. 
(3)	At each exit door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 36 inches by 36 inches. 
(4)	Minimum width of 24 feet. 
(5)	Minimum square footage required by the district in which located. 
(6)	The roof shall have a minimum 2:12 roof pitch and shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, built-up gravel material or other materials approved by the planning director. 
(7)	The exterior siding materials shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl lap designed for such purposes or other materials of like appearance. 
(8)	Be attached to a permanent foundation. 
(9)	Be constructed according to standards established either by the state minimum standard codes as amended from time to time or the standard building code if locally adopted or the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act or the State of Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
(10)	Manufactured homes and modular homes placed in residential five (R-5) districts shall meet the minimum compatibility standards set forth in this section. 
(11)	The planning director may approve deviations from one or more of the developmental or architectural standards provided herein on the basis of a finding that the materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity. 
(b)	Additional requirements applicable to R-5 district. No more than one dwelling or manufactured/modular home may be placed on a lot or parcel of land. 
Permits: No person, firm, or corporation shall erect, locate, or construct a dwelling in the City of Rossville without first obtaining a building permit for said structure. No manufactured home shall be placed, rented, occupied or used in any manner whatsoever in the City of Rossville without an appropriate placement permit. It shall be unlawful for any manufactured home in the City of Rossville to be without a valid placement permit being clearly visible on said manufactured home. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-128. C-1 central business district.
(a)	Purpose. The C-1 district is established primarily as the center of retail trade and financial and professional activity. It is intended to group these uses in a compact area, designed for adequate pedestrian and vehicular movement as well as terminal facilities for vehicles. 
Within C-1 central business district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)	Retail trade, such as general merchandise, food, building materials, hardware, apparel, furniture, drugs, jewelry, books, stationery, etc. In general, any retail business or service establishment, including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises, provided such manufacturing is incidental to the retail business or service occupies less than 40 percent of the floor area and employs no more than five persons. 
(2)	Retail services, such as banks, insurance, real estate business, laundering, beauty and barber services, apparel repair, advertising services, medical and health services, governmental, education, and other miscellaneous services. 
(3)	Hotels, motels, restaurants, and the like. 
(4)	Professional offices. 
(5)	Public assembly and amusement enterprises. 
(6)	Newspaper and printing plants. 
(7)	Public and semipublic uses and structures. 
(8)	Off-street parking lots and parking garages. 
(9)	Bus stations. 
(10)	Radio, television, and telephone exchange stations, and transmission towers. 
(11)	Business and incidental signs. 
(12)	Outdoor advertising signs, provided the setback lines of the district are followed. 
(13)	Automobile sales, new and used, retail and wholesale with attendant repair facilities. 
(14)	When a use in this section abuts a residential district, it shall be separated from such district by a buffer strip at least six feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-129. C-2 general business district.
(a)	Purpose. The C-2 district is the general business district for the City of Rossville. 
(b)	Area, yard, height and buffer requirements. See table of area, yard and height requirements, section 80-133(b). 
(c)	Buffers. Buffer standards, and regulations regarding use and crossing of buffers, are located in section 80-152. 
(d)	Accessory structures. Accessory buildings and structures shall maintain the same front and side yards as the main structure; however, they will not project beyond the established building line. Rear yard setback shall be ten feet. If the property is abutting the same zoning district, side and rear setbacks shall be zero, but fire code regulations must still be met. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-130. I-1 light industrial district.
(a)	Purpose. The I-1 district is established primarily to encourage the development of light industrial uses, such as light manufacturing and wholesale distribution. 
(b)	Area, yard, height and buffer requirements. See table of area, yard and height requirements, section 80-133(b). 
(c)	Buffers. Buffer standards, and regulations regarding use and crossing of buffers, are located in section 80-152. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-131. I-2 heavy industrial district.
(a)	Purpose. The I-2 district is established primarily to encourage the development of heavy industrial uses, including heavy manufacturing. 
(b)	Area, yard, height and buffer requirements. See table of area, yard and height requirements, section 80-133(b). 
(c)	Buffers. Buffer standards, and regulations regarding use and crossing of buffers, are located in section 80-152. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-132. PUD planned unit development district.
(a)	Purpose. The PUD district is established primarily to encourage the development of mixed-use developments, containing both residential and commercial property. PUD is considered a residential district where residential uses are placed. 
(b)	Area, yard, height and buffer requirements. The following requirements apply in the PUD district and shall be shown on the site plans: 
(1)	Minimum lot width at street right-of-way for individual lot: 50 feet, 25 feet on cul-de-sac. 
(2)	Front yard setback for individual lot: 25 feet. 
(3)	Side yard setback for individual lot: 10 feet. 
(4)	Rear yard setback for individual lot: 25 feet. 
(5)	External setback: 25 feet (i.e., all buildings to be at least 25 feet from external boundaries of PUD development). 
(6)	Maximum building and structure height: 50 feet. 
(7)	Buffers: Buffers in PUD districts shall be set according to the zoning district that corresponds to the proposed use and density, and shall be determined at the time the PUD status is granted by rezoning. 
(c)	Location. A planned unit development district shall be located only in an area where public utilities are available. A PUD must be served by public water and sewer. Said district may consist of various residential dwellings, commercial or industrial sites or combinations thereof. A PUD is not intended to be developed as solely residential lots. 
(d)	Required information. The following shall be filed with the application for rezoning, in addition to any information otherwise required of all rezoning applications. Site plans are required to be filed, and the PUD must be conditioned to the site plan at the rezoning hearing. Concept plans with only general delineations of the location of lots and structures are unacceptable: 
(1)	The proposed name of the PUD; 
(2)	An aerial photograph of the area and vicinity; 
(3)	A complete and accurate legal description of the proposed PUD property; 
(4)	A tabulation of total acreage of the site designated for various uses, i.e., parking, structures, streets, parks, playgrounds and utilities; 
(5)	A site plan showing all proposed lots in the PUD and proposed building densities (units per acre); 
(6)	Proposed circulation pattern of the public streets and private driveways; 
(7)	Parking layout which complies with the provisions of this chapter concerning off- street parking; 
(8)	All access points to the same arterial streets to be located and which shall have been approved by the road department and/or the state department of transportation; 
(9)	Detailed landscaping plans, including and designating types of buffer or landscape screens placed between abrupt changes of land uses. Buffers shall be required consistent with the most comparable zoning district for the proposed uses; 
(10)	Signage plan, showing all proposed signs (providing height, area, type and location) for commercial uses and businesses; and 
(11)	Site plan showing a minimum of ten percent of the PUD shall be set aside and designated for recreational purposes (for example, parks, fields, playgrounds, walking trails, etc.). Parking lots, streets, setback areas, stormwater control measures, detention facilities, and so forth shall not count towards this requirement. 
(e)	Abandonment. Whenever the developer or owner of an approved planned unit development has not broken ground on the development within one year of the mayor and council's approval of the plan, the plan shall be deemed abandoned and shall require resubmittal and approval subject to the terms of this chapter before any further land disturbance activities may take place or any further permits may be issued. Whenever the developer has failed to break ground on a phase of a planned unit development for three years from the date of the plan's approval, the plan shall be deemed abandoned as to that phase and shall require resubmittal and approval subject to the terms of this chapter as to that phase before land disturbance activities may occur in the phase or further development permits in the phase may issue. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-133. Tables of permitted uses and area, yard and height requirements.
(a)	Table of permitted uses. The following table of permitted uses is hereby adopted. No principal use shall be established on any property unless it is shown as permitted, by right or subject to special use approval, for the applicable zoning district on the table of permitted uses. A "P" on the table of permitted uses means that the listed use is permitted in the particular zoning classification. An "SU" on the table of permitted uses means that the use is permitted in the particular zoning district as a special use. For purposes of the overlay district, an "X" on the table of permitted uses means that the use is not permitted regardless of the underlying zoning district. A "P" on the table of permitted uses means that the use is permitted regardless of the underlying zoning district. An "SU" means that the use is permitted by special use permit, regardless of whether or not it is permitted or prohibited in the underlying zoning district. 
Table of Permitted Uses
	R-1	R-2	R-3	R-4	R-5	C-1	C-2	I-1	I-2	PUD	Overlay
AGRICULTURAL 
Agriculture and Forestry
Commercial greenhouse or plant nursery 							P 	P 	P 	P 	
Temporary or portable sawmill 								P 	P 		
Urban, community garden 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Animal Oriented Agriculture
Livestock sales pavilion 							SU 				
Riding academies or stables 	SU 										
RESIDENTIAL 
Dwellings
Dwelling, manufactured home 					P 						
Dwelling, multifamily 				P 	P 						P 
Dwelling, townhouse 			P 	P 							
High-rise apartment 					P 	SU 	SU 			P 	
Dwelling, single-family (attached) 			P 	P 	P 						P 
Dwelling, single-family (detached) 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						
Dwelling, two-family 			P 	P 	P 						
Dwelling, single-family, accessory (guesthouse, in-law suite) 	P 										
Home occupation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						
Live/work unit 						P 	P 	P 		P 	P 
Housing and Lodging
Bed and breakfast 				P 	SU 						
Boarding/Rooming house 						SU 	SU 				
Convents or monasteries 				P 							
Dormitory associated with college or school 				P 							
Extended stay hotel/motel 						SU 	SU 				
Fraternity house or sorority house associated with college or school 				P 							
Hotel/Motel 						SU 	SU 			P 	P 
Nursing care facility or hospice 				P 	P 	P 	P 				
Personal care home, community, 7 or more 				P 		P 	P 				
Personal care home, group, 6 or less 			P 	P 		P 	P 				
Child caring institution, group, 4-6 		P 	P 	P 		P 	P 				
Child caring institution, community, 7 or more 						P 	P 				
Shelter for homeless persons, 7-20 				SU 							
INSTITUTIONAL/PUBLIC 
Community Facilities
Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum 							SU 				
Cemetery, columbarium, mausoleum, accessory to place of worship 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
Club, order or lodge, fraternal, non- commercial 						P 	P 				
Coliseum or stadium/not associated with church or school 						P 					
Funeral home, mortuary 							P 				
Golf course, public or private 	P 										
Government facilities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Hospital or accessory ambulance service 							P 				
Library or museum 			P 	P 	P 	P 	P 			P 	
Recreation club 				P 		P 	P 				
Neighborhood or subdivision clubhouse or amenities 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 					P 	
Places of worship 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 				
Swimming pools, commercial 				P 		P 	P 				
Tennis courts, swimming pools, play or recreation areas, community 	P 	P 	P 	P 		P 	P 			P 	
Education
Colleges, universities, research and training facilities 						P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Private educational services, home occupation 	P 	P 	P 	P 	P 						P 
Private kindergarten, elementary, middle or high schools 		P 	P 	P 			P 				P 
Vocational schools 						P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Specialized schools 						P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
COMMERCIAL 
Automobile, boat and trailer sales and service
Automobile or truck rental or leasing facilities 							P 	P 	P 		
Automobile brokerage 							P 	P 	P 		
Auto recovery, storage 								P 	P 		
Automobile repair or maintenance, minor 							P 	P 			X 
Automobile repair, major 							P 	P 	P 		X 
Automobile sales or truck sales 							P 	P 	P 		X 
Automobile service stations 							P 	P 	P 		X 
Automobile upholstery shop 							P 	P 			X 
Automobile wash/wax service 							P 				X 
Boat sales 							P 	P 			
Retail automobile parts or tire store 							P 	P 			
Trailer or RV salesroom and lot 							P 	P 			
Office
Accounting office 						P 	P 				P 
Building or construction office 							P 	P 	P 		P 
Building, landscape, heavy construction contractor office (material, equipment, storage) 							P 	P 	P 		
Engineering or architecture office 						P 	P 				P 
Finance office or banking 						P 	P 				P 
General business office 						P 	P 				P 
Insurance office 						P 	P 				P 
Legal office 						P 	P 				P 
Medical office 						P 	P 				P 
Real estate office 						P 	P 				P 
Recreation and Entertainment
Adult entertainment establishments 								P 			
Drive-in theater 							P 	P 		P 	
Fairground or amusement park 	SU 						SU 				
Indoor recreation (bowling alleys, movie theatres and other activities conducted wholly indoors) 						P 		P 			
Nightclub or late night establishment 						P 		P 			
Outdoor recreation (miniature golf, batting cages, tennis, Go-cart and other outdoor activities) 							P 	P 		P 	
Special events facility 						P 	P 	P 	P 	P 	
Theaters with live performance, assembly or concert halls, or similar entertainment within enclosed building 						P 		P 			
Retail
Alcohol outlet, retail sales, primary or accessory 							P 				P 
Apparel or accessories store 						P 	P 			P 	P 
Art gallery 						P 	P 			P 	P 
Book, greeting card, or stationery store 						P 	P 			P 	P 
Camera or photography 						P 	P 			P 	P 
Computer or computer software store 						P 	P 			P 	P 
Convenience store 							P 				P 
Farm or garden supply store 							P 	P 	P 		P 
Farmer's market 							P 	P 		P 	P 
Florist 						P 	P 	P 			P 
Fortune telling 								P 	P 		P 
Specialty food stores (e.g., coffee, ice cream) 						P 	P 			P 	P 
Fuel dealers, manufacturers or wholesalers 								P 	P 		
Gift, novelty, or souvenir store 						P 	P 				P 
Gold buying, precious metals 						P 	P 				P 
Grocery stores 						P 	P 			P 	P 
Hardware store or other building materials store 						P 	P 	P 	P 		P 
Hobby, toy or game store 						P 	P 				P 
Jewelry store 						P 	P 				P 
Music or music equipment store (retail) 						P 	P 				P 
Liquor store 							P 				X 
Office supplies and equipment store 						P 	P 				P 
Pawn shop, title loan, check cashing other than bank/credit union, payday lending 							P 				P 
Pet supply store 						P 	P 				P 
Pharmacy or drug store 						P 	P 				P 
Radio, television or consumer electronics store 						P 	P 				P 
Retail, 5,000 sf or less 						P 	P 	P 			P 
Retail warehouses/wholesales providing sales of merchandise with no outdoor storage 								P 			
Sporting goods or bicycle sale 						P 	P 				P 
Tattoo Parlor and Piercing Studio 							P 				P 
Thrift, secondhand, antique store 							P 				P 
Tobacco/Cigar/Vape/E-cig store 							P 				SU 
Trade shops: electrical, plumbing, heating/cooling, roofing/siding, with no outside storage 						P 	P 	P 			P 
Restaurant/Food establishments
Brewpub/Beer Growler 						P 	P 		P 		P 
Catering establishments 						P 	P 		P 		P 
Farm winery 						P 	P 		P 		P 
Restaurants 						P 	P 		P 		P 
Restaurants (non-drive-thru) 						P 	P 		P 		P 
Restaurants with a drive-thru configuration 						P 	P 		P 		P 
Transportation
Bus or rail stations or terminals for passengers 								P 	P 		P 
Heliport 								P 	P 		P 
Parking, automobiles, commercial lot or garage 						P 	P 	P 			
Parking, commercial vehicles 								SU 	SU 		
Taxi, ambulance or limousine service, dispatching or storage 							P 	P 			
Services 											
Adult day care center - 7 or more 							P 				P 
Adult day care facility - up to 6 							P 				P 
Animal hospitals, veterinary clinic 						P 	P 				P 
Animal shelter/rescue center 							P 	P 			P 
Banks, credit unions or other similar financial institutions 						P 	P 				P 
Barber shop/ beauty salon or similar establishments 						P 	P 				P 
Coin laundry 							P 				P 
Dog day care 							P 				P 
Dog grooming 						P 	P 				P 
Dry cleaning agencies, pressing establishments, or laundry pick-up stations 							P 	P 			P 
Fitness center 						P 	P 				P 
Health Spa 						P 	P 				P 
Kennel, breeding or boarding 								P 			P 
Landscape business 							P 	P 			P 
Massage Establishment 							SU 				P 
Mini-warehouse 							P 	P 			
Outdoor storage, commercial 									P 		X 
Photoengraving, typesetting, electrotyping 						P 	P 	P 			P 
Photographic studios 						P 	P 	P 			P 
Plumbing, HV/AC equipment establishments with no outdoor storage 							P 	P 			P 
Publishing or printing establishments 							P 				P 
Quick copy printing store 							P 	P 			P 
Services, Medical and Health
Ambulance service or emergency medical services, private 							P 				P 
Health services clinic 						P 	P 				P 
Home healthcare service 							P 				P 
Kidney dialysis center 							P 				P 
Medical or dental laboratories 						P 	P 				P 
Services, Repair
Furniture upholstery or repair; home appliance repair or service 							P 	P 			P 
Personal service, repair (watch, shoes, jewelry) 						P 	P 	P 			P 
INDUSTRIAL 
Alcohol or alcoholic beverage manufacturing 						P 	P 	P 		P 	
Alternative energy production 								P 	P 		
Automobile/truck manufacturing 									P 		
Brick, clay, tile, or concrete products terra cotta manufacturing 								SU 	SU 		
Building materials or lumber supply establishment 								P 	P 		
Cement, lime, gypsum, or plaster of Paris manufacturing 									SU 		
Compressed gas fuel station 									P 		
Chemical manufacture, organic or inorganic 									P 		
Contractor, heavy construction, outside storage 								P 	P 		
Crematoriums 									SU 		
Distillation of bones or glue manufacture 									SU 		
Dry cleaning plant 									SU 		
Dye works 									SU 		
Explosive manufacture or storage 									SU 		
Fabricated metal manufacture 								P 	P 		
Fat rendering or fertilizer manufacture 									SU 		
Fuel dealers, manufactures or wholesalers 									P 		
General aviation airport 									SU 		
Heavy equipment repair service or trade 									P 		
Ice manufacturing plant 								P 	P 		
Incidental retail sales of goods produced or processed on the premises 							P 	P 	P 		
Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an enclosed plant 									SU 		
Industrial, heavy, other 									SU 		
Industrial, light, other 								SU 	SU 		
Intermodal freight terminal, bus or rail freight or passenger terminal, or truck terminal 								SU 	SU 		
Leather manufacturing or processing 									P 		
Light manufacturing 								P 	P 		
Manufacturing, heavy 									P 		
Manufacturing operations not housed within a building 									SU 		
Mines or mining operations, quarries, asphalt plants, gravel pits or soil pits 									SU 		
Outdoor storage, industrial 									P 		
Paper or pulp manufacture 									SU 		
Petroleum or inflammable liquids production, refining 									SU 		
Radioactive materials: utilization, manufacture, processing or emission 									SU 		
Railroad car classification yards or team truck yards 									SU 		
Recovered materials facility wholly within a building 								SU 	SU 		
Recovered materials processing wholly within a building 								SU 	SU 		
Recycling collection 									SU 		
Repair/manufacture of clocks, watches, toys, electrical appliances, electronic, light sheet metal products, equipment, machine tools, or machinery not requiring the use of press punch over 100 tons rated capacity or drop hammer 							
P 	
P 	
P 		
Research, experimental or testing laboratories 								P 	P 		
Rubber or plastics manufacture 									SU 		
Salvage yard (junkyard) 									SU 		
Solid waste: General disposal, landfill, private industry disposal, handling facility, thermal treatment technology or hazardous/toxic materials including radioactive materials 									
SU 		
Smelting: Copper, iron, zinc, or ore 									SU 		
Storage yard, except vehicle 								SU 	SU 		
Storage yard for damaged or confiscated vehicles 								SU 	SU 		
Tire retreading or recapping 									SU 		
Towing or wreckage service 								P 	P 		
Transportation equipment manufacture 									P 		
Transportation equipment storage or maintenance (vehicle) 									SU 		
Truck stop or terminal 								SU 	SU 		
Vehicle storage yard 								SU 	SU 		
Warehousing or storage 								P 	P 		
Wholesale/distribution centers 								P 	P 		
TELECOMMUNICATION 
Telecommunication tower 	SU 	SU 	SU 	SU 	SU 	SU 	SU 	SU 	SU 	SU 	

* All businesses and dwellings within the overlay district are subject to the requirements and conditions of the underlying zoning. 
 
(b)	Table of area, yard and height requirements area, yard and height requirements.
District 	Minimum Lot Size 	Minimum Front Yard Setback From Right-of-Way 	Minimum Side Yard in Feet 	Minimum Rear Yard in Feet 	Maximum Height in Feet 	>Minimum Square Footage of Primary Structure 
	Area in Sq. Ft. 	Density Sq. Ft./D. 	Lot Width in Feet 					
R-1, with private water and private sewer 	25,000 	25,000 	100 	0 	10 	30 	35 	1,200 sf 
R-1, with public water and private sewer or private water and public sewer 	20,000 	20,000 	100 	10 	10 	30 	35 	1,200 sf 
R-1, with public water and public sewer 	17,500 	17,500 	90 	10 	10 	30 	35 	1,200 sf 
R-2 	9,000 	5,000 	80 	10 	10 	25 	35 	1,200 sf 
R-3 	8,000 	4,000 	70 	10 	10 	25 	35 	see (e) below 
R-4 	7,000 	3,500 	60 	25 	10 	25 	35 	see (e) below 
R-5, with public water and public sewer 	7,000 	3,500 	60 	25 	0 	25 	35 	1,200 sf 
C-1 	— 	— 	— 	5 	None 	None 	None 	— 
C-2 	— 	— 	— 	20 	None 	None 	35 	— 
I-1 	— 	— 	— 	50 	15 	None 	55 	— 
I-2 	— 	— 	— 	50 	15 	None 	55 	— 
PUD—Per 
approved site plan 							35* 	
— 

* Unless approved site plan shows otherwise 
(c)	Height exceptions. The height limitation does not apply to structures such as unoccupied and inaccessible architectural features on nonresidential buildings (e.g., church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes), monuments, government-owned observation towers, water towers, chimneys, flag poles, aerials, and similar structures. 
(d)	Nonresidential uses and accessory uses. Nonresidential uses in residential districts shall be set back at least 50 feet from all property lines, shall be screened by a 25-foot vegetative buffer, and shall also have a six-foot wooden fence on the inner or outer boundary of the buffer where adjacent to residentially used property. Off-street parking/loading for all nonresidential uses shall be provided in accordance with the city development regulations. 
(e)	[Square footage per unit.] Six hundred square feet for one-bedroom units, 900 square feet for two-bedroom units, 1,200 square feet for three or more bedroom units. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-134. Central business overlay district.
(a)	[Created.] A central business overlay district is hereby created to encourage a more urban and aesthetically pleasing downtown development pattern, to provide for pedestrians, to encourage access to businesses and the amenities of downtown, and to facilitate infill development and public use of the downtown area. The area of the central business overlay district is designated on the official zoning map. Where there are conflicts between the requirements of this chapter pertaining to the central business overlay district and other sections of the zoning ordinance, the regulations pertaining to the central business overlay district will apply. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the requirements of this section shall not apply to properties within the district so long as they are used for single-family residential purposes permitted within their underlying zoning district. 
(b)	Off-street and on-street automobile parking. Within the central business overlay district, when expanding an existing building more than 25 percent of its current square footage, building new construction, or expanding existing parking or asphalt, the following parking regulations shall apply: 
(1)	Retail sales and services shall be permitted up to a 30-percent reduction in parking requirements within the central business overlay district; 
(2)	Where permitted, on-street parking directly adjacent to the lot may be counted towards parking requirements, provided that no on-street parking spot can be counted for two different properties; 
(3)	A mixed-use development containing residential and commercial uses on the same lot may count an individual spot towards each use's parking requirement; 
(4)	A minimum of one bicycle rack shall be provided per every two residential units; 
(5)	A minimum of one bicycle rack shall be provided per every 5,000 square feet of leasable area for non-residential uses; and 
(6)	A shared parking agreement may cover up to 100% of required parking and bicycle parking. 
(c)	Setbacks. Within the central business overlay district, the C-1 district setbacks shall be measured from property line or edge of curb and: 
(1)	Minimum front-yard setback shall be five feet from the edge of curb; 
(2)	Maximum front-yard setback from curb shall be five feet; however, a maximum setback of 15 feet may be permitted if the use is an attached single-family dwelling or an intentional public space or pedestrian activity space is provided between the building and sidewalk such as a park, plaza, outdoor dining, or similar; 
(3)	A proposed building may match one of the adjacent front-yard setbacks if those setbacks establish a dominant pattern (more than 30 percent) on the same block meeting the intent of this section; and 
(4)	Awnings and balconies may protrude into the public right-of-way on non-arterial streets with a maximum protrusion of four feet. Any intrusion must provide at least eight vertical feet of clearance above a sidewalk. No intrusion into the right-of-way may be allowed into the airspace of vehicle parking or traveling lane. 
(d)	Site plan requirements. Within the central business overlay district, any application for rezoning or for a building permit for new construction shall include a site plan which contains the information identified below. The site plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission at a public meeting and approved if it is in compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Any construction or development subject to an approved application shall be consistent with the site plan presented. 
(1)	Site plans shall include the area and location of any new structures proposed to be constructed and shall identify proposed uses of the property if the application is granted; 
(2)	Site plans shall include approximate location, size, and dimensions of existing structures intending to stay and also structures to be removed or demolished; 
(3)	Site plans shall show property lines that bound the tract of land to be developed; 
(4)	Site plans shall show vehicular and pedestrian points of ingress and egress, existing and proposed; 
(5)	Site plans shall show landscape buffers as required by ordinance or otherwise proposed; 
(6)	Site plans shall show any existing or proposed sidewalks; 
(7)	Site plans shall show approximate parking area design/redesign, including number of spaces; 
(8)	Site plans shall show location of any proposed dumpsters; 
(9)	Site plans shall include a legend, north arrow, graphic scale, total area, and the number of residential units proposed if applicable; and 
(10)	Site plans shall include information necessary to show compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(e)	Building frontage. Building frontage refers to what percentage of the frontage of a lot is to be filled with a building or built feature. When expanding an existing building more than 25 percent of its current square footage or building new construction, the following building frontages shall apply: 
(1)	Minimum building frontage of 80 percent of lot frontage with a building façade. Courtyards and other such defined open spaces shall count towards minimum building frontage requirements when either is open to the public or is screened in a manner which protects the public realm and uses materials as defined in section (h) below; 
(2)	Building frontage cannot be blank (lacking windows, doors, or other ornamentation) for more than 20 linear feet; 
(3)	Buildings shall have their principal pedestrian entrance along a public street. When on a corner, the arterial road shall be the determined road for principal pedestrian entrances. When on a corner of two similar streets, the applicant may choose which street to locate principal pedestrian entrance on, or locate the entrance on the corner itself; and 
(4)	Frontage without a building façade shall include a screenwall built to align with the building façade with not more than two-foot offset. Screenwalls shall be between three feet and five feet in height. Screenwalls may have an opening a maximum of 25 feet to allow vehicular and pedestrian access. 
(f)	Parking and service. When expanding an existing building more than 25 percent of its current square footage, building new construction, or expanding existing parking or asphalt, the following parking requirements shall apply: 
(1)	Off-street parking shall be located in the rear, side or internal to a structure; 
(2)	A net increase in the number of curb-cuts shall not be permitted along an arterial street; 
(3)	Shared access driveways are encouraged as are shared parking agreements where the parking is within 500 feet of the site; 
(4)	All dumpsters, service areas and loading areas shall be entirely screened from the public right-of-way excluding alleys; 
(5)	Any parking area which is visible from a public right-of-way, which is not an alley, shall be buffered using fences, planters, landscaping or other suitable materials such that minimal light, noise, and exhaust spill onto the public realm; 
(6)	Trash and recycling collection and other service areas must be located to the side or rear of buildings; and 
(7)	All drive-thru areas, including, but not limited to, menu boards, stacking lanes, ordering boxes, and drive-up windows must be located to the side or rear of the principal building. Drive-thru windows and lanes may not be placed between a public street (not including an alley) and the associated building. 
(g)	Building massing and height. When expanding an existing building more than 25 percent of its current square footage or building new construction, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)	The first floor of any new construction shall have a floor-to-floor (or floor-to-roof) height of at least 12 feet; 
(2)	Buildings which are new construction shall have a maximum building height of 52 feet; 
(3)	Buildings which are new construction and have first floor entrances two feet over grade or higher must provide either a five-foot deep stoop or porch. Steps cannot be counted in this five feet nor can they encroach into the right-of-way; 
(4)	New construction of a building shall provide that mechanical equipment is not visible from adjoining streets or public parks. Rooftop equipment shall be concealed by a parapet or screened architecturally with materials or elements consistent with the building design and designed to minimize its overall impact; and 
(5)	Buildings of new construction with a wall facing a public street or park and being over 75 feet in length shall be visually broken down by articulating the building façade. Change in articulation shall be set back a minimum of 16 inches from the rest of the façade and occur a minimum of once every 50 feet of building façade. 
(h)	Materials. When expanding an existing building more than 25 percent of its current square footage, building new construction, or replacing existing fencing, the following requirements shall apply: 
(1)	Fence materials are limited to masonry, concrete, stucco, wood, and metal, excluding chain link; 
(2)	storefront cladding materials at ground level shall be stone, brick, concrete, metal, glass, and/or wood; 
(3)	Accessory structures shall use the same or similar materials, color and style of the primary structure's façade if the accessory structure is visible from a public right-of-way; 
(4)	Accessory structures shall use the same or similar materials, color, and style of the primary structure's façade if visible from a public way; 
(5)	Buildings shall create desirable pedestrian environments between the buildings and adjacent streets through clear and visible orientation to the streets; and 
(6)	No security-type roll up metal doors shall be permitted fronting a street or public park. 
(i)	Signage. Within the central business overlay district, the following requirements apply: 
(1)	Signage shall be located only in the sign band or be a pedestrian sign; 
(2)	The sign band is a band along the façade of a building facing a street located between the first and second stories not to exceed three feet in vertical height. A sign within the sign band shall not intrude into the public right-of-way; 
(3)	the pedestrian sign is a hung sign attached perpendicular to the façade with a maximum size of eight square feet. There may be no more than one pedestrian sign per separate first floor use in each building façade; and 
(4)	Any pedestrian sign which protrudes into the right-of-way must provide at least eight vertical feet of clearance above the sidewalk, and must not be located above lanes of traffic or vehicle parking. 
(j)	[Permitted uses.] Within the central business overlay district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)	Retail trade, such as general merchandise, food, building materials, hardware, apparel, furniture, drugs, jewelry, books, stationery, etc. In general, any retail business or service establishment, including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises provided such manufacturing is incidental to the retail business or service, occupies less than 40 percent of the floor area, and employs no more than five persons; 
(2)	Retail services, such as banks, insurance, real estate business, laundering, beauty and barber services, apparel repair, advertising services, medical and health services, governmental, education and other miscellaneous services; 
(3)	Hotels; 
(4)	Restaurants, cafés, and other eateries; 
(5)	Professional offices; 
(6)	Dwelling, live-work; 
(7)	Single-family attached dwellings (no more than six attached units per single massed building), including single-family dwelling units within the same building as permitted non-residential uses; 
(8)	Multifamily dwellings (subject to minimum square footage requirements applicable to R-3 and R-4 zoning); 
(9)	Artisan manufacturing and craft studios; 
(10)	Art galleries; 
(11)	Sidewalk sales and tent sales are allowed only as temporary events accessory to permitted retail uses and shall be conducted no more than 14 days within a calendar year. The public right-of-way shall not be obstructed; and 
(12)	Health care service, provided that hours of operation shall not exceed 8:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(k)	[Prohibited uses.] Within the central business overlay district, the following uses are prohibited: 
(1)	Gas stations or service stations; 
(2)	Auto dealerships; 
(3)	Auto repair/detailing shops; 
(4)	Car washes; 
(5)	Parking lot, except where accessory to a use permitted by this chapter that is on the same lot or an adjacent lot; 
(6)	Warehousing or outdoor storage; 
(7)	Package/liquor stores; 
(l)	[Special use permit required.] Within the central business overlay district, the following uses are permitted by special use permit only: 
(1)	Tobacco/cigar/vape/E-cig store.
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-135. Flex use development.
(a)	Purpose. Flex use developments are established to encourage the development of mixed use developments in commercial and industrial areas of the city. A flex use development may allow any use, including both single and multifamily residential uses as well as nonresidential uses, that is permitted in the terms of the special use permit approving the flex use development. 
(b)	Area, yard, height and buffer requirements. In order to encourage flexibility, area, yard, height and buffer requirements and restrictions shall be established at the time that the flex use development is approved, and shall be shown on the approved site plan. 
(c)	Location. A flex use development may be approved as a special use in any industrial or commercially zoned property greater than one acre in size. 
(d)	Required information. The following shall be filed with the application for special use permit, in addition to any information otherwise required of all special use permit applications. Site plans are required to be filed, and the flex use development shall be conditioned to the site plan approved a part of the special use permit. Concept plans with only general delineations of the location of lots and structures are unacceptable: 
(1)	The proposed name of the development; 
(2)	An aerial photograph of the area and vicinity; 
(3)	A complete and accurate legal description of the property; 
(4)	A tabulation of total acreage of the site designated for various uses, i.e., parking, structures, streets, parks, playgrounds and utilities; 
(5)	A site plan showing all proposed lots and uses in the development and proposed building densities (units per acre); 
(6)	Proposed circulation pattern of the public streets and private driveways; 
(7)	Parking layout which complies with the provisions of this chapter concerning off- street parking; 
(8)	All access points to the same arterial streets to be located and which shall have been approved by the road department and/or the state department of transportation; 
(9)	Detailed landscaping plans, including and designating types of buffer or landscape screens placed between abrupt changes of land uses. Buffers shall be required consistent with the most comparable zoning district for the proposed uses; 
(10)	Signage plan, showing all proposed signs (providing height, area, type and location) for non-residential. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-136—80-151. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VI. BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
 
Sec. 80-152. Required buffers.
(a)	Buffers. A buffer area shall be defined as that portion of a lot set aside for separation or screening purposes, pursuant to the applicable provisions of this article, to separate different use districts and or uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. Transitional buffers are buffers required between dissimilar zoning districts. 
(b)	Buffer requirements.
Table III. Minimum Required Buffers
The buffers listed in this section will apply as follows (measured in feet): 
		Adjacent Property
Property Being Developed		R-1 	R-2 	R-3 	R-4 	R-5 	C-1 	C-2 	I-1 	I-2 	PUD 
	R-1 	— 	— 	— 	15 	15 	25 	25 	50 	50 	25 
	R-2 	— 	— 	— 	15 	15 	25 	25 	50 	50 	25 
	R-3 	— 	— 	— 	15 	15 	25 	25 	50 	50 	25 
	R-4 	15 	15 	15 	— 	— 	— 	— 	50 	50 	25 
	R-5 	15 	15 	15 	15 	— 	15 	15 	50 	50 	25 
	C-1 	25 	25 	25 	15 	15 	— 	— 	— 	— 	25 
	C-2 	25 	25 	25 	15 	15 	— 	— 	— 	— 	25 
	I-1 	50 	50 	50 	50 	50 	25 	25 	— 	— 	50 
	I-2 	50 	50 	50 	50 	50 	25 	25 	— 	— 	50 
	PUD 	50 	50 	50 	15 	15 	— 	— 	50 	50 	— 

(c)	Special exemptions. The following special exceptions apply to buffers and control over general buffer provisions: 
(1)	When property zoned C-1 or C-2 is separated by a public road from residentially- zoned property, no buffer shall be required. 
(d)	Buffer standards. Buffers should be sufficient to provide some screening or protection to neighboring uses, where required by the use and nature of the surrounding area. The particular standards for a specific buffer depend on the nature of the proposed use and the character of the surrounding area. The code enforcement officer shall make a determination as to the type of buffer required, following the procedure of subsection (e) of this section. 
(1)	The code enforcement officer shall have the following discretionary options regarding the standards imposed on a particular buffer and may impose some or all of the following requirements: 
a.	Buffers may be required to be left in their natural state with the preexisting vegetation intact. 
b.	Buffers may be required to be planted or vegetated with fast growing trees and shrubs (for some or all of the width of the required buffer), in species and quantities to be determined by the code enforcement officer. 
c.	Open field buffers may be left as open space. 
d.	Roads, rights-of-way and streams may be counted towards buffer requirements, or may be left as open space. 
e.	The code enforcement officer may, in addition or in lieu of other requirements, require a fence be erected. 
(2)	Buffers shall be undisturbed, provided that buffer areas may be used for sewer and other utility easements, detention ponds, access roads and fences may be erected in buffer areas, so long as the purpose of the buffer is achieved. 
(3)	No structures may be erected in buffers, and buffer areas shall be graded or disturbed only when absolutely necessary. Buffers shall be crossed in such a fashion to minimize incursion into the buffer (i.e., close to perpendicularly). Where possible, buffers shall be restored to an opaque standard after being crossed, and BMPs, as required by the city development regulations (and soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance), shall be followed at all times. 
(4)	The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to administratively vary all requirements in this section. 
(e)	Procedure. In the event a development is one that requires buffers, the developer shall inform the code enforcement officer of the proposed use and provide information about the size of the operation, dimensions of the building, the planned hours of operation, security lighting and other lighting issues, anticipated traffic flow of customers, suppliers and deliveries, and any other information as required by the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall review the surrounding area and the uses and zoning of surrounding property. The code enforcement officer shall then determine the appropriate buffering standards under this section, considering the following criteria: 
(1)	The nature of the use and all the information provided about the use and its potential nuisance impact on the neighboring and surrounding properties; 
(2)	The existing and adjacent uses that may already impose similar negative impacts on adjoining property; 
(3)	The existing dissimilar uses of surrounding property and the current zoning of the surrounding property; 
(4)	The location of any nearby residences; and 
(5)	The existence of any streams, roads or other rights-of-way, the natural terrain, and the existing topography that may provide buffering. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-153—80-173. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VII. DETAILED REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC USES
 
Sec. 80-174. Junk yards; salvage yards; scrap yards.
Any junk yard (including salvage yards and scrap yards), whether preexisting or new, shall maintain a 50-foot opaque buffer. Any stacking of inoperable, crushed or otherwise damaged vehicles shall only be permitted in a junk yard. Impound lots, towing services and similar businesses shall be permitted to retain junk, inoperative or abandoned vehicles for a maximum of 120 days before disposal; long-term or permanent storage of such vehicles shall only be permitted in a junk yard. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-175. Cemeteries.
(a)	Cemeteries. Cemeteries are burial grounds, generally where multiple burial plots are sold or provided for burial of persons beyond the immediate family. Cemeteries are permitted as accessory uses to churches. All cemeteries shall have a 25-foot vegetative buffer where adjacent to any residentially zoned or used property. 
(b)	Marking and boundaries. All family plots and cemeteries must be marked on plats and surveys of property, and if not clearly ascertainable, the boundaries must be marked by fencing or other monuments or markers. All abandoned or historic cemeteries must be maintained by the property owner. 
(c)	Family cemeteries. The establishment of private family cemeteries within the city is not permitted. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-176. Hotels and motels.
All new hotels and motels, or expansions of existing hotels and motels, shall have internal corridors only, and rooms for guests shall only be accessible from the interior of the structure. All hotels and motels shall have lighting installed and operational to fully illuminate all parking areas. All hotels and motels shall have fully functional telephones in all rooms open to guests. Notwithstanding the height limitations of the underlying zoning district, hotels may be constructed up to a maximum height of 100 feet. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-177—80-205. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE VIII. MANUFACTURED HOMES
 
Sec. 80-206. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to ensure that manufactured homes are installed on a site according to applicable federal and manufacturers' requirements; that manufactured homes are architecturally compatible with single-family residences and other land uses in the city currently and consistent with the mayor and city council's vision for future development in the city; and that pre-owned manufactured homes are in a safe and sound condition when they are relocated into the city. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-207. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicant means any person seeking to install a pre-owned manufactured home in the incorporated area of the city. 
Architectural features means ornamental or decorative features attached to or protruding from an exterior wall, including cornices, eaves, gutters, belt courses, sills, lintels, bay windows, chimneys, and decorative ornaments. 
Bay window means a window assembly whose maximum horizontal projection is not more than two feet from the vertical plane of an exterior wall and is elevated above the floor level of the home. 
Building inspector means the person appointed, employed, or otherwise designated as the director of planning, permits and inspections; the city building official or any of his assistants. 
Certificate of occupancy means a document issued by the building inspector certifying that a manufactured home is in compliance with applicable requirements set forth by this article and indicating it to be in a condition suitable for residential occupancy. 
Compatibility means, with regard to buildings, achieving harmony in appearance of architectural features in the same vicinity. 
Dormer means a window projecting from a roof. 
Eave means the projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Install means to construct a foundation system and to place or erect a manufactured home on such foundation system. The term "install" includes, without limitation, supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, or anchoring such manufactured home and connecting multiple or expandable sections of such manufactured home. 
Jurisdiction means the incorporated area of the city. 
Pre-owned manufactured home means any manufactured home that has been previously used as a residential dwelling and has been titled. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-208. Installation permit and certificate of occupancy required.
(a)	No manufactured home shall be installed on any site without first obtaining an installation permit. An installation permit shall not issue unless the building inspector determines that: 
(1)	The site meets the requirements of the city's ordinance for the location of manufactured housing; 
(2)	The manufactured home complies with federal and state requirements applicable to manufactured housing; and 
(3)	The manufactured home, once installed, will comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)	No manufactured home shall be occupied without a certificate of occupancy. The building inspector shall not issue a certificate of occupancy for a manufactured home unless it has been installed in compliance with federal and state laws and regulations, manufacturers' instructions, and unless it is in conformity with all the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-209. Installation requirements.
(a)	Hauling mechanisms removed. The transportation mechanisms, including wheels, axles, and hitch, must be removed prior to occupancy. 
(b)	Installation regulations. The manufactured home shall be installed in accordance with the installation instructions from the manufacturer, as appropriate. 
(c)	Approved septic system. Each manufactured home shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer system, community sewerage system, or on-site septic system with capacity available as approved by the health officer. 
(d)	Foundation. The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
(e)	Masonry skirting. The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure of each manufactured home and the ground, including stairways, shall be underpinned with masonry that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage and attached stairways except for proper ventilation and access openings. 
(f)	Exterior finish. The exterior siding of the manufactured home shall consist of wood or hardboard siding material. 
(g)	Roof pitch and materials. The manufactured home shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least five feet in height for each 12 feet in width. Roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, or asphalt shingle material. 
(h)	Width and square footing. The manufactured home shall consist of two fully enclosed parallel sections and a total width of at least 20 feet. It shall be at least 1,200 square feet in conditioned living space. 
(i)	Covered porch. A covered porch or deck shall be provided facing the front yard or street prior to occupancy, with a ten-foot minimum depth and a minimum of 20 feet in length. 
(j)	Additional architectural features. The manufactured home shall contain eaves with a minimum projection of six inches, window shutters, and at least one additional architectural feature such as dormers, bay windows, or another architectural feature that will provide equal compatibility with surrounding residences and land uses, as approved by the building inspector. 
(k)	Yard. Each newly installed manufactured home shall be located so that there is an unshared yard adjacent to the structure that is at least 5,000 square feet. 
(l)	Buffer. No manufactured home shall be located closer than 30 feet from the property line of an adjacent property having a residential zoning classification. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-210. Legal nonconforming manufactured homes.
Legal nonconforming manufactured homes existing prior to the date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may remain in use without complying with this article; however, whenever a legal nonconforming manufactured home is replaced with a manufactured home, the replacement home shall comply with this article. Whenever a nonconforming manufactured home falls into such a state of disrepair that the certificate of occupancy is revoked, in order for a certification of occupancy to be reissued, the manufactured home shall be brought into compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-211. Mobile homes.
No mobile homes, defined as units constructed prior to June 15, 1976, shall be allowed within the city. Only manufactured homes constructed to the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards governed by the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, as amended, 42 USC 5401 et seq. shall be permitted to be installed or relocated within the jurisdiction. Pre-owned manufactured homes relocated into or within the city must comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-212. Pre-owned manufactured homes.
In addition to the other requirements of this article, the relocation and installation of pre- owned manufactured homes shall be subject to the following health and safety standards and conditions and inspection program: 
(1)	Relocation permit. A permit shall be required to locate a pre-owned manufactured home in the jurisdiction. To obtain a relocation permit, applicants shall provide to the building inspector: 
a.	An affidavit signed by the applicant that the pre-owned manufactured home meets health and safety standards required by this article; 
b.	Photographs of the interior and exterior of the pre-owned manufactured home providing evidence that the home meets the minimum health and safety standards of this article; and 
c.	The permit and inspection fee required by subsection (4) of this section. 
(2)	Inspection. Upon receipt of a relocation permit, applicants may relocate the manufactured home onto a residential site of the proper zoning classification for the purposes of inspection. Applicant shall arrange for an inspection to be held prior to the installation of the manufactured home. At such time as the building inspector certifies that the manufactured home meets the requirements of this article, applicants may install the manufactured home in accordance with the requirements of this article. 
(3)	Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued to the applicant after installation and at such time that the building inspector certifies that the requirements of this article have been met. 
(4)	Fee. A permit and inspection fee in an amount set by the city council shall be charged to the applicant to cover the cost to process the permit application and inspect the pre- owned manufactured home. Such fee shall cover the initial inspection and one follow- up inspection. The applicant shall be charged an additional amount set by the city council for each additional follow-up inspection that may be necessary. 
(5)	Alternative inspection. At the request of the applicant, the building inspector may, at his discretion, inspect a pre-owned manufactured home prior to its being relocated if the home is then located at another site within the city or within a convenient distance of the city. In the event that the building inspector travels outside of the city to inspect a pre-owned manufactured home, applicant shall pay mileage at the then-applicable federal reimbursement rate from the office of the building inspector, to the site of the inspection, and back to the office of the building inspector. 
(6)	Rehabilitation. At the request of the applicant, and where the building inspector finds that rehabilitation of a pre-owned manufactured home that does not meet the health and safety standard of this article can be accomplished in a reasonably short period of time and without causing any detriment to the neighborhood where the pre-owned manufactured home will be relocated in the city, the building inspector may issue the relocation permit and delay inspection for a period of up to 45 days to allow for rehabilitation after the pre-owned manufactured home has been relocated into the city. The building inspector shall not grant such request unless the applicant presents satisfactory evidence of a feasible rehabilitation plan. The pre-owned manufactured home shall not be connected to utilities until the inspection is performed and a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-213. Minimum health and safety standards.
All pre-owned manufactured homes shall comply with the following health and safety standards before being issued a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector: 
(1)	HUD Code. Every pre-owned manufactured home located in the jurisdiction shall be in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 USC 5401—5445 (the HUD Code) and shall not have been altered in such a way that the home no longer meets the HUD Code. 
(2)	Interior condition. Every floor, interior wall, and ceiling of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in sound condition. Doors and windows shall be operable, watertight and in good working condition. The floor system shall be in sound condition and free of warping, holes, water damage, or deterioration. 
(3)	Exterior condition. The exterior of all pre-owned manufactured homes shall be free of loose or rotting boards or timbers and any other conditions that might admit rain or moisture to the interior portions of the walls or to occupied spaces. The exterior siding shall be free of rot and rust. Roofs shall be structurally sound and have no obvious defects that might admit rain or cause moisture to collect on the interior portion of the home. 
(4)	Sanitary facilities. Every plumbing fixture, water, and waste pipe of a pre-owned manufactured home shall be in a sanitary working condition when properly connected and shall be free from leaks and obstructions. Each home shall contain a kitchen sink. Each bathroom shall contain a lavatory and water closet. At least one bathroom shall contain a tub and/or shower facilities. Each of these fixtures shall be checked upon being connected to ensure they are in good working condition. 
(5)	Heating systems. Heating shall be safe and in working condition. Unvented heaters shall be prohibited. 
(6)	Electrical systems. Electrical systems (switches, receptacles, fixtures, etc.) shall be properly installed and wired and shall be in working condition. Distribution panels shall be in compliance with the approved listing, complete with required breakers, with all unused openings covered with solid covers approved and listed for that purpose. The home shall be subject to an electrical continuity test to ensure that all metallic parts are properly bonded. 
(7)	Hot water supply. Each home shall contain a water heater in safe and working condition. 
(8)	Egress windows. Each bedroom of a manufactured home shall have at least one operable window of sufficient size to allow egress if necessary, which shall have a net clear opening that is a minimum of five square feet in area, 24 inches in height, and 20 inches in width. The opening shall have a sill height of not more than 44 inches above the floor. The opening shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys, tools or special knowledge. 
(9)	Ventilation. The kitchen in the home shall have at least one operating window or other ventilation device. 
(10)	Smoke detectors. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall contain one operable battery-powered smoke detector in each bedroom and in the kitchen, which must be installed in accordance with the manufacturers' recommendations. 
(11)	State law and regulations. Each pre-owned manufactured home shall be installed in compliance with the requirements of state law, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq., and the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to that law, as they may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-214. Enforcement.
(a)	Permanent connection to utilities shall not be approved until the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy. 
(b)	Owners of pre-owned manufactured homes that are not in compliance with this article upon a third inspection shall have their permit revoked and shall be required to remove the home from the jurisdiction at their own expense. 
(c)	Failure to remove a pre-owned manufactured home from the jurisdiction upon failure to receive a certificate of occupancy shall be punishable by a fine of $100.00. Each day any violation under this article continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-215—80-236. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE IX. SIGN REGULATIONS
 
Sec. 80-237. Purposes.
(a)	It is the purpose of the mayor and city council in enacting these regulations to provide standards to safeguard life, public health, property and welfare by regulating the location, size, illumination, erection, maintenance and quality of materials of all signs. More specifically, signs have a powerful impact on the aesthetic environment of the community, and it is the purpose of this article to encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, allowing sufficient opportunities for communications to serve business, interest groups and the public, while complying with the federal and state constitutions and laws. Signs create visual clutter and therefore should be regulated in their size, location, construction and illumination. Signs can detract from the beauty of the neighborhood and lower property values. In seeking to comply with federal and state law, the city has determined the following: large signs are, as the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized, an aesthetic harm; the state supreme court has upheld sign regulations on the basis of aesthetics and preserving the beauty of environment; and, the 11th Circuit has recognized portable signs are visual clutter and a potential traffic hazard. These holdings show that the city's ordinance is within the law and constitutional, which is a goal of the city. The goal of this article is to avoid being an impermissible content-based regulation, and instead to be a permissible time, place and manner restriction. 
(b)	Many signs can also be a hazard and negatively impact traffic safety by distracting drivers and blocking views of other vehicles and dangers, by making intersections more treacherous, and by making it difficult to see oncoming traffic when entering a roadway. Therefore, it is also the purpose of this article to prevent those harms by regulating signs to safe locations, safe sizes, with proper and safe illumination and construction. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-238. Jurisdiction and applicability of code requirements.
(a)	This article shall apply to all properties within the incorporated areas of the city. This article shall not relate to the copy or message on signs within the city. 
(b)	All signs and sign structures shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the state minimum standard codes. 
(c)	If any provisions or requirements of this article are in conflict with any other provision or requirement of this article or any other applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or other governmental regulation of any kind, the more restrictive rule or standard takes precedence. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-239. General provisions and definitions.
(a)	No sign shall be placed or maintained within the city except in conformity with this article. 
(b)	Notwithstanding any other restrictions in this article, any sign, display or device allowed under this article may contain any commercial or noncommercial message, or any political or non-political message; except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 
(c)	Height limitations in this article control over the general height limitations of this article and apply to any structure that contains a sign. For example, a church spire or radio antenna with a sign would be subject to the height limitations of this article, rather than general height limitations. 
(d)	Definitions. The general definitions and interpretative rules of this chapter shall also be used. To the extent those general rules or definitions conflict with these specific definitions, these definitions shall control. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned sign means a sign and/or sign structure which no longer correctly directs or exhorts any person, or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product or service. 
Animated sign means any sign that all or any part thereof visibly moves or imitates movement in any fashion whatsoever. Any sign that contains or uses for illumination any lights (or lighting devices) that change color, flash or alternate, show movement or motion, or change the appearance of said sign or any part automatically. 
Area of sign (copy area) means the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, or material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such sign from the background against which it is placed. 
Banner means a sign hung either with or without a frame, possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. This definition expressly excludes all fabric signs mounted from one side to a flag pole. For purposes of regulation under this article, banners shall be treated as a ground sign, but shall not be maintained for more than 30 consecutive days, or more than 90 total days in any calendar year. 
Building sign means any sign attached to any part of a building other than a freestanding sign. 
Canopy means any permanent roof-like structure, including awnings and marquees, projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Canopy sign means any sign attached to, or made a part of, the front, side, or top of a canopy. These signs are regulated as wall signs. 
Copy means the wording or graphics on a sign surface in either permanent or removable form. 
Crown of the road means the highest point of a road, usually the centerline of a road. 
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, paint or affix. 
Establishment means a commercial, industrial, institutional, educational, office, business or financial entity. 
Flag means any fabric sign, regardless of the message conveyed, mounted to a flag pole on one side only. 
Flashing sign. See "animated sign." 
Freestanding sign means any sign which is independent from any building or other structure and is entirely supported by a single or multiple pedestals that are permanently attached at or below ground level. 
Frontage, building, means the length of an outside building wall facing a street. 
Frontage, street, means the length of the property line of any one parcel along a street on which it borders. 
Ground sign means a sign that is anchored to the ground and is wholly independent of a building for support. Freestanding signs are included in this definition, as are signs on poles, frames, or other mounting structures other than buildings. 
Illuminated sign means a sign which contains an internal source of light or which is designed or arranged to reflect light from an artificial source. 
Mansard sign means any sign attached to or erected within 12 inches of an actual or simulated mansard of a building, with the sign face parallel to and within the limits of the building, but not exceeding the roofline, and not deemed to be a roof sign. These signs are regulated as wall signs. 
Monopole sign or unipole sign means a freestanding sign that is erected on a single pedestal attached to the ground for the display of messages irrespective of the number of faces or the configuration of the faces. 
Monument sign means a permanent sign, other than a freestanding pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground independent of any other structure and constructed of stone, concrete, masonry, stucco or equal architectural material. These signs are regulated as ground signs. 
Moving sign. See "animated sign." 
Painted wall sign means any sign that is applied with paint or similar substance on the face of a wall. 
Permanent sign means a sign permanently affixed to a building or the ground. 
Person means any association, company, corporation, firm, organization, or partnership, singular or plural, of any kind. 
Planned center means a nonresidential develop with multiple establishments that are separately owned and operated. 
Portable sign means any sign supported by its own frame or trailer, with or without wheels, that is designed to move from one place to another. 
Projecting sign means any sign affixed to a building or wall, which horizontally extends more than 12 inches beyond the surface of a building or wall. 
Revolving sign. See Animated sign. 
Roof sign means any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon or over the roof of any building and projecting above the roofline. 
Roof sign (integral) means any sign erected or constructed as an integral part of a normal roof structure of any design. No part of the sign can extend vertically above the highest portion of the roof, and no part of the sign can be separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
Setback means the distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
Sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame sign means a sign which is normally in the shape of an "A" of some variation, which is usually two-sided. 
Sign means any display of words, shapes or images designed to convey a message to the viewer, located on the exterior of any dwelling, building or structure, or located anywhere on a lot upon a dedicated supporting structure or device, including poles, banners, windows and similar devices. 
Sign face means the actual message-carrying portion of the sign that can be used to display content, including any area that can display or does display words, pictures or other communicative elements of the sign, including the background color. 
Sign structure means and includes all the elements of the sign, including its supporting structure, sign face, base, lights and every portion of the sign. 
Street means any public or private right-of-way for automobile use. This excludes alleyways, parking lots and driveways. 
Street frontage means the width in linear feet of a lot or parcel where it abuts the right-of- way of any public street. 
Under canopy sign means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a canopy (in awnings and marquees), is perpendicular to the wall surface of a building, and whose copy is not clearly visible from the public right-of-way. 
Wall face means a measurement of area equal to the height of the structure from the ground to the coping or eave of the roof multiplied by the width of the wall associated with the individual business. The wall face is to be measured for each wall independently. 
Wall sign means a sign that is fastened directly to or is placed or painted directly upon the exterior wall of a building. 
Window sign means a sign having its message visible from the exterior of a building that is either located within a building so as to be visible through a window, or affixed directly to the window either inside or outside the building. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-240. Permitted signs.
(a)	Standard permitted signs. The following signs are permitted in the following zoning districts. If not otherwise stated, any sign not specifically permitted in a zoning district as provided under this section shall be prohibited. These regulations apply to signs located on any lot or development. A double-sided (double-faced) sign is counted as one sign. Height is measured from grade to the highest portion of the sign structure. 
(b)	Signs permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 zoning districts.
(1)	Ground signs. Up to two double-faced signs per lot. No single sign face may exceed 16 square feet. Total maximum area for all sign faces is 32 square feet (e.g., two 16-square-foot sign faces, or four eight-square-foot faces, etc.). Height is limited to five feet. 
(2)	Window signs. Two per lot, total of up to eight square feet of window signs. 
(3)	Wall signs. Not permitted. 
(4)	Entrance signs. Two per subdivision development, maximum area of each sign is 32 square feet. Entrance signs may only be single-sided, unless only one is erected, in which case it can be double-sided. Entrance signs are only permitted at the entrance to a subdivision development. Entrance signs must be set back from the right-of-way a distance equal to their height plus one foot for safety reasons, and cannot block traffic sight lines. Maximum height is six feet. 
(c)	Signs permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, for individual uses.
(1)	Ground signs. One double-faced sign per lot. No sign face may exceed 100 square feet. Total maximum sign face area is 200 square feet. If the lot contains a principal building of over 10,000 square feet, no sign face may exceed 200 square feet and total maximum sign face area is 400 square feet. If the principal building exceeds 100,000 square feet, no sign face may exceed 300 square feet and total maximum sign face area is 600 square feet. Maximum height for all ground signs is 25 feet. 
(2)	Window signs. Total signage not to exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)	Wall signs. Up to four signs per lot. Total wall signage not to exceed 200 square feet on all walls (e.g., four 50-square-foot signs or one 200-square-foot sign). If the lot contains a principal building of over 10,000 square feet, the total amount of permissible wall signage increases to 250 square feet. If the lot contains a principal building of over 100,000 square feet, the total amount increases to 300 square feet. No single wall sign may exceed 250 square feet. 
(4)	Entrance signs. Two per lot, maximum area of each sign is 32 square feet. Entrance signs may only be single-sided, unless only one is erected, in which case it can be double-sided. Entrance signs are only permitted at the entrance of the development. Entrance signs must be set back from the right-of-way a distance equal to their height plus one foot for safety reasons, and cannot block traffic sight lines. Maximum height is six feet. 
(d)	Signs permitted in C-1 or C-2 zoning districts, for planned centers.
(1)	Ground signs. One double-faced sign of up to 200 square feet per face, for the entire planned center. Total maximum sign face area is 400 square feet. If the development contains over 50,000 total square feet, no sign face may exceed 300 square feet. Total maximum sign face area is 600 square feet. Maximum height for all ground signs is 25 feet. 
(2)	Window signs. Total signage not to exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)	Wall signs. Four signs per business. Total area of all signs is not to exceed ten percent of the gross floor area of each business. No single wall sign shall exceed 250 square feet. 
(4)	Entrance signs. Two per planned center, maximum area of each sign is 50 square feet. Entrance signs may only be single-sided, unless only one is erected, in which case it can be double-sided. Entrance signs are only permitted at the entrance to the planned center. Entrance signs must be set back from the right-of-way a distance equal to their height plus one foot for safety reasons, and cannot block traffic sight lines. Maximum height is ten feet. 
(e)	Signs permitted in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, for individual uses.
(1)	Ground signs. One double-faced sign of up to 300 square feet per face; maximum total area is 600 square feet. Maximum height is 25 feet. 
(2)	Window signs. Total signage not to exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)	Wall signs. Total signage not to exceed 200 square feet on all walls. If the lot contains a principal building of over 50,000 square feet, the total amount increases to 300 square feet. No single wall sign may exceed 200 square feet. 
(4)	Entrance signs. Two per lot, maximum area of each sign is 50 square feet. Entrance signs may only be single-sided, unless only one is erected, in which case it can be double-sided. Entrance signs are only permitted at the entrance to the lot. Entrance signs must be set back from the right-of-way a distance equal to their height plus one foot for safety reasons, and cannot block traffic sight lines. Maximum height is ten feet. 
(f)	Signs permitted in I-1 and I-2 zoning districts, for planned centers.
(1)	Ground signs. One double-faced sign of up to 300 square feet per face, for the entire planned center. Total maximum sign face area is 600 square feet. Maximum height is 25 feet. For lots with frontage on a U.S. highway or state highway, ground signs may have a maximum height of 40 feet. 
(2)	Window signs. Total signage per business not to exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing road frontage. 
(3)	Wall signs. Total area of all signs is not to exceed ten percent of the gross floor area. No more than four signs per business are permitted, and no single wall sign shall exceed 250 square feet. 
a.	Entrance signs. Two per planned center, maximum area of each sign is 50 square feet. Entrance signs may only be single-sided, unless only one is erected, in which case it can be double-sided. Entrance signs are only permitted at the entrance to the planned center. Entrance signs must be set back from the right-of-way a distance equal to their height plus one foot for safety reasons, and cannot block traffic sight lines. Maximum height is ten feet. 
(g)	Signs permitted in the PUD zoning district. Within the residential portion of any PUD, the provisions of subsection (b) of this section apply. A sign plan for any commercial portion of a PUD shall be made a part of the PUD application process and approved during the rezoning process. PUD applicants should seek consistency with the signage provisions of commercial zoning districts as shown above. 
(h)	Internal signs. Any sign not visible from the public right-of-way is not restricted or regulated by this article. 
(i)	Outdoor facility signs. Any sign that is located at an outdoor event facility that is open to the general public, such as a ball field, race track, or amphitheater, and is mounted on the internal-facing walls of the facility, is exempt from the maximum number and square footage restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-241. Regulations for signs.
(a)	Location, height, and setback.
(1)	The property owner must give permission for all sign placement on the owner's property, through the issuance of a letter signed by the owner. 
(2)	All signs must comply with all side and rear setbacks of this chapter. 
(3)	Signs can be located in front setback areas, but all signs and sign structures, except as noted below, must be set back at least ten feet from the public right-of-way. No portion of a sign or sign structure shall encroach on or overhang the public right-of- way or any other person's property. Furthermore, for safety reasons, no sign shall be located closer than ten feet from the back of the curb of a public roadway, or if there is no curb, from the edge of the pavement. 
(4)	Distances are measured from the closest portion of the sign (whether that is the base, sign face, or the sign structure) to the right-of-way, curb or pavement. 
(5)	The height requirements of a sign shall be computed as the length of a straight vertical line from normal grade to the height of the highest attached component of the sign or sign structure. When the sign is constructed within 15 feet of a right-of-way, the normal grade shall be considered the elevation of the crown of the road. When a sign is constructed 15 or more feet from any right-of-way, normal grade shall be considered the lower of: 
a.	Existing grade of the site of the sign prior to construction of the sign; or 
b.	The newly established grade at the base of the sign after construction, exclusive of any filling, beaming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. 
(b)	Number. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, ground signs shall be equal to the number of sign structures. All other non-ground signs shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. 
(c)	Illumination.
(1)	Ground signs cannot be internally illuminated except where expressly permitted by this article. All signs may be externally illuminated. External illumination of any sign in any district shall be positioned and shielded so that the light source does not shine directly into the path of motorists on a public right-of-way or into the windows of adjacent dwellings or businesses without the permission of the owner and resident thereof. Signs located in residential districts shall not be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(2)	Flashing, blinking or otherwise varying illumination are not permitted. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. 
(3)	All externally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. 
(4)	All internally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. 
(5)	All illuminated signs over ten feet in height shall either be internally illuminated where permitted or illuminated by external lighting fixtures not visible to passing motorists. 
(6)	No sign shall give off light which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. This shall be determined by measuring the footcandles (lumens per square foot) that fall on adjacent properties or the public right-of-way. No sign shall exceed 0.5 footcandles at any adjacent property line in a residential district or two footcandles at any public right-of-way. 
(7)	Multiple-message signs. Multiple-message signs are those which change the message or copy on the sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slates, or by changing electronic display on the sign face. They are subject to the following restrictions: 
a.	No multiple-message sign may change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every minute, provided that multiple-message billboards shall be allowed to change the copy or images that are part of the message not more frequently than once every ten seconds. 
b.	When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed mechanically, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. When the message of a multiple- message sign is changed in an electronic manner, through the use of light emitting diodes, back lighting or other light source, the transition shall occur within two seconds. 
c.	When any multiple-message sign is located within 150 feet of any residential district, the display of multiple-messages shall discontinue between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., and the sign shall be static and not display more than one message during that period. 
(8)	Multiple-message signs and internally illuminated signs are only permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts. 
(d)	Calculation of area. The area of a sign is calculated by determining the area of the smallest square or rectangle which encloses the sign face and the structure surrounding the sign face. For example, the pole or base would not be included, but any frame holding the sign face in place would be counted. See examples: 

Examples of Sign Face Area Measurements 

 
(e)	Unusual shaped signs. Unusual shaped signs are signs that are any shape other than a square or rectangle, and include signs with projecting elements or features, round, oval, and triangular signs, signs with more than four sides, signs in the shape of an animal, object, or device, and so forth. For all such signs, the area is calculated by calculating the area of the smallest rectangle that will completely enclose all elements of the sign face and sign structure supporting the face, not including the base, or any open space. 
(f)	Sign support structures. Signs 300 square feet per face or larger must be constructed with a monopole-type support system. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-242. Safety and construction standards.
(a)	Engineering approval. All signs in excess of 15 feet in height should be constructed according to plans approved by a state registered professional engineer. The sign owner shall produce such approved plans at the request of the building official. 
(b)	Official confusion. Signs which contain or are in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal are prohibited. 
(c)	Fire safety. No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, ventilation, or door; nor shall any sign or sign structure be attached to a fire escape. 
(d)	Corner visibility. No sign or sign structure above a height of three feet shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of two streets, or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
(e)	Traffic visibility. No sign shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering the roadway (i.e., the view of oncoming traffic by vehicles attempting to enter the road). 
(f)	Good repair. All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair. Any structure formally used as a sign, but not in use for any other purpose, must be removed by the owner of the property within ten days after written notification from a designated city official or 30 days after its use as a valid sign has ceased, after which time, the city may cause the removal of the sign at the owner's expense. 
(g)	Removal of unsafe signs and safety hazards. The city may remove a sign in violation of this article, without giving notice to any party, if said sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property, or said sign poses an immediate safety threat to the life or health of any members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-243. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs are prohibited: 
(1)	Roof signs (which means signs mounted above a roof or projecting above the roof-line of a structure). 
(2)	Rotating signs. 
(3)	Signs with more than two sides. 
(4)	Except where expressly permitted, changing copy, moving signs, or signs with moving parts are prohibited. This includes animated signs involving motion or sound; fluttering ribbons; "trivision"-type signs; signs displaying moving pictures or images; LED signs or EVMC signs with content that changes more than once daily; signs with moving words; signs with waiving elements, whether motorized or wind-powered; or similar moving signs. This regulation shall not be construed to prohibit flags, which are regulated as other non-moving signs. 
(5)	A-frame, sandwich type, sidewalk or curb signs, except in DDA area. 
(6)	Swinging or projecting signs, except in DDA area. 
(7)	Portable signs (mobile, trailer). 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-244. Procedures; sign registration and building permits.
(a)	Except as specifically exempted from the provisions of this article, a person or firm may not legally maintain, post, display, enlarge, erect, move, or substantially change a sign that is larger than four square feet without first obtaining a permit from the code enforcement officer. Signs using electrical wiring and connections (i.e., illuminated signs), as well as larger signs, may require additional permits under the city building code, and the building official should be contacted regarding such signs. 
(b)	All parties are advised to consult with the code enforcement officer to avoid erecting signs that violate this article. No person shall obtain a vested right to maintain a sign that does not comply with this article at the time it is erected. Signs erected in violation of this article shall be removed or reconstructed in compliance with this article. 
(c)	Permit applications for conforming signs shall be filed by the sign owner or his agent with the code enforcement officer. 
(1)	Applications. Applications shall contain the following: 
a.	The type of the sign as defined in this article. 
b.	The street address and zoning designation of the property where the sign is to be located. 
c.	A site plan drawn to scale that shows the location of the sign on the lot, including indicating setbacks from property lines and rights-of-way. 
d.	The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
e.	The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the sign is to be located, along with written consent of said owner. 
f.	Engineered construction plans for signs exceeding 15 feet in height, showing they are approved by a state registered professional engineer. 
g.	Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(2)	Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the code enforcement officer and permit fees have been paid as adopted by the mayor and city council and as amended from time to time. 
(3)	Granting of permit. The code enforcement officer or his designee shall grant a permit upon receipt of a completed application if the proposed sign meets the requirements of this article. 
(4)	Permit expiration. A permit shall become null and void if construction of the sign has not begun within six months from the date of issuance. Issuance of a permit shall in no way prevent the city from later declaring the sign to be nonconforming or unlawful if, with further review of available information, the sign is found not to comply with the requirements of the ordinance applicable at the time that the complete permit application was filed. 
(5)	Violation. A violation of any provisions of this article will be grounds for termination of a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this article, the code enforcement officer or his designee shall revoke the permit. No information shall be required regarding the content of the sign. Any person failing to obtain a permit prior to construction shall be subject to citation and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with the enforcement provisions of this chapter and applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-245. Nonconforming signs.
Signs existing legally at the time of the adoption or amendment of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but which do not conform to newly adopted or amended provisions of this article solely because of a change in this article, and not because of a change to the sign, may remain as legal nonconforming signs, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)	There must be existing property rights in the sign; 
(2)	The right to continue a nonconforming sign is confined to the sign owner or his transferee; 
(3)	A nonconforming sign may be restored to its original condition, provided that not more than 50 percent of the sign is destroyed. The 50 percent is to be determined by 50 percent of the value of the materials of the sign, inclusive of poles and other structural members, immediately prior to damage; 
(4)	A nonconforming sign when relocated or moved shall no longer be considered a nonconforming sign and thereafter shall be subject to all the provisions of law and of these rules relating to outdoor advertising; 
(5)	The sign must remain substantially the same as it was on the effective date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived which rendered the sign nonconforming. Extension, enlargement, replacement, rebuilding, adding lights to a non-illuminated sign or re-erection of the sign will be considered a change in the existing use. The maintenance will be limited to: 
a.	Replacement of nuts and bolts; 
b.	Additional nailing, riveting or welding; 
c.	Cleaning and painting; 
d.	Manipulating to level or plumb the device, but not to the extent of adding guys or struts for stabilization of the sign structure; 
e.	A change of the message, including changing faces, as long as similar materials are used and the sign face is not enlarged; 
(6)	At no time may changes be made in a nonconforming sign which would increase the value of the sign; 
(7)	A nonconforming sign may continue as long as it is not abandoned, destroyed, discontinued, or purchased by any governmental agency. Any sign suffering damage in excess of normal wear cannot be repaired without: 
a.	Notifying the code enforcement officer in writing of the extent of the damage, the reason the damage is in excess of normal wear, and providing a description of the repair work to be undertaken, including the value of the sign materials and the cost of the repair; and 
b.	Receiving written notice from the code enforcement officer authorizing the repair work as described above. If said repair is authorized by the terms of this article, the code enforcement officer shall mail such notice to the applicant within 30 days of receipt of the information described in subsection (7)a. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-246—80-268. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE X. TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS
 
Sec. 80-269. Purposes.
The purpose of this article is to provide for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications towers and antennas; to encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas; to minimize the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the city; to encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers; to locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; to encourage the design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and to enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-270. Definitions.
The general definitions and interpretative rules of this chapter shall also be used. To the extent those general rules or definitions conflict with these specific definitions, these definitions shall control. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alternative tower structure means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission towers, on premises signs, outdoor advertising signs, water storage tanks, and similar natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
Co-location means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
Department means the city planning, zoning and development department. 
FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
Geographic antenna placement area means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower structure or appurtenance. 
Preexisting towers and antennas means structures as set forth in section 80-271(d). 
Scenic views means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the city comprehensive plan. 
Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures. 
Visual quality means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-271. Applicability.
(a)	General application. Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions, requirements and limitations of this article shall govern the location of all wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave or radio transmission tower or antenna installed within the city. In the event of any conflict between any other provision of this chapter and this article, this article shall control. 
(b)	Governmental exemption. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this article, the provisions of this article shall not apply to the city's properties, facilities or structures. Private facilities and structures placed upon city property shall be governed by a lease agreement between the city and the provider. 
(c)	Amateur radio; receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is 75 feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna; provided, however, only one such tower or antenna per residence shall be excluded from this article. 
(d)	Preexisting towers and antennas. Towers and antennas permitted and erected prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived or amendment thereto shall be deemed preexisting, and shall not be subject to the requirements of this article. The placement of additional antennas on any nonconforming structure shall not create a vested right for the continued use of the structures should the nonconforming use cease. If an additional antenna is co-located on a legally preexisting tower, the requirements of this article shall be met. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-272. General provisions.
(a)	Special use required. A special use permit shall be required for the placement of any tower or alternative tower structure, except as otherwise permitted herein. Procedures for special use permits sought under this article are contained in section 80-273. 
(b)	Principal or accessory use. A tower and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structures. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including, but not limited to, setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or tower may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use of structure. 
(c)	Co-location of antennas required. Applicants for the erection of a tower or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing tower structure, if reasonably possible. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant submits a report from an engineer demonstrating that an existing tower suitable for co- location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative tower structure is available, or if the applicant submits an affidavit showing that while a suitable tower may exist, no space is available thereon. Co-location is permissible provided the new antenna will add no more than ten feet to the height of the tower and related equipment or appurtenances. Increasing the antenna height more than ten feet requires a special use permit. Co-location requires only a building permit, and the information described in subsection 80-275(b). 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-273. Special use permit required.
(a)	General.
(1)	A special use permit shall be required for the construction of a new tower in any zoning district. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this article and all other applicable codes and ordinances, unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity. 
(2)	In granting a special use permit, the city may impose conditions to the extent that it concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize adverse effects from the proposed tower on adjoining or nearby properties as set out in subsection (f) of this section. 
(b)	Application; contents; fee. All applications for special use permits shall be submitted to the city code enforcement officer. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in section 80-275. An application for a special use permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in section 80-275. An application fee shall be charged by the department in the amount stated in section 80-276. 
(c)	Independent expert review. The city may engage a licensed professional engineer as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant for a special use permit and render an opinion regarding any concerns about the proposal, including, but not limited to, structural integrity and the feasibility of alternative sites or co-location. Following the review of an independent expert, the city shall convey its concerns to the applicant in writing and shall allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. If the applicant is unable to satisfactorily address those concerns, the applicant shall be allowed a reasonable amount of time, not to exceed 30 days, following the receipt of the letter in which to modify the application to alleviate the city's concerns or withdraw the application altogether. The expert's opinion shall be considered determinative, unless the applicant agrees to pay the expenses of submitting both opinions for a peer review, which review shall then be considered final. If the independent third-party expert supports the applicant's expert, then the department shall pay the expenses of said third-party expert. If the independent third-party expert supports the position of the department, then the applicant shall pay the expenses of said third-party expert. 
(d)	Public hearing. Before taking action upon the proposed special use permit, the city shall hold a public hearing on the matter consistent with the procedures of article XIV of this chapter. 
(e)	Considerations in approval or denial of special use permits. Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The following factors may be taken into consideration in acting upon a special use permit application under the provisions of this article: 
(1)	The height and setbacks of the proposed tower or antenna; 
(2)	The proximity of the tower or antenna to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)	The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)	The surrounding topography; 
(5)	The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)	The design of the tower or antenna, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)	The proposed ingress and egress; 
(8)	The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures for antenna co-location; 
(9)	The impact of the proposed tower or antenna upon scenic views and visual quality of the surrounding area; 
(10)	The needs of the applicant as balanced against the detrimental effects on surrounding properties; and 
(11)	The impact of the proposed tower or antenna on adjacent and nearby properties. 
(f)	Requirements for issuance of special use permit. The special use permit may be issued by the city only upon satisfaction of the following requirements: 
(1)	A proper application filed in accordance with the requirements of section 80-275; 
(2)	The application is otherwise in compliance with or otherwise is satisfactory in considering the standards contained in subsection (e) of this section; 
(3)	The applicant complies with the conditions proposed by the city for the purpose of reducing the harmful effects of the use on surrounding uses and ensuring compatibility with surrounding uses; 
(4)	The city determines that the benefits and need for the proposed special use are greater than any possible depreciating effects or damages to neighboring or nearby properties; and 
(5)	All fees, including expert fees, have been paid in full. 
(g)	Resubmittal of special use application. An application for a special use permit which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of 12 months, and then only if the applicant can document a substantial change in need for a tower or antenna at the same location. 
(h)	Time. All co-location applications shall be ruled upon within 90 days of the filing of a completed application; all other applications shall be ruled upon within 150 days of a completed application. Applications which are not completed at the time of filing shall not be accepted, and city staff shall review the application to verify completeness within 30 days from the filing of the application. In the event that an application is determined to not be complete within the initial 30-day period after filing, city staff shall promptly notify the applicant, and the time for issuance of the decision shall be tolled for the time period between such notification to the applicant and the date the applicant files materials which complete the application. The time periods within this subparagraph may be extended by the mutual consent of the city and the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-274. General requirements for towers.
(a)	Setbacks and separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all towers. 
(1)	Towers shall be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from its base to any public right-of-way or occupied structure, or property line of the lot or parcel containing the tower, except when a property owner or adjoining property owner consents in writing to waive the setback and the applicant clearly demonstrates that the tower will collapse within the parent parcel. 
(2)	Guy wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements. 
(3)	In zoning districts other than I-2, towers shall not be located closer than 500 feet from any existing tower. This requirement shall not apply to amateur radio towers. 
(4)	Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tower or antenna shall be permitted in a residential neighborhood or within 1,000 feet of any residential dwelling unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity. 
(5)	The requirement of subsection (a)(4) of this section may be waived by the adjacent property owner. In such cases, the applicant shall submit a notarized affidavit from the adjacent owner, identifying the property owned, and affirming that he agrees that the tower can be erected at the proposed location, which shall be specifically described, including its distance from that owner's residential dwelling. The affidavit shall further specifically state that the affiant understands that he or she is waiving his rights under this subsection. Waivers shall be required of all property owners whose dwellings are located within 1,000 feet of the proposed tower. 
(b)	Aesthetics. The guidelines set forth in this subsection shall govern the design and construction of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this article and shall be approved by the director. 
(1)	Towers and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)	At all tower sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and building environment. Any equipment or cabinet that supports telecommunication facilities must be concealed from public view and made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
(3)	For antennas installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. 
(4)	Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the city may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. The lighting shall be dimmed or changed to red lights from the sunset to sunrise. 
(5)	No signage or other identifying markings of a commercial nature shall be permitted upon any tower or alternative tower structure within the city. 
(6)	To the extent practical, telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
(7)	Access to the tower site shall be restricted so as to minimize visibility of the access. Where possible, existing roads shall be used. Where no roads exist, access shall follow the existing contours of the land. 
(8)	Such other additional requirements as the director shall reasonably require to minimize the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. 
(c)	Security fencing/anti-climbing devices. All towers and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood or other approved alternative. 
(d)	Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all towers: 
(1)	Where adequate vegetation is not present, tower facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the tower compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. 
(2)	Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
(3)	Landscaping shall be maintained by the provider and shall be subject to periodic review by the director to ensure proper maintenance. Failure to maintain landscaping shall be deemed a violation of this article. 
(4)	Amateur radio towers and antennas, or receive-only antennas, shall not be subject to the provision of this subsection unless required by the city through the special use permit process. 
(e)	Maintenance impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street, utilizing existing access to the property on which such facility is to be located, where possible. 
(f)	Federal requirements; removal of towers. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the permittee or the lessee of the tower and antenna governed by this article shall bring such tower and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring such tower and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall be deemed to be a declaration of abandonment of the tower and constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's, permittee's, or lessee's expense. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in the city unfit property ordinance then in effect. 
(g)	Building codes; safety standards; removal of towers. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a tower or alternative tower structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable standard building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the department concludes that a tower fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the tower, said party shall have 15 days to bring the tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into compliance within 15 days shall be deemed a declaration of abandonment of the tower and constitute grounds for removal of the tower as provided in the city unfit property ordinance. Prior to the removal of any tower, the department may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard towers, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above-referenced compliance period. Abandoned towers or towers deemed unsafe may also be removed under the city unfit property ordinance procedures. 
(h)	Change of ownership notification. Upon the transfer of ownership of an interest in any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the department of the transaction in writing within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-275. Application procedures.
(a)	General application requirement. Application for a permit for any telecommunication facility shall be made to the department by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. An application will not be considered until it is complete. The director is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. Except for a co- location information submittal under subsection (b) of this section, the following information shall be submitted when applying for any permit required by this article and must be submitted for an application to be considered complete: 
(1)	Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city information services department. 
(2)	Landscaped plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in section 80-274(d). 
(3)	A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
(4)	A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
(5)	Report from a professional qualified engineer licensed in the state, or other appropriate qualified industry expert, documenting the following: 
a.	Tower or antenna type, height, and design; 
b.	Engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
c.	Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including numbers and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
d.	Evidence of structural integrity of the tower or alternative tower structure; 
e.	Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; 
f.	Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety; 
g.	Certification that the proposed height of the tower is the minimum height necessary for coverage; and 
h.	A propagation study which documents the proposed location is the only location for the tower that reduces alleged gaps in coverage. 
(6)	Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the proposed site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network (i.e., whether such antenna or tower is needed for coverage or capacity). 
(7)	The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power line easements impacting the proposed tower site. 
(8)	The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the department to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
(b)	Tower co-location information submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas on a tower for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following information only: 
(1)	The name of the person or entity co-locating the antenna. 
(2)	The name of the owner of the tower. 
(3)	The tower's permit number. 
(4)	The location of the tower. 
(5)	The remaining structural capacity of the tower. 
(6)	Certification that the antenna and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-276. Application and permit fees.
(a)	Special use permit. The fee for an application seeking a special use permit to erect a new tower on an alternative tower structure shall be $3,000.00. 
(b)	Co-location. There shall be no fee for an application seeking a special use permit for co- location on an existing tower or alternative tower structure other than the building permit fee. 
(c)	Building permit fees. In addition to the application fees set forth herein, the applicable construction and utility inspection permit fees in effect at the time of the application for the permit shall apply. 
 
Secs. 80-277—80-300. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XI. ENFORCEMENT
 
Sec. 80-301. Zoning enforcement officer; appeals.
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the code enforcement officer. Requests for an administrative variance from the requirements of this chapter shall be heard and decided by the code enforcement officer in accordance with the guidelines set forth in section 80-327. Decisions of the code enforcement officer may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of article XIV of this chapter. Requests for a variance other than an administrative variance shall be heard and decided by the planning commission in accordance with the guidelines set forth in section 80-330. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-302. Enforcement actions.
(a)	Enforcement options. Enforcement of this chapter may be through citation, civil fines, or other civil proceedings. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other legal entity who shall do anything prohibited by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended or which shall fail to do anything required by this chapter as the same exists or as it may hereafter be amended shall be subject to an enforcement action. The city shall also be authorized to bring actions in rem against the property itself. 
(1)	Representatives of the city shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may reasonably be deemed necessary to ensure or compel compliance with the requirements and provisions of this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property for the purpose of investigation and inspection, as permitted by law. Officers and officials may seek inspection warrants or search warrants on probable cause of a violation occurring inside a structure. No warrant shall be required to investigate visible and open violations or uses. 
(2)	No person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with any city representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)	Persons who may be cited. Owners are ultimately responsible for the condition of their property and ensuring that their property and all activity occurring on such property are in compliance with this chapter. For any violation, both the owner of the property and/or the individual agent, tenant or invitee of the owner responsible for the violation may be cited, where appropriate. Agents of the owner would include, but not be limited to, developers, builders, contractors, and sub-contractors. Tenants and invitees would include, but not be limited to, any renter, leaseholder, owner of any vehicle or structure on the property, or other person conducting an activity on the property who is not a trespasser. Corporations and companies responsible for the work may be cited in lieu of or in addition to citations issued to the actual individuals on site committing violations. In addition, the city shall also be authorized to bring actions in rem against the property itself. 
(c)	Daily violations. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a new citation, or other civil or court proceeding. 
(d)	Multiple violations. Each separate action, omission, or occurrence relating to any specific provision of this chapter shall be a separate violation, subjecting the offender to a separate citation. Multiple junk cars count as one violation, but the fine increases as shown in section 80-303. 
(e)	Citation. The code enforcement officer, or designated code enforcement personnel, or other authorized personnel, may issue citations for violations of this chapter, or violation of any stop-work order. 
(1)	Prosecutions for violation of this chapter shall be commenced by the completion, signing, and service of a citation by an authorized city official or zoning enforcement officer. No warning need be issued prior to a citation being issued. The original of the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, his authorized representative or, if a corporation, an officer of the corporation or its on-site representative or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property; a copy shall be promptly filed with the municipal court. A stop-work order may be issued in conjunction with a citation. 
(2)	Each citation shall state the time and place at which the accused is to appear for trial in municipal court, shall identify the offense with which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the deputy sheriff or other authorized officer who completes and serves it. 
(3)	Any defendant who fails to appear for trial may be arrested on the warrant of the municipal court and required to post a bond for his future appearance. 
(4)	The city attorney, city solicitor or another attorney designated by the city council may act as prosecuting attorney for violations of this chapter. 
(5)	Fines shall be assessed in accordance with section 80-303. 
(f)	Civil fines and proceedings. In addition to or in lieu of any other remedy, the city may seek injunctive or other appropriate relief in superior court to enjoin or prevent a violation of any provision of this chapter. Such action may also seek civil fines at the mandatory rates specified in section 80-303 for violation of this chapter, and may additionally seek the costs of restitution, and any other costs associated with the action to enjoin or prevent any violation of any provision of this chapter. The city shall be entitled to its reasonable attorney's fees and costs for bringing an action in superior court wherein any relief is granted or fine assessed. 
(g)	Stop-work orders. Upon notice from the code enforcement officer, designated code enforcement officers, or other authorized personnel, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be immediately stopped. 
(1)	Stop-work orders shall affect all work being done on a project or development (including work done on other lots in the subdivision owned by the same violator). Stop-work orders stop not only the work in violation, but all other work by contractors or sub-contractors on the same property. Only work to remedy the deficiency shall be allowed until the stop-work order is lifted. 
(2)	A stop-work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent, or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency or other exigent circumstances exist, no written notice shall be required, and a verbal stop-work order may be issued, with a written order to be provided within three working days. 
a.	Stop-work orders may be issued on their own, or in conjunction with criminal citations, or civil proceedings in superior court. 
b.	Issuance of a stop-work order may be appealed to the planning commission. 
(h)	Additional penalties. Persons cited are also subject to other penalties within the jurisdiction of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-303. Fine schedule.
Fines assessed under this chapter shall be assessed according to the following mandatory schedule, whether assessed as a civil fine in superior court, or assessed as a penalty upon conviction in magistrate court. The maximum permissible fine shall be $1,000.00 per offense. In no event shall a fine be reduced below the mandatory minimum, as set forth below. Fines may be increased by mandatory add-ons under state law. As a deterrent to violation, second and subsequent violations by the same offender of any provision of this chapter, whether violations of the same or different provisions of this chapter as the initial violation, and whether involving the same or different property, shall increase the fine owing. However, repeated citations for the same violation on a second and subsequent days shall not count as a subsequent violation, but shall rather be assessed at the same rate as the initial violation. Note: "Per vehicle" additions relate to violations such as junk vehicles, parking violations, and similar violations, where each vehicle is in violation of the chapter. 
(1)	First violation. For the first violation of any provision of this chapter by any violator (whether an individual or corporation), the fine shall be as follows, unless otherwise noted: 
Violation of article IV of this chapter: 	$250.00 
(plus $50.00 per vehicle, if applicable) 
Violation of any other article: 	$200.00 

(2)	Second violation. For the second violation of any provision of this chapter (whether the same or different as the first violation) by the same violator (whether an individual or corporation), the fine shall be as follows, unless otherwise noted: 
Violation of article IV of this chapter: 	$500.00 
(plus $75.00 per vehicle, if applicable) 
Violation of any other article: 	$400.00 

(3)	Third and subsequent violations. For the third and subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter (whether the same or different as the prior two violations) by the same violator (whether an individual or corporation), the fine shall be as follows, unless otherwise noted: 
Violation of article IV of this chapter: 	$750.00 
(plus $100.00 per vehicle, if applicable) 
Violation of any other article: 	$600.00 

(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-304. Records.
The zoning department shall keep records of violators, whether corporate or individual, in order to determine when second or subsequent violations occur. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-305—80-326. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XII. VARIANCES
 
Sec. 80-327. Administrative variances.
If, in the judgment of the code enforcement officer, the application of any particular numeric criteria, standard or requirement of this chapter causes undue hardship on the applicant, the code enforcement officer shall be empowered to grant an administrative variance to alter said requirement by up to 20 percent if, in doing so, the purposes of this chapter are not impaired and there is not a negative impact on the surrounding uses, properties, or neighbors. In granting an administrative variance, the code enforcement officer may attach such conditions as the code enforcement officer may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. The code enforcement officer shall not be authorized to grant a use variance to permit a use in a district in which the use is prohibited. An administrative variance shall be granted or denied in writing. Notice of the grant of an administrative variance shall be sent to all adjoining property owners via first class mail by the applicant. The notice shall describe the variance granted and state that interested parties have 30 days in which to file an appeal of the variance. Only owners reflected on the records of the tax assessors as of the date of the application shall be entitled to notice. Proof of mailing, as described in subsection 80-331(c), shall be submitted to the zoning department within ten days of grant of the variance. The 30 days shall be counted from the date of mailing of the notice. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-328, 80-329. Reserved.
 
Sec. 80-330. Powers and duties of the planning commission.
The planning commission shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)	Appeals. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the code enforcement officer in the enforcement of this chapter. Appeals to the planning commission may be taken by any person aggrieved or by any officer, department, board, or bureau of the city affected by any decision of the code enforcement officer. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of said decision by filing with the code enforcement officer a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Decisions on appeals shall be issued in writing within ten days of the appeal. 
(2)	Variances. The planning commission has the power to hear requests for variances from the provisions of this chapter. Variances may be granted only if the board finds all of the following to exist: 
a.	That one of the following is true, through no action or fault of the property owner or predecessor: 
1.	The property is exceptionally narrow, shallow or unusually shaped; 
2.	The property contains exceptional topographic conditions; 
3.	The property contains other extraordinary or exceptional conditions; 
4.	There are existing other extraordinary or exceptional circumstances; and 
b.	That the strict application of the requirements of this chapter would result in practical difficulties to, or undue hardship upon, the owner of this property; and 
c.	That the requested variance relief may be granted without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
Variance decisions shall be issued in writing within ten days of the hearing. 
(3)	Conditions. In granting a variance, the planning commission may attach such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed building, structure or use as it may deem advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will be served, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. 
(4)	Limitations on variances; improper variance requests. Variances cannot be given to totally remove a requirement or to exempt a property or applicant entirely from a requirement. If a variance is being sought that is, in the judgment of the code enforcement officer, a request that would constitute a text amendment, then the application shall not be accepted. For example, a request to be exempted from the Etowah Valley Historic District requirements would not be the subject of a variance. The applicant shall instead be directed to file for a text amendment. Variances can only be given to alter a numeric value, such as a setback, height limit, area limit, and so forth. Furthermore, the planning commission shall not be authorized to grant a density variance or a use variance to permit a use in a district in which the use is prohibited. A variance application shall not be accepted if the variance seeks something that cannot be varied. A variance application shall not be accepted if the variance is contradictory to this chapter (such as reducing a requirement to zero or totally eliminating a requirement). 
(5)	Self-inflicted hardship. The planning commission shall not grant variances when the hardship was created by the property owner or his predecessor, and shall not grant hardship variances based on shape or topography for lots of record not existing prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived or amendment thereto. 
(6)	Place of worship. In compliance with federal law, if the variance is requested by a place of worship or church, in connection with the exercise of religion, the board shall additionally consider whether the regulation imposes a substantial burden on the exercise of religion, whether the regulation serves a compelling governmental interest, whether the denial is the least restrictive means to serve that interest, or whether the variance can be granted without harming that interest. 
(7)	Reasonable accommodation variance. Notwithstanding any other ordinance provisions to the contrary, the planning commission shall consider and grant reasonable accommodations necessary to afford persons with disabilities equal housing opportunities. In determining whether a particular accommodation is reasonable and necessary, the planning commission shall consider whether: 
a.	The accommodation is necessary, because of a disability, to allow the applicant an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling of his choice; 
b.	The request imposes an undue burden or expense on the city; and 
c.	The proposed accommodation would create a fundamental alteration in the zoning scheme. 
An application for a reasonable accommodation variance shall comply with all other procedural requirements for consideration and approval of variances under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-331. Applications, hearings and notice.
(a)	Applications. Applications for appeals or variances must be filed in accordance with the schedule set out by the code enforcement officer. The contents of the application shall be determined by the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer shall forthwith transmit to the board all documents constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Variances may be sought by filing an application on forms provided by the code enforcement officer. Applicants shall pay the fee established by the city council. 
(b)	Published notice. Due notice of the public hearings pursuant to this article shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the city. Notice advertising the hearing on the appeal or variance and indicating date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing shall be published at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. The cost of the advertisement shall be borne by the applicant. For variances, the code enforcement officer shall post, at least 15 days prior to the planning commission's public hearing, in a conspicuous place in the public right-of-way fronting the property or on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign or signs containing information as to the application number, date, time and place of the public hearing. 
(c)	Letters to adjacent property owners. The applicant for said appeal or variance shall also give notice of the appeal or variance and the public hearing thereon to all property owners adjoining the property for which said appeal or variance is made or sought. Said notice shall be given to each adjoining property owner by first class mail, with proof of mailing obtained from the post office. Proof of mailing means either a first class certificate of mailing or a first class certified mail receipt; a proof of delivery is not required. Only owners reflected on the records of the tax assessors as of the date of the application shall be entitled to notice. In determining the adjoining property owners, road, street or railroad rights-of-way shall be disregarded. Proof of mailing for each recipient shall be provided to the code enforcement officer before the public hearing. Said notice must be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of said scheduled public hearing. 
(d)	Information in notice. The notice required herein to be published and to be served upon adjacent property owners shall contain the following information: 
(1)	Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)	Address and location of the property for which the appeal or variance is sought; 
(3)	Current zoning of the property for which the appeal or variance is sought; 
(4)	The variance requested or the subject matter of the appeal and the reason for the requested variance or the appeal; and 
(5)	The date, time and place of the public hearing on said requested appeal or variance. 
(e)	Recording hearing. The applicant may arrange for and provide a certified court reporter to transcribe the hearing before the planning commission, at the expense of the applicant. Upon appeal of the decision of the planning commission, said transcript shall be made part of the record for review. Board hearings shall also be recorded by video or audio tape. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-332. Stay of proceedings.
An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the code enforcement officer certifies to the planning commission after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a stay granted by the planning commission or by a restraining order issued by a court of record on application, on notice to the code enforcement officer, and for due cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-333. Action by the planning commission.
(a)	In exercising its powers, the planning commission may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or determination, and to that end shall have all the powers of the code enforcement officer. 
(b)	The concurring vote of a majority of the members present of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the code enforcement officer, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance or to affect any variation of this ordinance. 
(c)	On all appeals, applications and other matters brought before the planning commission, said board shall inform, in writing, all the parties involved of its decisions and the reasons therefore. Such written decision shall be prepared by the zoning staff or city attorney and be signed by the secretary. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-334. Conduct of the planning commission's hearing.
(a)	Sign up. All persons who wish to address the planning commission at a hearing concerning an appeal or variance under consideration by the planning commission shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the city prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
(b)	Matter presented; out of order applications. The secretary of the planning commission will read the proposed appeal or variance under consideration in the order determined by the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer, or his designee, shall then present the basis of the appeal or variance, along with the pertinent departmental reviews, if any, prior to receiving public input on the proposed appeal or variance. Any appeal or variance that has not complied with all notice and other requirements of this article shall be deemed out of order and shall not be considered at that hearing. It shall be postponed until the next meeting, and if it is still out of order at the next meeting, the application shall be deemed denied. 
(c)	Speakers. The secretary of the planning commission shall call each person who has signed up to speak on the appeal or variance then before the planning commission in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except the applicant who will always speak first. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself and state his current address. Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless a majority of the members of the planning commission present at the hearing allow the person to speak to the appeal or variance, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
(d)	Time limits. The applicant or appellant and those in favor of the variance or appeal shall have ten minutes to speak, total. Those opposed to the application or appeal shall have ten minutes to speak, total. The board may extend these times upon majority vote. Each individual speaker shall have no more than three minutes to speak, except the applicant, who can take as much of the ten minutes as is desired. The applicant may reserve time for rebuttal. Upon vote of a majority of the board, either side may be granted additional time in any amount the board desires, but in such event, the other side shall be granted the same additional time. 
(e)	Evidence, cross examination. Each side shall have the opportunity to present evidence and witnesses which shall be entered into the record. Cross examination of opposing witnesses shall be allowed by the chair, but decorum shall be maintained. The board may require the applicant and opponents to designate one person to conduct any desired cross examination. 
(f)	Decorum and order. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed appeal or variance under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the members of the planning commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed appeal under consideration. The chair may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the chair from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to ensure that the public hearing on the appeal or variance is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-335. Appeals to the mayor and city council and to superior court.
(a)	Appeal to city council. Recourse from a decision by the planning commission shall be to the city council, by filing a written notice of appeal within 30 days of the board's decision. The city council shall have a hearing on said appeal within 60 days of completion of preparation of the record and transcript. The city council's hearing shall be noticed according to the requirements of subsections 80-331(b)—(d), including published notice, sign, and letters to adjacent property owners. The hearing shall be open to the public, but public comment shall not be taken. At the hearing, the city council shall review the evidence presented below, which shall automatically include this chapter, the official zoning map, the city's file on the application, and any other city ordinance relevant to the dispute. 
(b)	Appeal to court. Recourse from a decision of the city council shall be to a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to law. Appeals shall be on the record. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-336—80-358. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIII. AMENDMENTS
 
Sec. 80-359. Initiation of amendments.
(a)	Text amendment. An application to amend the text of this chapter may be initiated by the planning commission or be submitted to the planning commission by the mayor and city council, zoning staff, or by any person having an interest in the city. 
(b)	Map amendment. An application to amend the official zoning map may be initiated by the planning commission or be submitted to the planning commission by the mayor and city council or zoning staff, property owner or agent of the owner. Unless initiated by the mayor and city council, the planning commission or zoning staff, all applications to amend the official zoning map must be submitted by an owner of the affected property or an authorized agent of an owner, following procedures set forth in sections 80-360 and 80-361. If submitted by an agent of the owner, such authorization shall be notarized and attached to the application. If a property has multiple owners, only one owner need file the application, and it will be assumed that the other owners consent; however, if any owner does not consent to the application (or otherwise objects), the rezoning application will not go forward. If owned by a corporation or other entity, the application must be filed by a person with proper corporate or entity authority, and the code enforcement officer may require documentation to support a claim of authority. 
(c)	Resubmission after denial. In the event an application for an amendment to the zoning map has been denied, another rezoning application affecting the same property shall not be submitted nor accepted until 12 months have passed from the date of the final decision by the mayor and city council. 
(d)	Alter conditions. An application to alter conditions of rezoning may be submitted at any time after the final decision of the mayor and city council. The applicant must show a change in circumstances or additional information not available to the applicant at the time of the original decision by the mayor and city council to impose the condition. Another application to alter the same condition shall not be submitted more than once every 12 months, such interval to begin on the date of the final decision by the mayor and city council on said application to amend the condition. 
(e)	Withdrawal. An application may be withdrawn without prejudice at any time prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day of the planning commission's hearing. The planning commission may give permission for a withdrawal without prejudice at its hearing. Withdrawal after the planning commission's hearing shall mean such application may not be resubmitted for consideration for a period of six months, counting from the date of withdrawal to the date of renewed application. Unless withdrawn at the hearing, the withdrawal must be in writing, signed and dated by the applicant. 
(f)	Campaign contribution disclosures. Applicants and opponents to rezoning actions that change the zoning district on a parcel are requested to consult the Conflict of Interest in Zoning Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1, which requires disclosure of campaign contributions, made within two years of the rezoning application, and aggregating $250.00 or more, to any planning commission member or city elected official. Such disclosures should be filed at least five calendar days prior to the planning commission's hearing on forms available at the zoning office. Violation of this Act shall not affect the validity of the rezoning, but such action may be a misdemeanor under O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-4. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-360. Applications for amendments.
(a)	Applications. Each application required by this article, including, without limitation, to amend this chapter or the official zoning map, shall be filed with the code enforcement officer. The following requirements for information are mandatory, unless the requirement is deleted by the code enforcement officer: the code enforcement officer may require additional information to evaluate the application, the suitability of the proposed use, and other aspects of any proposed development, and any such information shall be provided. Such information is not required for city-initiated applications. 
(b)	Procedure. Zoning numbers will be issued to applicants, in order of request, starting on the first day applications are accepted. A schedule may be obtained from the zoning office. All applications must be complete and submitted by the end of the business day on the date the zoning number is issued. Incomplete applications will not be accepted, except with permission of the code enforcement officer. Furthermore, applicants not filing a complete application on the date the zoning number is issued will forfeit their assigned number and will have to request a new number no sooner than the next available date to accept applications, once their application is complete and ready for submission. 
(c)	Text amendment applications. Text amendment applications shall include the following minimum information, unless the requirements listed below are waived by the code enforcement officer. Additional information may also be requested by the code enforcement officer: 
(1)	Name and current address of the applicant; 
(2)	Current provisions of the text to be affected by the amendment; 
(3)	Proposed wording of text change; and 
(4)	Reason for the amendment request. 
(d)	Zoning map amendment. Official zoning map amendment applications shall include the following minimum information, unless the requirements listed below are waived by the code enforcement officer. Additional information may also be requested by the code enforcement officer: 
(1)	A tax parcel card from the county tax assessor identifying the parcel to be rezoned, or the parent parcel of the parcel to be rezoned, if a split or subdivision is occurring; 
(2)	One copy of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. The preparer's seal shall be affixed to the plat. For subdivision or nonresidential developments, an additional electronic copy of the plat shall be submitted by the applicant, owner or developer to the engineering department; 
(3)	The present and proposed zoning district for the tract; 
(4)	Existing and intermediate regional floodplain and structures, as shown on the applicable Federal Emergency Management Agency FIRM rate maps; 
(5)	The names and addresses of the owners of the land and their agents, if any; 
(6)	The names and addresses of all adjoining property owners. In determining the adjoining property owners, streams and road, street or railroad rights-of-way shall be disregarded; 
(7)	No application for the rezoning of any property for a residential subdivision shall be accepted for filing unless the application is accompanied by a letter from the local government that will supply water to the property stating that public water is available to the property; 
(8)	On any rezoning of three or more acres to be subdivided into a residential subdivision, a soil survey prepared by a soil scientist, registered in the state, shall be submitted to the health department prior to application submittal to the zoning department, unless the property is served by sewer, unless all lots in the subdivision are three acres or larger in size, or unless the requirement is administratively varied by the code enforcement officer; and 
(9)	Such other and additional information as may be requested by the code enforcement officer. 
(e)	Application schedule. Applications shall be submitted according to the schedule set by the code enforcement officer and adopted by the planning commission. Application fees for an application to amend this chapter or the official zoning map shall be established by the mayor and city council and made available by the code enforcement officer. A fee shall not be charged for applications initiated by the zoning staff, mayor and city council, or the planning commission. 
(f)	Proposed conditions. With respect to amendments to the official zoning map, an applicant may file site plans, renderings, construction specifications, written development restrictions and other conditions which the applicant proposes as binding conditions upon the development and use of the property involved in the application. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-361. Public notification.
(a)	Legal notice. Due notice of the public hearings pursuant to this article shall be published in the newspaper of general circulation within the city. Notice advertising the application and indicating date, time, place and purpose of the public hearings shall be published at least 15 days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing of the mayor and city council but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the first scheduled hearing conducted by the mayor and city council. If the application is for amendment to the official zoning map, then the notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning district of the property, and the proposed zoning district of the property. The cost of the advertisement shall be borne by the applicant. The notice shall also state: 
"Notice is hereby given that the mayor and city council have the power to impose a different zoning classification from the classification requested, and impose or delete zoning conditions that may change the application considerably." 
If the notice does not run in the newspaper in conformance with these requirements, the application is void and cannot be considered as scheduled. The applicant shall coordinate with the zoning office and re-advertise for a future hearing, as assigned by the staff. 
(b)	Signs posted. The code enforcement officer shall post, at least 15 days prior to the planning commission's public hearing, in a conspicuous place in the public right-of-way fronting the property or on the property for which an application has been submitted, a sign or signs containing information as to the application and date, time and place of the public hearing. 
(c)	Letters to property owners. The applicant shall notify each owner of property adjoining the property for which the amendment (other than a text amendment) is sought by mailing to each property owner a letter by first class mail, with proof of mailing obtained from the post office. Proof of mailing means either a first class certificate of mailing or a first class certified mail receipt; a proof of delivery is not required. Only owners reflected on the records of the tax assessors as of the date of the application shall be entitled to notice. In determining the adjoining property owners, road, street or railroad rights-of-way shall be disregarded. Notice shall also be provided by letter to such other impacted property owners or interest holders as the code enforcement officer directs. The form letter provided by the city shall be used, or a letter conveying substantially the same information. Proof of mailing for each recipient shall be provided to the code enforcement officer before the public hearing. Said notice must be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of said scheduled public hearing. 
(d)	Exemptions. The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall not apply if the application is initiated by the zoning department staff, the planning commission or the city council. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-362. Action by the planning commission.
(a)	Public hearing. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for an amendment pursuant to this article in accordance with a schedule adopted by the board. As to each application, the planning commission shall make a recommendation for approval, approval with conditions, or denial. A tie vote on any motion shall equate to denial. The planning commission may grant the applicant's request to withdraw without prejudice at its hearing. 
(b)	Tabling or remand. The planning commission may table an application if new information has been submitted, or to provide the applicant time to revise an application. At the hearing in which the tabling is granted, the planning commission shall specify the date of the next hearing, and this action shall constitute public notice of such hearing, and no additional notices shall be required prior to the hearings. 
(c)	Report. A written report or summary of the planning commission's recommendation shall be prepared by the zoning staff and shall be a public record. The planning commission's action may recommend amendments or conditions to the applicant's request which would reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district requested, and recommend conditions of rezoning which may be deemed advisable so that the purpose of this chapter will, if applicable, be served, and health, public safety and general welfare secured. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-363. Conduct of the planning commission's hearing.
(a)	Sign up. All persons who wish to address the planning commission at a hearing on the proposed amendment under consideration by the planning commission shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the city prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
(b)	Matter presented; out of order applications. The secretary of the planning commission will read the proposed amendments under consideration in the order determined by the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer, or his designee, shall then present the amendment, along with the pertinent departmental reviews, if any, prior to receiving public input on the proposed amendment. If an application is not complete, or all requirements of this article have not been complied with, the application is out of order and may be taken off the agenda. It shall be postponed until the next meeting of the planning commission. If the application has already been advertised and persons wishing to speak have appeared for the hearing, the board may choose to hear from them, but an additional hearing shall be required. If the application is still incomplete or out of order at the next meeting, it shall be deemed withdrawn. The applicant shall have to wait six months to reapply. 
(c)	Speakers. The secretary of the planning commission will then call each person who has signed up to speak on the amendment in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except the applicant who will always speak first. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself and state his current address. Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless a majority of the board, in its discretion, allows the person to speak to the amendment, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
(d)	Time limits. In all circumstances, the proponent(s) and opponent(s) of each amendment shall have equal time and no less than ten minutes per side for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion thereon. 
(e)	Decorum and order. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed amendment under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the members of the planning commission. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed amendment under consideration. The chairperson may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the chair from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to ensure that the public hearing on a proposed amendment is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(f)	[Availability of procedures.] These procedures shall be available in writing at each hearing. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-364. Action by the mayor and city council.
(a)	Public hearing. Before taking action on a proposed amendment and after receipt of the planning commission's recommendations, the mayor and city council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment, which shall be advertised as stated in section 80-361 and conducted pursuant to section 80-365. 
(b)	Powers of the mayor and city council. At the public hearing, the mayor and city council shall review the analysis submitted by the initiating party and the recommendation prepared by the planning commission. So that the purpose of this chapter will be served, health, public safety and general welfare secured, the mayor and city council may approve or deny the application, reduce the land area for which the application is made, change the district or land use category requested, or add or delete conditions of the application. The mayor and city council shall have the power to impose a different zoning classification from the classification requested, and impose any zoning conditions which ameliorate the impact of the zoning, or serve other lawful purposes of this chapter. The submission of an application for a rezoning shall be deemed notice of this power and consent to any such action. The mayor and city council may also remand the application, if it has been changed or for any reason, to the planning commission for further review and recommendation. 
(c)	Tabling application. The mayor and city council shall have the power to table incomplete applications or to seek more time for further information to be submitted. The action by the mayor and city council to table the application shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the application will be considered, which statement shall constitute public notice of the hearing on the application, and no further notice, such as that required by section 80-361, is required. The application can be tabled for up to three months at a time to obtain necessary information or for other reasons of the mayor and city council. The application can be tabled more than once if necessary, extending the duration the application remains on the table. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-365. Conduct of the mayor and city council's hearing.
(a)	Sign up. All persons who wish to address the mayor and city council at a hearing concerning a proposed zoning decision under consideration by the mayor and city council shall first sign up on a form to be provided by the city prior to the commencement of the hearing. 
(b)	Matter presented. Proposed zoning decisions shall be called in the order determined by the code enforcement officer. The code enforcement officer or his designee will read the proposed zoning decision under consideration and summarize the departmental reviews pertaining thereto prior to receiving public input on said proposed zoning decision. If an application is not complete, or all requirements of this article have not been complied with, the application is out of order and will not be called at that meeting. It shall be tabled for one month. If the application is still incomplete or out of order at the next meeting, it shall be deemed withdrawn. The applicant shall have to wait six months to reapply. 
(c)	Speakers. The code enforcement officer or his designee shall call each person who has signed up to speak on the zoning decision in the order in which the persons have signed up to speak, except the applicant who will always speak first. Prior to speaking, the speaker will identify himself and state his current address. Only those persons who signed up to speak prior to the commencement of the hearing shall be entitled to speak, unless the mayor and city council, in their discretion, allow the person to speak to the zoning decision, notwithstanding the failure of the person to sign up prior to the hearing. 
(d)	Time limits. In all circumstances, the proponent(s) and opponent(s) of each amendment shall have equal time and no less than ten minutes per side for presentation of data, evidence, and opinion thereon. 
(e)	Decorum and order. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed zoning decision under consideration and shall address his remarks only to the mayor and city council. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed zoning decision under consideration. The mayor and city council may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this subsection. Nothing contained herein shall be construed as prohibiting the mayor and city council from conducting the hearing in an orderly and decorous manner to ensure that the public hearing on a proposed zoning decision is conducted in a fair and orderly manner. 
(f)	[Availability of procedures.] These procedures shall be available in writing at all hearings. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-366. Appeals to superior court.
Appeals of the grant or denial of a rezoning decision shall be taken within 30 days of the decision by filing an appeal in superior court, pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-367. Standards for governing the exercise of zoning power.
The following standards governing the exercise of the zoning power are adopted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5(b): 
(1)	The existing land uses and zoning classification of nearby property; 
(2)	The suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes; 
(3)	The extent to which the property values of the subject property are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
(4)	The extent to which the diminution of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(5)	The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(6)	Whether the subject property has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(7)	The length of time the property has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
(8)	Whether the proposed zoning will be a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(9)	Whether the proposed zoning will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
(10)	Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policies and intent of the land use plan; 
(11)	Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; and 
(12)	Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which give supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-368—80-392. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XIV. SPECIAL USE PERMITS
 
Sec. 80-393. Procedures.
(a)	An applicant for a special use permit shall file an application on forms provided by the code enforcement officer. The grant or denial of a special use permit is a zoning decision and such decision shall follow the procedures for a rezoning, as specified in sections 80-361 through 80-365, unless modified by the provisions of this article. 
(b)	Any use which may be authorized by a special use permit may be approved by the mayor and city council only if, in the exercise of the mayor and city council's legislative discretion, they find that: 
(1)	A proper application has been filed in accordance with the requirements of this article; 
(2)	A recommendation has been received from the planning commission in accordance with the provisions of article XIII of this chapter; 
(3)	The applicant is in compliance with the particular conditions for the proposed special use that are required by this article; 
(4)	The use is consistent with the purposes and intent of this article; and 
(5)	After considering the application and the facts, and the standards for making a zoning decision contained in section 80-367, the mayor and city council determine that the standards are satisfied such that the benefits of and need for the proposed special use outweigh any possible harmful effects, negative impacts, or damages to the neighboring properties or the city in general. In making this determination, the city council may consider the effects of the proposed use on traffic, public infrastructure and services, aesthetics, property values, the peaceful enjoyment of private property in the community, and other relevant factors. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-394. Action by the mayor and city council.
The mayor and city council shall consider all evidence in the record in making their decision. This chapter is automatically a part of the record in each case, as is the entire application file. The mayor and city council shall have the power to table the application for further information to be presented, or to remand the application to the planning commission if new information has been presented that they have not considered. The mayor and city council shall have the power to grant, deny, or grant with further specific conditions imposed. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-395. Conduct of the hearing.
(a)	Hearings on special use permits shall follow the procedures of hearings on rezoning amendments, except as modified below: 
(1)	The applicant shall have at least 10 minutes to present his case, and submit all evidence and witnesses for the record, and opponents shall have equal opportunity to present their case. The applicant can request additional time if voluminous evidence is to be submitted, and may be granted at the discretion of the mayor and city council. Equal time shall be allowed to the opponent. The city, as represented by the code enforcement officer or his designee, or the city attorney or his designee, shall have the right and equal time to present any witnesses and evidence into the record it chooses. 
(2)	The applicant or his attorney shall have a right to cross examine any witnesses in opposition to the application, and one representative or attorney of the opponents shall have a similar opportunity to cross examine the witnesses. The city shall also have a similar opportunity to cross examine all witnesses. 
(3)	The mayor and city council may question any witness, or request further information and table a decision for one month to await additional information or evidence. The mayor and city council may also request expert reports or studies relating to the request, and shall similarly table the application in such cases. An application may only be tabled one time without the consent of the applicant. 
(b)	The hearing shall be recorded in some fashion and that recording preserved for 60 days after the decision, or during the pendency of any appeal that is filed in superior court. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-396. Appeals to superior court.
Appeals of any decision to deny or grant a special use permit shall be filed within 30 days by filing an appeal to superior court, pursuant to law. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-397. Reapplication.
An application for a special use which has been denied shall not be resubmitted for a period of 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Secs. 80-398—80-422. Reserved.
 
ARTICLE XV. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
 
Sec. 80-423. Conflict with other regulations.
Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a greater width or size of yards, courts, or other open spaces; require a lower height of buildings or smaller number of stories; require a greater percentage of lot to be left unoccupied; or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other ordinance or statute, the regulations and requirements of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute or ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-424. Separability/severability.
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. It is the intent of the mayor and city council that any provision declared unconstitutional shall be severed from the chapter and the remainder of the chapter remain in effect. 
 
Sec. 80-425. Repealer.
This chapter repeals and replaces the zoning ordinance existing immediately prior to its adoption. In the event that this chapter is struck down in its entirety as void, unconstitutional or invalid, including, therefore, this provision, that prior ordinance shall be considered to not have been repealed. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
Sec. 80-426. Official zoning map adopted.
The Official Zoning Map of Rossville, Georgia, is hereby adopted. Said map shall be that map signed by the mayor and dated contemporaneously with the adoption of this chapter. It is the intent of the adoption of this official zoning map to readopt and replace the previously existing zoning map; in the event that there are conditions of record applicable to individual properties as the result of prior zoning decisions, those conditions shall continue to be in force and shall not be repealed by the adoption of this official zoning map. The official zoning map shall be a public record, and it shall be available to the public for inspection during the regular business hours of the city. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 1, 6-14-21)
 
APPENDIX B 
LAND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
ORDINANCE NO. 260 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING LAND SUBDIVISIONS OF THE CITY OF ROSSVILLE, GEORGIA. 
 
ARTICLE I. PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE
In pursuance of the authority conferred by Georgia General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, as amended, the City Council of Rossville, Georgia, does ordain and enact into law the following articles and sections. 
 
ARTICLE II. SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION
 
Section 21. Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Subdivision Regulations of the City of Rossville, Georgia." 
 
Section 22. Purpose.
This ordinance is enacted for the following purposes: 
22.1 To encourage the development of an economically sound and stable community; 
22.2 To assure the provisions of required streets, utilities and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
22.3 To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
22.4 To assure the provisions of needed open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational, and other public purposes; and 
22.5 To assure, in general, the proper development of new areas, in harmony with the master plan of Rossville, Georgia. 
 
Section 23. Planning commission as platting authority.
No plat of a subdivision (as defined in Article III) within Rossville, Georgia shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County until it shall have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. 
 
Section 24. Approval by planning commission required.
No land in the City of Rossville, Georgia shall hereafter be subdivided (as defined in Article III) and offered for sale, or sold or otherwise transferred in ownership by reference to or other use of a plat of a subdivision until said plat has received final approval by the planning commission, after which said plat shall then be duly recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Walker County. 
 
Section 25. Issuance of building permit.
Hereafter no building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the City of Rossville, Georgia unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened, as or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by the planning commission or on a street located and accepted by the city council of Rossville. 
 
ARTICLE III. DEFINITIONS
 
Section 31. Interpretation of certain words and terms.
31.1 The word "shall" is mandatory. 
31.2 When not inconsistent with the context, words used in singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. 
31.3 Words used in the present tense include the future. 
31.4 Planning commission shall mean Rossville planning commission. 
31.5 City engineer shall mean city engineer of Rossville. 
31.6 City council shall mean city council of Rossville. 
31.7 City shall mean City of Rossville, Georgia. 
31.8 Zoning ordinance shall refer to zoning ordinance of Rossville, Georgia. 
31.9 Health department shall mean Walker County health department. 
31.10 Clerk of superior court shall mean the clerk of the superior court of Walker County. 
 
Section 32. List of definitions.
Except as specifically defined herein all words used in this ordinance have their customary dictionary definitions. 
32.1 City specifications or standards: The specifications or standards of the City of Rossville, Georgia. 
32.2 Lot: A portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat or record of survey map or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
32.3 Major thoroughfare plan: The major thoroughfare plan that is part of Rossville's master plan for development. 
32.4 Master plan: The comprehensive development plan of Rossville, Georgia including but not limited to: study of population and economy; land use and community facilities plans; major thoroughfare plan; zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations. 
32.5 Plat: A map indicating the subdivision or resubdivision of land and intended to be filed for record. 
32.6 Plat, final: A plat of a tract of land which meets the requirements of these regulations and is in form for recording in the office of the clerk of superior court of Walker County. 
32.7 Plat, preliminary: A tentative proposal of a subdivision submitted to the planning commission for its consideration. 
32.8 Street: A public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley, or other way. For the purpose of this ordinance "streets" are divided into the following categories: 
32.81 Arterial, street: The streets so designated in the zoning ordinance of Rossville, Georgia. 
32.82 Street collectors: The streets so designated in the zoning ordinance of Rossville, Georgia. 
32.83 Minor street: The streets so designated in the zoning ordinance of Rossville, Georgia. 
32.9 Subdivider: A person, firm or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under these regulations. 
32.10 Subdivision: Division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy or building development and includes all division of land involving a new street or change in existing streets, and includes resubdivision, and where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided, provided, however, that the following are not included within the definition: 
1.	The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots comply with the standards set forth in the zoning ordinance of the City of Rossville. 
2.	The division of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved. 
3.	The division of land into parcels where no new street is involved and the resultant lots comply with the standards set forth in the zoning ordinance of the City of Rossville. 
 
ARTICLE IV. PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL
 
Section 41. General intent.
It is the intent of these regulations that the planning commission shall represent the city in all negotiations with the subdivider, and shall handle all negotiations between the city and the subdivider for such changes as may be necessary in the subdivision plats. Final approval of all subdivision plats shall be by the planning commission of Rossville. 
 
Section 42. Notice to subdividers.
It shall be the duty of the secretary of the planning commission to give at least five days notice by registered or certified mail to the subdivision [subdivider] before the date on which the planning commission will review said subdivider's subdivision. 
 
Section 43. Procedure for conditional approval of preliminary plat.
The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat, together with supplementary date as specified in article V, for purposes of conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
Three copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary data specified and a filing fee of $1.00 per lot shall be submitted to the city clerk of Rossville, Georgia. The city clerk shall retain one copy and shall forward two copies and a copy of receipt for filing fee to the planning commission. 
The planning commission shall, within 15 days, act on the preliminary plat giving consideration to (a) the conformity of the preliminary plat to these regulations, (b) the specific changes that may be required in the preliminary plat, and (c) the kind and extent of improvements to be made. The planning commission shall retain one copy and return one copy of the preliminary plat to the subdivider within the said 15 days, recording the note of conditional approval or disapproval on the plat. If approved, the planning commission shall state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved the commission shall state reasons therefor. Conditional approval shall be granted only in cases where no changes, or minor changes only, are required in the preliminary plat. 
Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, it shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat, which will be submitted for approval of the planning commission and for recording, upon fulfillment of the requirements of these regulations. 
 
Section 44. Procedure for approval of final plat.
The subdivider, after notification by the planning commission with respect to the preliminary plat and the changes, if any, to be made therein, shall within six months thereafter file with the planning commission the final plat prepared as specified in article V. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
Prior to the approval of the final plat the subdivider shall complete in accordance with the commission's decision, to the satisfaction of the planning commission, all the improvements required by the commission. Alternatively, he shall file with the planning commission a performance bond for the completion of improvements required by the planning commission, prior to the approval of the final plat. 
One original and three copies of the final plat; supplementary data, as specified in article V; a filing fee of $1.00 per lot and a recording fee as prescribed by the city shall be submitted to the planning commission within six months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is granted by the planning commission. 
Within 30 days after the submission of the final plat and supplementary data the planning commission shall afford a hearing to the subdivider sending by registered or certified mail the notice of time and place of hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor and shall express and note its final action on the plats and return the original and one copy to the subdivider. The planning commission shall retain one copy and file one copy with the city clerk, if disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be expressed on or attached to said plats. 
 
ARTICLE V. PLATS AND DATA
 
Section 51. Preapplication plats and data.
The following plats and data are required as supplements to the procedures outlined under section 43, preapplication procedures: 
51.1 General subdivision information. A description of existing conditions of the site and the proposed development, as necessary to supplement the drains required below. This information may include data on existing covenants, land characteristics and available community facilities and utilities; and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, areas for business, play, recreation and other public uses and proposed street, utility and other improvements. 
51.2 Location map. Showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the community; title, graphic scale, north arrow and date. 
51.3 Sketch plan. The sketch plan may be a freehand sketch made directly on a print of a topographic survey, showing proposed layout of streets, lots and such other information found necessary by the planning commission. 
 
Section 52. Plats and data for preliminary plat approval.
The preliminary plat, as prepared by the subdivider and formally filed with the city engineer and the planning commission shall be drawn to a horizontal scale of 100 feet or less to the inch, and shall contain: 
52.1 The proposed name of the subdivision; 
52.2 Sufficient information to accurately locate the plat. (Reference may be made to existing streets and plats. If there are none lying within a reasonable distance of proposed subdivision, a vicinity map on a small scale should accompany the preliminary plat); 
52.3 Names and addresses of the subdivider, the designer of the subdivision, and the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land to be platted; 
52.4 The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, accurate in scale and bearing; 
52.5 Contours at five-foot intervals (where required by topography); 
52.6 The location, width, and other dimensions of all existing or platted streets and other important features such as railroad lines, water courses, and exceptional topography within and contiguous to the tract to be subdivided; 
52.7 The location, widths and other dimensions of proposed streets, easements, parks and other open spaces and lots; 
52.8 The names of platted and proposed streets not duplicating by spelling, sound or otherwise the names of existing streets in the city; 
52.9 Existing sanitary sewers, storm drains, and culverts within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto; 
52.10 All parcels of land intended to be dedicated for public use with the purpose indicated; 
52.11 The plans and profiles of proposed sanitary and stormwater sewers with grades and sizes indicated; 
52.12 Zoning on and immediately adjacent to the tract; 
52.13 Minimum building setback lines; 
52.14 Information regarding periodic inundations or flooding if it happens to be a frequent problem; 
52.15 Graphic scale, north point and date; 
52.16 Plans and information such as profiles of existing ground surface, typical cross-sections, profiles and tentative grades of proposed streets and other information as required by the planning commission. 
 
Section 53. Plats and data for final plat approval.
The final plat should be submitted in the form required for recordation under the provisions of Georgia Code Ann. 24-2716 et seq. Where necessary the plat may be on several sheets accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. For large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the planning commission. The final plat shall show the following: 
53.1 Name of the subdivision and the name of the larger subdivision or tract of which it forms a part; 
53.2 Names of the subdivider and record owners of immediately adjoining platted land by record name date and number; 
53.3 Primary control points or descriptions and "ties" to such control points to which all dimensions, angles, bearings, and similar data on the plat shall be referred; 
53.4 Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, area and central angles of all curves; 
53.5 The accurate location and description of all monuments; 
53.6 All lots shall be numbered or lettered and all streets shall bear tentative names (which shall not duplicate by spelling, sound or otherwise the names of existing streets in the city); 
53.7 The accurate outline of all property that is offered for dedication for public use, with the purpose indicated thereon; 
53.8 A certificate of a licensed engineer or surveyor to the effect that the plat represents a survey made by him, that all of the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their positions are as shown; 
53.9 Minimum building setback line on all lots; 
53.10 Certification of title showing that applicant is the land owner; 
53.11 Statement by owner dedicating streets, right-of-way and any sites for public use; 
53.12 North arrow, graphic scale and date (whether the north point is magnetic or true north shall be indicated); 
53.13 Such other information, certificates or endorsements as may be required by the planning commission in the enforcement of these regulations; 
53.14 A certificate of a licensed civil engineer that the final plat conforms with the minimum grading, paving, and drainage requirements of this ordinance, and with sound engineering practices as applicable to the specific site and project planned. 
 
ARTICLE VI. DESIGN STANDARDS
 
Section 61. Conformity to master plan.
All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the master plan of Rossville, Georgia. The densities established by the zoning ordinance of Rossville shall be observed by all subdividers. 
61.1 Excavations. Any excavations or moving of earth shall conform to the specifications set forth in the Standard Excavation and Grading Code (1975 Edition) [see section 22-36 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rossville] and to chapter [section] 34-126 et seq., and section 518-20 et seq. [sic] of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rossville. 
 
Section 62. Street design.
The arrangement, character, extent, location and grade of all streets shall be done in accordance with acceptable land planning principles and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, orientation, to public convenience and safety and in appropriate relation to the proposed uses of land to be served by such streets. 
62.1 Access and circulation. Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided and provide normal circulation of traffic within the subdivision. 
62.2 Arrangement. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(a)	Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(b)	Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
62.3 No through traffic on minor streets. Minor streets shall be so laid [out] that their use by through traffic in the subdivision will be discouraged. 
62.4 Reserve strips. Unusual reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited. Land shall not be subdivided in a manner which omits part of the original tract to avoid drainage improvements. 
62.5 Half streets. Half streets shall be prohibited. 
62.6 Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted. 
62.7 Reverse curves. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterials and collectors. 
62.8 Cul-de-sac. Streets designed to have one end permanently closed shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a minimum right-of-way diameter of 80 feet. 
62.9 Minimum right-of-way widths. In undeveloped or vacant areas the planning commission shall have the discretion of approving or classifying street types, such as arterials, collectors or minor streets. The right-of-way widths of street shall conform to the following minimum standards: 
Street Type 	Right-of-Way 
Major arterial 	80;ft; minimum or greater subject to negotiation with the city 
Minor arterial 	70;ft; minimum or greater subject to negotiation with the city 
Major and minor collector 	60;ft; minimum or greater subject to negotiation with the city 
Minor streets 	50;ft; 

62.10 Pavement widths. The streets shall have the following minimum pavement widths unless otherwise recommended by the city engineer: 
	Pavement Width 
Street 
Type 	Vertical 
Curb 
(feet) 	Rolled 
Curb 
(feet) 
Major arterial 	48 	
Minor arterial 	40 	
Major collector 	40 	36 
Minor collector 	40 	36 
Minor streets 	30 	26

62.11 Grades. Street grades shall not exceed the following unless otherwise recommended and approved by the city engineer: 
Street Type 	Percent Grade 
Major streets 	 7 
Collector streets 	10 
Minor streets 	18 

No street grade shall be less than 0.5%. 
62.12 Visibility. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point they shall be connected by a horizontal curve with a radius adequate to insure a sight distance of not less than 200 feet, measured along the centerline, for minor and collector streets and not less than 400 feet for major streets. 
62.13 Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees. Intersections of minor streets with major arterials shall be held to a minimum. 
Property lines at arterial and collector street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of 25 feet. An increased radius shall be required when the angle of intersection is less than 90 degrees. 
Roadway and curb intersections shall be made concentric and shall be rounded by a radius of not less than 20 feet. 
62.14 Street names. No new street names shall be used that will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 283, § 1(a), (b), 1-8-90)
 
Section 63. Alleys.
Alleys may be required in commercial and industrial districts, except that the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent with zoning requirements. 
Alleys are not permitted in residential districts except when the planning commission determines that special conditions warrant a secondary means of access. 
 
Section 64. Blocks.
Except where platting design makes it desirable, block lengths shall not exceed 1,200 feet or be less than 600 feet and shall normally be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth. 
 
Section 65. Lots.
The size, width, depth, shape, and the minimum setback lines shall be as indicated in the Rossville zoning ordinance. 
65.1 Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for commercial and industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Such properties shall have a minimum setback as indicated in the zoning ordinance. 
65.2 Corner lots shall have minimum frontage and front and side yard setbacks as required by the zoning ordinance. 
65.3 The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street. 
65.4 Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided. 
65.5 Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
 
Section 66. Easements.
Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 16 feet in width. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or parkways may be required by the planning commission in connection therewith. 
 
Section 67. Drainage and inundation.
67.1 When required by the planning commission, a drainage plan shall be made which shall take into account the ultimate development of the tributary area in which the proposed subdivision is located. 
67.2 Low areas subject to periodic inundation shall not be developed or subdivided unless the commission determines that: 
.21	The nature of the land use would not lend itself to damage by water to an appreciable extent; or that 
.22	The area may be filled or improved in such a manner to prevent such periodic inundation; or that 
.23	Minimum floor elevations may be established to prevent damage to buildings and structures. 
67.3 The commission may require of the subdivider or his agent additional engineering information necessary to make decisions on acceptance of development in an area of questionable drainage. Such additional information shall be in writing and the certification of a qualified engineer may be required. 
 
Section 68. Public sites and open spaces.
Proposed subdivisions shall provide appropriate open spaces suitably located and of reasonable size for parks, playgrounds, play lots, or other recreational areas as may be necessary or practical. Such areas may consist of approximately five percent of the gross area of the proposed subdivision. The size and location of such parks and playgrounds are subject to the approval of the planning commission. In determining this requirement the planning commission shall give due consideration to the adequacy of existing parks and recreational facilities in the vicinity, size and characteristics of the subdivision and whether such requirement will result in exceptional hardship to the subdivider. 
 
ARTICLE VII. REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
 
Section 71. Monuments.
Iron pins shall be placed by the subdivider at all subdivision boundary lots and block corner angles points, points of curves in streets and at intermediate points as shall be required by the planning commission and shall meet the following specification: 
71.1 Iron pins not less than 12 inches long and one-half inches in diameter set flush with the ground. 
 
Section 72. Streets and related improvements.
Each subdivider shall be required to install, at his own expense, or to have installed by the appropriate public agency, street and related improvements according to the following specifications: 
72.1 All streets shall be cleared, grubbed and graded to the full right-of-way width. Finished grades shall be at levels approved by the planning commission. 
72.2 Either rolled concrete curbs or integral concrete curb and gutter shall be installed on all streets. Adequate storm drainage pipes and catch basins, shall be installed where needed. Installation shall be according to sound engineering practices for proper drainage. 
72.3 Curb breaks and driveways to property lines may be required by the planning commission according to standard engineering practices. 
72.4 The planning commission may require sidewalks near commercial areas, schools and other places of public assembly and areas of intensive residential development such as apartment areas. 
72.5 Streets shall be paved to the following widths: 
Street Type 	Pavement Width 
Major or minor arterial 	As approved or recommended by the planning commission 
Major or minor—rolled curb 	36;ft; 
Collector—vertical curb 	40;ft; 
Minor street—rolled curb 	26;ft; 
Minor street—vertical curb 	30;ft; 

72.6 Street pavements shall be installed according to standard engineering practices, as outlined in the standard specifications for construction of roads and bridges of the Georgia D.O.T. (1977 Edition). 
72.7 In certain cases as determined by the planning commission the subdivider may be required to pave a portion of a major street in order to insure proper access to the proposed subdivision. 
72.8 Aluminum reflectorized street markers on plain pipes or posts of durable metal conforming to presently prevailing practices in the city, shall be furnished and set at all street intersections by the subdivider. 
 
Section 73. Sanitary sewers.
Except as herein provided, each lot or other site in a subdivision shall be connected to a public sanitary sewage system by lines of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated sewage load. Lot service connections shall be stubbed in so that there will be no necessity for cutting into any pavement in order to make any future connection. 
Three copies of the sewer plan, showing the seal of a registered professional engineer and showing the proposed sewer system in plan and profile as designed in accordance with sound engineering practices shall be submitted to be checked and approved by the planning commission prior to installation. The subdivider is responsible for installing approved sewer lines in a proper manner. 
Wherever a sanitary sewage system is not available within a reasonable distance, septic tanks may be permitted upon obtaining special permission of the Walker County health department. For septic tank installations the minimum lot size shall be 20,000 square feet with 100 feet of frontage or greater if so required by the health department. The following information shall be submitted to the health department for consideration of septic tank approval: 
73.1 Topographic information for each parcel of land on which a septic tank is to be installed, contour interval shall not exceed five feet. 
73.2 Location of all drainage facilities either natural or proposed. 
Percolation data indicated on a plat as specified by the health department. 
 
Section 74. Water supply system.
Each lot or other site in a subdivision shall be connected to a public water supply system by lines of sufficient size to accommodate the anticipated water demand. Lot service connections shall be stubbed in so that there will be no necessity for cutting into any pavement in order to make any future connections. 
Three copies of the plan of the water supply system of the subdivision, showing the seal of a registered professional engineer, shall be submitted to, checked and approved by the planning commission prior to installation. Said system shall be designed in accordance with standard engineering practice. 
Arrangements for the installation of the water system are the responsibility of the subdivider. 
 
Section 75. Fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed by the subdivider according to the city standards. 
Cross reference(s)—Fire prevention and protection, ch. 38. 
 
Section 76. Coordination of installations.
All underground work such as sewers, water lines, gas mains and telephone conduits shall be installed and earth backfill compacted before street pavement is laid. 
 
ARTICLE VIII. EXEMPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
 
Section 81. Waiver of paving requirements.
The paving requirements of this ordinance may be waived on request of the subdivider for a subdivision of four lots or less which involves either the extension of an unpaved street or the opening of a new street, provided that such street extension or new street shall not exceed 400 feet in length, and shall end in a permanent dead-end or intersect another street. All land which abuts upon such street extension or new street shall be within the subdivision for which the waiver of paving is granted and shall not be subject to further subdividing. 
 
Section 82. Modification of right-of-way requirements.
The street right-of-way requirements of this ordinance may be reduced on the request of the subdivider for a subdivision of four lots or less which involves the extension of an existing street with a right-of-way width smaller than that required by this ordinance or which involves the opening of a new street. Provided, however, that such street extension or new street shall not exceed 400 feet in length and shall end in a permanent dead-end or intersect another street. All land which abuts upon such street extension or new street shall be within the subdivision for which the modifications of the right-of-way is granted and shall not be subject to further subdividing. In no case shall a right-of-way be reduced to less than 40 feet. 
 
Section 83. Variants.
When a peculiar shape, or the topography of a tract of land, or other unusual condition, makes it impractical for a developer to comply with the literal interpretations of the design requirements of this ordinance, the planning commission shall be authorized to vary such requirements, provided, however, that in so doing the intents and purposes of this ordinance are not violated. 
 
Section 84. Conditions.
In granting modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so modified. 
 
Section 85. Experimental subdivisions.
The planning commission may waive, vary, or modify the standards and requirements of these regulations if, in its judgement, an unusual or experimental subdivision might have merits because of: 
85.1 Judicious use of unusual materials in constructing required improvements. 
85.2 Use of new design concepts such as cluster subdivisions. 
 
Section 86. Independent engineer.
Where necessary, in the opinion of the planning commission, to carry out the provisions of this ordinance, the planning commission is authorized to hire a licensed civil engineer, for the purposes of consultation or inspection. There is hereby appropriated the sum of $1,000.00 for such purpose. 
 
ARTICLE IX. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
 
Section 91. Conflict with other laws.
Whenever these subdivision regulations impose more restrictive standards than other applicable local ordinances the requirements of these regulations shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any applicable local ordinances require more restrictive standards than are required by these regulations, the provisions of such ordinances shall govern. 
 
Section 92. Repeal of conflicting ordinances.
All ordinances or regulations and part of ordinances or regulations in conflict herewith are repealed. 
 
Section 93. Penalties for transferring lots in unapproved subdivisions.
The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the city, who transfers or sells such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of subdivision of such land before the plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Walker County, shall be guilty of misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided by law. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
 
Section 94. Validity.
Should any section or provision of these subdivision regulations be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect any other portion or provision of these subdivision regulations. 
 
Section 95. Effective date.
These subdivision regulations shall take effect and be in force from and after their adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
 
Section 96. Inclusion in Code of Ordinances of City of Rossville.
The provisions of this ordinance shall be included and incorporated in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rossville, Georgia, as an addition or amendment thereto and shall be appropriately renumbered to conform to the uniform numbering system of the Code. 
GEORGIA, WALKER COUNTY 
CITY OF ROSSVILLE 
I, ___________, do certify that I am Clerk of the City of Rossville, Georgia, and Keeper of the records of said municipality and as such do certify that the foregoing is a true, correct, and complete copy of the LAND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS as prepared by the Rossville Planning Commission and unanimously adopted at a ___________ meeting on ________, 19___ and as appears of record in the City Clerk's Office. 
WITNESS my hand and seal of the City of Rossville, Georgia, this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
PASSED THIS FIRST READING, on the 9th day of November, 1987. 
/s/ 
Mayor: William L. North 	/s/ 
City Clerk: Bobbie Alexander 
/s/ 
Councilman: W. E. Fleming 	/s/ 
Councilman: Joseph A. Moore 
/s/ 
Councilman: J. Paul Griffin 	/s/ 
Councilman: W. Larry Rose 

PASSED THIS SECOND READING, on the 14th day of December, 1987. 
/s/ 
Mayor: William L. North 	/s/ 
City Clerk: Bobbie Alexander 
/s/ 
Councilman: W. E. Fleming 	/s/ 
Councilman: Joseph A. Moore 
/s/ 
Councilman: J. Paul Griffin 	/s/ 
Councilman: W. Larry Rose 

APPENDIX I 
ENGINEERS OR SURVEYORS ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: 
It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct, and was prepared from an actual survey of the property made under my supervision on the ground. 
By: 	Registered C.R. No. 
Date: 	Registered Georgia Land Surveyor 
No. 

OWNERS ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: 
STATE OF GEORGIA, 
WALKER COUNTY 
The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, and who in person or through a duly authorized agent, acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey, and dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks, water courses, drains, easements, and public places thereon shown for the purposes and considerations therein expressed. 
	
Owner 
	
Date 

APPENDIX II 
SEPTIC TANKS: 
The percolation tests made above meet Health Department procedures and standards. I further certify that the above information is true and correct. 

Date 	
Registered Engineer 
	
Registration Number 

The septic tank plans shown on this subdivision plant [plat] meet Walker County requirements. 

Date 	
Health Officer, 
Walker County 

APPENDIX III 
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF CITY OF ROSSVILLE, WALKER COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
Pursuant to the Land Subdivision of the City of Rossville, Georgia, all the requirements of Conditional Approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was given Conditional Approval by the Municipal Planning Commission on the _____ day of ________, 19___. This Conditional Approval does not constitute approval of a Final Plat. This certificate of Conditional Approval shall expire and be null and void on the _____ day of ________, 19___. 
By: 
Secretary, Rossville 

Planning Commission 	
Date 

FINAL APPROVAL OF THE PLANNING COMMISSION OF CITY OF ROSSVILLE, WALKER COUNTY, GEORGIA: 
This plat has been submitted to and considered by the Planning Commission, of the City of Rossville, Walker County, Georgia, and is approved by the Planning Commission. Dated this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
By: 
Chairman 	
By: 
Secretary 	

APPENDIX IV 
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVALS 
pu mp 1186 
APPENDIX V 
ROADWAYS 
pu mp 1187 
APPENDIX V 
(continued) 
 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
1976 CODE
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1976 Code, as updated through December 11, 1995, which are included herein. Sections of the 1976 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1976 Code 
Section 	Section  this Code 
1-1—1-3 	1-1—1-3 
1-4	1-5
1-5	1-4
1-6	1-8
1-7, 1-8	1-10, 1-11
2-3—2-7 	2-196—2-200 
2-8—2-10 	2-161—2-163 
2-12 	30-56
	30-58
3-1, 3-2 	6-38, 6-39
3-3, 3-4 	6-36, 6-37
3-5 	6-1
3-8 	6-2
4-1—4-3 	10-1—10-3 
4½-12—4½-17 	14-31—14-36 
4½-18(a)— 
4½-18(d) 	14-61—14-65 
4½-19 	14-91
4½-19(1)— 
4½-19(9) 	14-92—14-100 
4½-19(10) 	14-66
4½-19(11)— 
4½-19(16) 	14-101—14-106 
4½-20 	14-37
4½-21 	14-67
5-1 	18-1
	18-81
5-2 	18-83—18-85 
	18-87
5-3 	18-84, 18-85
5-4 	18-86
5-6—5-11 	18-2—18-7 
5-21—5-27 	18-41—18-47 
5-28 	18-81
	18-83
5-29 	18-85
	18-87
5-34 	18-82
6-1	22-1
6-2	22-36
6-5 	22-2
7-1 	30-31
7-2—7-7 	30-81—30-86 
7-8 	30-32
7½-2, 7½-3 	34-126, 34-127
7½-4(a)— 
7½-4(d) 	34-186—34-189 
7½-4(e) 	34-137 
7½-5(a)— 
7½-5(d) 	34-161—34-164 
7½-6(a)— 
7½-6(c) 	34-128—34-131 
7½-6(e) 	34-131
7½-7(a) 	34-165 
7½-7(b)— 
7½-9(c) 	34-132—34-137 
8-1 	2-231
8-5—8-7 	2-232—2-234 
9-1—9-5 	38-1—38-5 
9-10—9-12 	38-76—38-78 
9-20—9-25 	38-36—38-41 
9-30 	22-36
9½-1—9½-13 	42-1—42-13 
9½-23—9½-26 	42-46—42-49 
9½-37—9½-53 	42-81—42-87 
10-1	66-1
10-2	66-2, 66-3
10-3, 10-4	66-4, 66-5
10-5	66-7
10-6	66-6
11-1—11-4 	34-91—34-94 
12-1—12-6 	78-156—78-161 
12-20—12-28 	58-31—58-39 
13-1 	74-36
	74-52
13-2—13-16 	74-37—74-51 
13-17—13-29 	74-53—74-65 
13-40—13-45 	74-101—74-106 
13-51—13-53 	26-31—26-33 
13-54 	26-35, 26-36
13-55 	26-37
13-56 	26-34
13-57—13-65 	26-38—26-46 
13-76, 13-77 	74-141, 74-142
13-89—13-91 	58-71—58-73 
14-1, 14-2 	46-1, 46-2
14.5-1—14.5-5 	34-66—34-70 
15-1, 15-2 	50-1, 50-2
15-3—15-6 	50-41—50-44 
15-7 	50-3
15-9 	50-5
15-12 	50-6
15-17 	50-7
15-19—15-21 	34-31—34-33 
15-27 	50-8
16-1 	54-1
16-2, 16-3 	54-36, 54-37
16-4 	54-2
16-20—16-25 	54-71—54-76 
18-3—18-7 	70-1—70-5 
18-9, 18-10 	70-6, 70-7
18-20—18-30 	70-41—70-51 
18½-1—18½-3 	74-1—74-3 
19-1, 19-2 	78-1, 78-2
19-5 	78-3
19-14—19-17 	78-4—78-7 
19-18—19-22 	70-86—70-90 
19-23—19-26 	78-8—78-11 
19-31, 19-32 	78-12, 78-13
19-34, 19-35 	78-14, 78-15
19-38(a) 	78-16
19-50—19-57 	78-86—78-93 
19-62, 19-63 	78-94, 78-95
19-80—19-87 	78-116—78-123 

CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1976 Code, as updated through December 11, 1995, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1976 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede December 11, 1995, but which were never included in the 1976 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since December 11, 1995, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number 	 Date 	Section 	 Section 
this Code 
	11- 1-88(Ord.) 	13-101 	22-36
262 	 1-11-88 	1(a), 1(b) 	App. A, Art. VIII, § 1, App. A, Art. VIII, § 2
282 	 1- 8-90 	1(a), (b) 	App. A, Art. VII, § 5
283 	 1- 8-90 	1(a), (b) 	App. B, § 62
332 	 4- 8-90 		2-231
335 	10-14-96 		66-41, 66-42
339 	 1-13-97 		App. A, Art. XV, § 4
340 	 2-10-97 		62-1—62-11 
			62-46—62-51 
			62-86—62-90 
			62-121—62-124 
			62-156—62-160 
			62-181—62-187 
			62-211—62-214 
			62-236—62-243 
342 	 4-14-97 		22-36
342B 	 4-27-97 		22-37
343 	 4-14-97 	1—5 	50-76—50-80 
344 	 4-14-97 		50-4
345 	 4-14-97 	1, 2 	70-121, 70-122
		3—11 	70-146—70-154 
346 	 4-14-97 	1—4 	78-51—78-54 
347 	 4-14-97 	78-271(a) 	26-137
		78-271(b) 	26-110
		78-271(c)—78-271(e) 	26-138—26-140 
		78-272 	26-136
		78-273—78-276 	26-81—26-84 
		78-291 	26-106, 26-107
		78-292, 78-293 	26-108, 26-109
		78-294—78-297 	26-111—26-114 
348 	 4-14-97 	1—20 	2-31—2-50 
		21—27 	2-71—2-77 
		29 	2-78, 2-79
		30 	2-80
		31—36 	2-101—2-106 
		37 	2-107, 2-108
352 	 4-13-98 	Added 	App. A, Art. VI, § 3
354 	 6- 8-98 	Added 	Adopting Ord. 
357 	10-12-98 	Added 	1-14
367 	10-11-99 	1 Added 	22-101—22-108 
370 	12-13-99 	1 	App. A, Art. VI, § 1
375 	 3-12-01 	Rpld 	34-126—34-189 
		I—IX Added 	34-126—34-134 
375(A) 	 3-12-01 	I—V Added 	78-26—78-30 
386 	11-11-02 	Dltd 	10-1—10-3 
		1—4 Added 	10-1—10-4 
		20—36 Added 	10-26—10-42 
		40—54 Added 	10-51—10-65 
		60—65 Added 	10-76—10-81 
391 	 6- 9-03 	Rpld 	58-71
		Added 	58-71
392 	 7-14-02 		58-71
395 	10-13-03 	1—4 Added 	26-1
396 	11-10-03 	Added 	10-5
397 	12- 8-03 	II—VII 	34-127—34-132 
		IX 	34-133
		X 	34-134
398 	 1-12-04 		Ch. 14(note) 
407 	 6-13-05 		26-1
410 	 9-12-05 	1 Added 	App. A, Art. VII, Sec. 6
		1 	App. A, Art. X, Sec. 1
411 	 9-12-05 	1 	46-1
412 	 2-13-06 	Added 	78-17
413 	 5- 8-06 	Added 	34-151—34-288 
414 	 5- 8-06 	I—XXII Added 	34-289—34-322 
419 	11-13-06 	Added 	66-61—66-64 
420 	 3-12-07 	I Rpld 	Ord. No. 398 
		II Added 	14-201—14-209 
421 	 3-12-07 	I Rpld 	22-36
		II Added 	22-36
424 	 9-10-07 	Art. 1, A—D 	42-1—42-4 
		Art. 2, A—H 	42-6—42-13 
		Art. 3, A—C 	42-46—42-49 
		Art. 4, A—F 	42-81—42-86 
		Art. 5	42-87
		Art. 6	42-5
428 	 8-11-08 		18-7(a), (b) 
		Added 	18-7(c)—(e) 
432 	 2- 9-09 	1—13 Added 	66-81—66-93 
437 	12-14-09 	I Rpld 	22-36
		II Added 	22-36
438 	 2- 8-10 	Added 	22-36.1
439 	 4-12-10 	I—IX 	34-126—34-134 
		X Added 	34-135
440 	 4-12-10 	1—4 Added 	50-101—50-104 
452 	 1- 9-12 		66-42(c) 
		Add 	66-42(d) 
		Rltd 	66-42(d) 
		as 	66-42(e) 
		Added 	66-43
462 	 9-10-12 	1 Added 	2-170—2-173 
463 	 9-10-12 	1 Added 	2-201—2-205 
468 	 2-11-13 	A 	Ch. 70, Art. II, title 
		Rpld 	70-41—70-51 
		B—M Added 	70-41—70-52 
470 	 7-10-17 	I—III 	34-91—34-93 
474 	 8-12-13 	Added 	34-90
486 	 9-14-15 	Added 	2-235
495 	 3-13-17 	I—XI 	34-126—34-135 
498 	 6-12-17 	1-1—1-16 Added 	10-1—10-6 
		2-1—2-24 Added 	10-21—10-44 
		3-1—3-17 Added 	10-71—10-87 
		4-1—4-4 Added 	10-101—10-104 
		5-1—5-3 Added 	10-121—10-123 
		6-1—6-4 Added 	10-151—10-154 
		7-1, 7-2 Added 	10-171, 10-172
		8-1, 8-2 Added 	10-191, 10-192
		2 Rpld 	10-1—10-5, 10-26—10-65, 10-76—10-81 
507 	 8-13-18 	1 	22-36(b)(4) 
		2 	22-36.1
513 	 2-10-20 	1 Added 	2-236
514 	 8-14-20 		34-90
517 	 2- 8-21 	1 Added 	18-88—18-91 
518 	 4-14-21 	1 	2-36
519 	 6-14-21 	1 Added 	Ch. 80, §§ 80-1—80-3, 
80-25—80-27, 
80-58—80-67, 
80-89—80-104, 
80-122—80-135, 
80-152, 80-174—80-176, 
80-206—80-214, 
80-237—80-245, 
80-269—80-276, 
80-301—80-304, 
80-327, 80-330—80-335, 
80-359—80-367, 
80-393—80-397, 
80-423—80-426 
		3.B., Rpld 	App. A, Arts. I—XVI 
523 	 9-13-21 	1 	10-103
		2 	10-123

STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section 	Section  
this Code 
1-1-3 	1-4
1-1-7 	1-3
1-3-1—1-3-3 	1-2 
1-3-3 	34-128
1-4-1 	1-2 
2-10-105 	74-55
tit. 3 	10-1
3-1-1 et seq. 	Ch. 10
3-3-23 	10-1
	10-83
3-4-49 	Ch. 10
3-4-133 	10-192
3-11-3 	10-41
tit. 8, ch. 2	50-101
4-3-1 et seq. 	18-1
4-5-1 et seq. 	18-5
4-5-5 	18-88
4-8-5 	18-90
4-8-20 et seq. 	18-4
4-11-1 et seq. 	Ch. 18
	18-2
4-11-5.1 	18-89
8-2-1 et seq. 	Ch. 22
	Ch. 22, Art. III 
	22-36
8-2-3 	Ch. 22, Art. III 
8-2-25 	22-36
8-2-25(a) 	Ch. 38
8-2-110 	80-3
8-2-130 et seq. 	Ch. 46
8-2-160 et seq. 	80-21 
10-1-350 et seq. 	Ch. 58
12-2-8 	34-129
12-4-72 	34-128
12-5-20 et seq. 	34-127
12-5-23(5)(a) 	34-130
12-5-30(f) 	34-127
	34-129
12-5-282 	34-127
12-5-286 	34-129
12-5-440 et seq. 	34-127
12-7-1 et seq. 	34-129
12-7-6 	34-128
12-7-6(b) 	34-128
	34-129
12-7-6(c) 	34-129
12-7-7(e) 	34-131
12-7-7(f)(1) 	34-130
12-7-7.1 	34-128
12-7-8(a) 	34-127
	34-130
12-7-17 	34-130
12-7-19 	34-127
12-7-19(b)(1) 	34-133
12-7-19(b)(4) 	34-133
12-7-20 	34-130
	34-133
12-8-20 et seq. 	Ch. 66
12-8-31.1 	Ch. 66
15-6-67(d) 	App. B 
15-10-1 et seq. 	1-13
15-10-60 et seq. 	1-13
15-10-62 	78-28
15-10-63 	78-28
15-18-96 	2-173
15-21-93 	1-11
15-21-95 	1-13
15-21-100 	1-11
15-21-112 	1-11
15-23 	1-11
16-1-1 et seq. 	Ch. 50
16-5-1 et seq. 	26-111
16-6-1 et seq. 	26-111
16-6-16 	26-84
16-6-24 	50-7
16-7-40 et seq. 	66-7
16-7-51(6) 	34-90
16-10-24.1 	38-2
16-11-36 	50-7
16-11-41 	10-2
16-11-120 et seq. 	50-2
16-12-4 	18-2
16-12-20 et seq. 	26-111
16-12-35 	14-206
16-12-35(a.1)—(i) 	14-208
16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C) 	14-204
16-12-80 et seq. 	26-111
16-12-80 	80-239
tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2	50-101
16-14-1 et seq. 	26-111
16-25-35(d)(1)(B), (C) 	14-201
17-6-11 	1-11
17-6-70 et seq. 	1-11
17-10-3 	1-11
	1-13
17-10-3(e) 	1-11
tit. 25, ch. 2	50-101
25-2-1 et seq. 	Ch. 38
25-3-1 et seq. 	Ch. 38, Art. II 
25-4-1 et seq. 	Ch. 38, Art. II 
25-6-1 et seq. 	Ch. 38, Art. III 
25-6-2 	38-78
27-5-4 et seq. 	18-7
31-3-5.1 	22-40
31-19-6 	18-42
	18-43
	18-44
32-4-90 et seq. 	Ch. 70
32-4-92 	Ch. 70
32-6-1 et seq. 	Ch. 70
32-6-70— 
32-6-97 	Ch. 62
32-7-4 	2-234
33-3-5 	74-101
33-3-5(1) 	74-105
33-8-4 	74-104
	74-105
33-8-8 et seq. 	74-55
33-8-8-1 	74-104
33-8-8-2 	74-105
33-8-8.2 	Ch. 74, Art. III 
36-1-20(b) 	1-13
36-3-1 et seq. 	Ch. 2
36-18-1 	34-128
36-30-2 	Ch. 2, Art. V 
36-34-1 et seq. 	Ch. 2
36-34-2 	Ch. 2
36-35-3 	Ch. 1
36-35-6(a)(2) 	Ch. 50
36-35-6(a)(5) 	Ch. 26
36-40-1 et seq. 	Ch. 2, Art. V 
36-60-1 et seq. 	Ch. 2
36-60-3 	Ch. 14, Art. II 
	80-239
36-61-1 et seq. 	2-234
36-66-1 et seq. 	2-163
	Ch. 80
36-66-2 	Ch. 80
36-66-5(6) 	80-367
36-67A-1 	80-259 
36-67A-4 	80-259 
36-69-1 et seq. 	Ch. 38, Art. III 
36-70-1 et seq. 	2-163
36-71-2(8) 	74-37
36-80-1 et seq. 	Ch. 2
38-3-1 et seq. 	Ch. 30
38-3-70 et seq. 	Ch. 30
39-80-24(b) 	2-235
39-80-24(c) 	2-235
40-2-8 	78-26
	78-27
40-2-20 	78-26
	78-27
40-2-90 	78-30
40-6-14 	Ch. 34, Art. II 
40-6-181— 
40-6-183 	78-1
40-6-183 	78-12
40-6-200 et seq. 	Ch. 78, Art. III 
40-6-206 	Ch. 78, Art. III, Div. 2 
40-6-249 	66-7
40-6-370— 
40-6-376 	78-1
40-6-371 	Ch. 78
40-6-371(a)(1) 	Ch. 78, Art. III 
40-6-372 	78-1
40-11-1 et seq. 	Ch. 78, Art. IV 
	80-99
40-14-1— 
40-14-16 	78-1
41-1-1 et seq. 	Ch. 34, Art. III 
41-2-5 	Ch. 34, Art. III 
	80-98
41-2-7 	50-101
41-2-7 et seq. 	50-101
41-2-9—41-2-17 	50-101
42-5-51(a) 	1-13
tit. 43	74-48
tit. 43, ch. 39A 	50-102
43-22-1 et seq. 	Ch. 58, Art. II 
43-46-1 et seq. 	Ch. 54
44-3-1 et seq. 	App. B 
tit. 44, ch. 3, art. 3	80-3
tit. 45, ch. 3 	2-171
45-6-6 	Ch. 2, Art. IV 
45-10-3 	Ch. 2, Art. III 
45-11-1 	1-10
	Ch. 2, Art. IV 
46-7-15 	74-55
47-11-51 	1-13
47-17-60 	1-13
47-17-60 et seq. 	1-11
tit. 48, ch. 4, art. 5	50-103
48-4-75—48-4-81 	50-103
48-5-1 et seq. 	Ch. 74
48-5-350 et seq. 	Ch. 74
48-5-355 	74-55
48-5-356 	74-55
48-5-440 et seq. 	Ch. 46
48-6-93 	Ch. 74, Art. IV 
	74-55
	74-141
48-6-93(d) 	74-142
48-13-1 et seq. 	Ch. 74, Art. II 
48-13-5— 
48-13-26 	74-45
48-13-7 	74-36
	74-39
48-13-9 	74-38
48-13-9(c)(1)—(18) 	74-43
48-13-55 	74-55
48-17-1(2) 	14-201
48-17-2 	14-207
48-17-9 	14-207
50-8-7.3 	Ch. 66
50-14-1 et seq. 	2-34
50-14-1(d) 	Ch. 2, Art. II 
50-14-2 	2-39
50-14-3 	2-39
50-18-17 et seq. 	2-202
50-18-90 	Ch. 2, Art. IV 
50-18-99(e) 	Ch. 2, Art. IV 
50-18-102 	Ch. 2, Art. IV 
51-2-7 	18-4
	18-7


