CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF ST. MARYS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Adopted: December 9, 1996 
Effective: December 31, 1996 
____________ 
Published in 1996 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
ST. MARYS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jerry R. Brandon 
Mayor 
____________ 
Clifford Guyer 
Kenneth Hase 
Kyle Lewis 
Cynthia Nelms 
Tilden Norris 
Willie Walker, Jr. 
City Council 
____________ 
Michael Mahaney 
City Manager 
____________ 
Terry K. Floyd 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Gwendolyn W. Mungin 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE       RLCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 
CDB:1 
CDC:1 
CDD:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Palmer Carr, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Mr. Michael Mahaney, City Manager, and Mr. Terry K. Floyd, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Marys, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 1996. 
AN ACT ESTABLISHING THE TOWN OF ST. MARYS [1] 
    To establish a town on St. Mary's river, in the county of Camden, for altering the place of holding the courts and elections within the said county, and for appointing commissioners to erect a court-house and gaol in the county of Franklin. 
    Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives of the State of Georgia, in General Assembly met, That a town heretofore laid out on the river St. Mary's, in the county of Camden, a plat whereof has been recorded in the office of the county-surveyor of said county, shall be, from and after the passing of this act, vested in five commissioners, and be known by the name of St. Mary's, and that James Seagrove, William Maubrey, William Johnston, Thomas King and John King be appointed commissioners thereof, who or a majority of them, are hereby authorized and required within twelve months after the passing of this act to transmit to the surveyor-general a fair and correct copy of the plan of the said town by him to be recorded in the office of the surveyor general of this state. 
    And be it further enacted, That in case of the death or refusal to act on any of the said commissioners, his excellency the governor is hereby authorized and empowered to appoint some other person or persons in his or their room. 
    And be it further enacted, That James Seagrove, William Maubrey, William Johnston, John King, Thomas King and Abner Hammend be and they are hereby appointed commissioners of the court-house and gaol for the said county of Camden, in addition to those already appointed, whose duty it shall be within six months after the passing this act to convene at some place to be by them or a majority of them agreed on for that purpose, and then, there, by such majority to decide on the most eligible place for erecting the same, at which place, after the said determination, the courts and elections for the said county, shall be thereafter held. 
    And be it further enacted, That James Little, Benjamin Echols, George Henning, James Whitney, Roderick Easly, Esquire, be and they are hereby appointed commissioners to fix upon the most convenient place for a court-house and gaol in Franklin county, and for erecting the same, in addition to those appointed by an act entitled, "an Act to grant money for the purpose of building and repairing court-houses and gaols," passed the fifteenth of December, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-one. 
    And be it further enacted, That from and after the time of fixing and agreeing on the place for holding the said courts and elections, that so much of an act entitled, "an Act for fixing on proper places in the counties of Effingham, Glynn and Camden, for erecting gaols and court-houses, and for establishing superior courts in the counties of Franklin and Greene," passed at Augusta the tenth day of February, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty-seven, as respects the erecting of a gaol and court-house, and holding elections for the county of Camden at the town of St. Patrick's, on the Great Satilla river, be and the same is hereby repealed. 
WILLIAM GIBBONS, 
Speaker of the House of 
Representatives BENJAMIN TALIAFERRO, 
President of the Senate  
    Concurred, December 5, 1792. 
EDWARD TELFAIR, 
Governor  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance to Adopt a City Code of Ordinances; To Provide for Exemptions from Repeal of Certain Existing Ordinances; To Provide for an Effective Date; and for Other Purposes. 
    BE IT AND IT IS Hereby Ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of St. Marys that: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein for historic reference is the 1792 act of the Georgia General Assembly which established a town to be known as the Town of St. Mary's. The original act is set forth in 1792 Ga. Laws, page 43. In 1858, pursuant to 1858 Ga. Laws, page 141, the name of the town was changed to City of St. Marys. 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to adopt and implement a codification of the existing ordinances of the City of St. Marys so as to further the efficient administration and enforcement of the City's Ordinances and regulations. 
Section 2. - Adoption of City Code. 
    Subject to the provisions of Section 3 of this Ordinance, the 1996 Edition of the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia, as compiled, codified, printed and produced by the Municipal Code Corporation, a complete copy of which is attached hereto and by this reference made a part hereof, is hereby adopted as the codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of St. Marys. 
Section 3. - Exemption from repeal of certain ordinances. 
A.  The adoption of the Code of Ordinances as above-provided shall not effect or be construed as effecting a repeal of, or otherwise affect the validity or enforceability of the Ordinances set forth below, together with any amendments thereto; such Ordinances either having been adopted and enacted since the printing of the Code herein adopted or having been accidentally omitted from the compilation, codification and printing of the Code, to wit: 
An Ordinance Providing for Seizure, Sale and Disposition of Abandoned, Stolen or Recovered Property, adopted July 8, 1991. 
Radar Permit and Speed Limit Ordinance, adopted June 10, 1996. 
Adult Entertainment Ordinance, adopted November 11, 1996. 
An Ordinance to Govern Enforcement of Building and Construction Codes, adopted May 22, 1995. 
An Ordinance to Establish an Industrial Development Commission, adopted June 21, 1979. 
An Ordinance to Adopt the Ad Valorem Tax Lien Enforcement Provisions of O.C.G.A. Title 48, Article 5, adopted October 24, 1995. 
An Ordinance creating "Subdivision Regulations of St. Marys, Georgia" adopted September 7, 1978, and all amendments thereto. 
An Ordinance Adopting the Georgia Uniform Rules of the Road, adopted September 25, 1995. 
An Ordinance to Amend a Plan and Agreement with the Employee's Retirement System of Georgia with Regard to Election Officials, adopted January 8, 1996. 
All Ordinances Dealing with and Providing for Retirement Benefits and Retirement Benefit Plans for Employees and Officials of the City of St. Marys. 
All Ordinances Creating City Boards, Commissions and Authorities. 
B.  Such Ordinances shall continue in full force and effect and the Code shall be supplemented so as to reflect their inclusion. 
Section 4. - Repeal of specific conflicting ordinances. 
    The provisions of the Adult Entertainment Ordinance adopted by Council on December 6, 1979, which is found in Article II of Chapter 22 (Sections 22-76 through 22-86) of the City Code herein adopted is hereby stricken in its entirety, and the City Clerk is directed to substitute in lieu thereof the provisions of the Adult Entertainment Ordinance heretofore adopted by Council on November 11, 1996. 
Section 5. - Severability. 
    In the event any portion of this Ordinance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the City Council of the City of St. Marys that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Ordinance which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause or phrase were not originally a part of the Ordinance. 
Section 6. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall become effective at midnight on the 31st day of December, 1996. 
Section 7. - Repealer. 
    All Ordinances and parts of Ordinances in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed. 
    SO ORDAINED, this 9th day of December, 1996, by the Mayor and Council of City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
CITY OF ST. MARYS, GEORGIA 
By:;sigr;  \Its Mayor - Jerry Brandon 
Attest:;sigr;  \Its Clerk - Gwendolyn Mungin 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. Ord. of 2-22-11 Include 36 Ord. of 3-7-11(1) Include 36 Ord. of 3-7-11(2) Include 36 Ord. of 3-21-11(1) Include 36 Ord. of 3-21-11(2) Include 36 Ord. of 4-4-11 Include 37 Ord. of 5-2-11(1) Include 37 Ord. of 5-2-11(2) Include 37 Ord. of 5-2-11(3) Include 37 Ord. of 6-20-11 Include 37 Ord. of 3-21-11(3) Include 38 Ord. of 7-18-11(1) Include 38 Ord. of 7-18-11(2) Include 38 Ord. of 6-20-11(2) Include 39 Ord. of 12-5-11 Include 39 Ord. of 1-23-12 Include 39 Amend. of 5-16-11 Include 40 Amend. of 2-6-12 Include 40 Amend. of 3-19-12 Include 40 Res. 2010-R011 8-23-10 Include 41 Res. 2010-R012 8-23-10 Include 41 Res. 2012-R002 2-6-12 Include 41 Amend. of 5-7-12 Include 41 Amend. of 6-4-12 Include 41 Amend. of 8-6-12 Include 42 Amend. of 8-20-12(1) Include 42 Amend. of 8-20-12(2) Include 42 Ord. of 11-5-12 Include 42 2013-001  1- 7-13 Include 43 2013-002  2- 3-13 Include 43 2013-009  4-15-13 Include 43 2013-016  6- 3-13 Include 43 2013-019  6-17-13 Include 43 2013-022  7- 1-13 Include 43 2013-024  9-16-13 Include 43 2013-029 10-21-13 Include 43 2013-034 11-18-13 Include 43 2013-035 12- 2-13 Include 43 2013-036 12-16-13 Include 43 2014-001  1- 6-14 Include 43 2014-003  2- 3-14 Include 43 2014-004  2- 3-14 Include 43 2014-008  3- 3-14 Include 43 2014-011  4- 7-14 Include 43 2014-012  4- 7-14 Include 43 2014-018  5-13-14 Include 43 2014-020  6- 2-14 Include 43 2014-021  6- 2-14 Include 43 2014-022  6- 2-14 Include 43 2014-024  6- 2-14 Omit 43 2014-025  6- 2-14 Include 43 2014-027  6-16-14 Include 43 2014-040  9-15-14 Include 43 2014-041  9-15-14 Omit 43 2014-043  9-15-14 Include 43 2014-046 10-20-14 Include 44 2014-047 10-20-14 Include 44 2015-001  1- 5-15 Include 44 2015-002  1- 5-15 Include 44 2015-003  1- 5-15 Include 44 2015-007  2- 2-15 Include 44 2015-015  5- 4-15 Include 44 2015-016  5-18-15 Include 44 2015-020  6- 1-15 Include 44 2015-021  6-15-15 Include 44 Ord. of  7- 6-15 Include 44 2015-025  7-20-15 Include 44 2015-027  8- 3-15 Include 44 2015-028  8- 3-15 Include 44 2015-034  9-21-15 Include 44 2015-042 11- 2-15 Include 44 Ord. of ; en;2-17-16 Include 44 Ord. of  3-21-16 Include 44 Act 465  4-27-16 Include 44 Ord. of  5- 9-16 Include 44 Ord. of  7-18-16 Include 44 Ord. of  8- 1-16 Include 44 Ord. of  8-15-16 Include 44 Ord. of  8-15-16 Include 44 Ord. of 11- 7-16 Include 44 Ord. of 12- 5-16 Include 44 2017-001  2- 6-17 Include 44 2017-3-6-001  3- 6-17 Include 45 2017-3-6-002  3- 6-17 Include 45 2017-6-5-003  6- 5-17 Include 45 2017-7-17-001  7-17-17 Include 45 2017-9-21-002  9-21-17 Include 45 2017-10-16-001 10-16-17 Include 45 2017-10-16-003 10-16-17 Include 45 2017-11-6-003 11- 6-17 Include 45 2017-12-4-002 12- 4-17 Include 45 2018-3-19-001  3-19-18 Include 45 2018-7-16-001  7-16-18 Include 45 2018-8-6-001  8- 6-18 Include 45  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of St. Marys as set forth in 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4763. Original section number designations have been retained. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1, the term "city court" has been changed to "municipal court" throughout this Code. 

ARTICLE 1. - INCORPORATION, POWERS, BOUNDARIES 

Section 1-101. - Incorporation; name. 
    The City of St. Marys, Georgia, and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of St. Marys, hereinafter at times referred to as the "city." The city shall be the legal continuation and successor to the city as heretofore incorporated, shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the city, and shall have perpetual succession. 
Section 1-102. - General powers. 
(a)  The city shall have all the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities vested in the city now or hereafter granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution, by the general laws of the State of Georgia, and by this Charter. The city shall exercise and enjoy all powers of self-government not specifically prohibited by the Constitution, the general laws of the State of Georgia, or by this Charter, including all powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the city and of its inhabitants and all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted as fully and completely as if these powers were enumerated in this Charter. 
(b)  The city may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold any property, real and personal as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it and, from time to time, may hold or invest or sell or dispose of any of its property; and may have a common seal and alter it at will. 
(c)  No enumeration of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1-103. - Specific powers; certain powers enumerated. 
(a)  The city may acquire, construct, operate, and maintain, by condemnation or otherwise, inside or outside the city limits, public ways, streets, sidewalks, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, public buildings, libraries, sanitary landfill, sewers, drains, sewage treatment or waterworks systems, electrical or gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, flood control, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, areas, and facilities, and any other public improvement. The city by ordinance may establish and enforce rules and regulations necessary to preserve order, peace, and dignity on any property or facilities so acquired inside or outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The city shall have power and authority to grant franchises, easements, and rights-of-way over, in, under, and on the public streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, and parks and other property of said city on such terms and conditions as the mayor and council may fix, except that they shall not grant an exclusive franchise for any purpose, and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. 
(c)  In addition to the powers now or hereafter granted to municipalities by law, the city shall have all of the following powers: 
(1)  Authority to contract with industrial or development authority. The City of St. Marys, by and through its governing authority, shall have the power to contract with any duly created industrial or development authority, or both, for the operation, maintenance, and use of any public project, public building, or other public facility including, and not limited to, parking lots, garages, or other parking structures or projects, buildings, or facilities essential for the public purposes of development and promotion of civic and cultural growth, public welfare, trade, commerce, education, amusement, recreation, or other public purposes in the City of St. Marys. 
(2)  Authority to contract with water and sewer authority. The City of St. Marys, by and through its governing authority, is authorized to contract with any duly created water and sewer authority for the purposes of operating, maintaining, and providing water and sewer services to the City of St. Marys and its citizens. 
(3)  Appropriations for relief of poor and for charitable purposes. The mayor and council shall have power, by appropriate action, to appropriate money for the relief of the poor and for charitable purposes as they may deem proper. 
(4)  Nuisances on vacant lots; definition. Any property in the City of St. Marys on which weeds, debris, trash, or waste matter has been allowed to accumulate to such extent that the presence of such matter on the vacant property creates conditions likely to cause a fire or spreading of fire or an imminent danger to the health or welfare of the adjacent community by the spread of disease or epidemic shall be subject to be declared a nuisance and abated in the manner herein set out. 
(5)  Same; abatement. Proceedings for the abatement of the nuisance declared in the above section shall be initiated as provided by ordinance or, in the alternative, the city marshall shall cause summons to be issued from the City Court of the City of St. Marys, directed to the owner, if known and a resident of the City of St. Marys, or, if the owner is a nonresident but said property is under the management of an agent of the owner, resident of St. Marys, shall be directed to such agent to show cause why the nuisance should not be abated. Said notice to set out the particulars in what manner said vacant lot constitutes a nuisance, and the same shall be personally served on the owner, if a resident, and upon his agent if he is not a resident; and, if the owner is unknown and his residence is unknown, with no resident agent in charge of said property, then by publication one time in a newspaper of general circulation, published in the City of St. Marys, five days before the date of the hearing; such summons and notice shall state the time and place of the hearing to be had in the City Court of the City of St. Marys. 
(6)  Same; judgment against offender. If on said hearing before the judge it shall be adjudged that the said nuisance should be abated, the judgment of said judge shall provide that, unless said nuisance be abated within five days by the party proceeded against, the director of public safety or his assistants shall be authorized to enter upon said vacant property and abate said nuisance by cleaning off and removing the matter thereon constituting the nuisance, which shall be done by said city authorities at the expense of the owner and charged against the property and judgment for costs of court. 
(7)  Same; costs and expenses; collection. In the event the director of public safety or his assistants abate said nuisance, the actual cost and expense to said city in clearing away and removing said matter declared to be a nuisance shall be declared a charge and a lien upon the said property on which said nuisance was abated. Said charge and lien shall be fixed in the following manner: Upon the abatement of said nuisance, the director of public safety shall render a written statement to the owner of said property, if known, or to the owner's agent if the owner be a nonresident, or, if the residence of the owner be unknown, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of St. Marys, by being published one time, showing the actual cost of abating said nuisance and demanding the payment of said expense, and, if the same be not paid within 30 days from the date of said notice, the director of public safety shall certify to the mayor and council a statement showing the actual cost of abating said nuisance and the cost of advertising; and the mayor and council are authorized by ordinance to declare said charge and expense a lien against the real estate on which said nuisance was abated, which lien or charge may be enforced by execution, levy, and sale in the manner as executions now authorized under the provisions of the Charter of the City of St. Marys for street improvements. The property owner shall have the same rights and defense to the said execution as now exist in defense of executions issued under assessments for paving of streets. 
(8)  Same; cleanliness and safety of premises; authority to provide. The mayor and council of the City of St. Marys shall have the authority and power, in the interest of health, sanitation, and the public safety and welfare, to provide for the clearing, cleaning off, and making and keeping sanitary and free from fire or other hazards any and all real property, either vacant or improved, within the corporate limits of the City of St. Marys; to provide for the removal from such property all debris, grass, weeds, or other growth, or other unsanitary or combustible matter or materials; to provide for the height and trimming of hedges, shrubbery, and other growth; to fix and to impose penalties upon owner and occupants of property in respect to such requirements; to provide for the performance of such services by the city and for the assessment and collection of charges therefor, for the creation and assessment of liens against property and the owners and occupants thereof so served, and for the collection and enforcement of such liens the same as assessments for taxes, paving of streets and sidewalks, and other liens of the city are now executed and enforced; and further that the said mayor and council of the City of St. Marys be and they hereby are authorized and empowered to adopt such ordinances or resolutions or other acts of a like nature to enforce this provision of the city Charter. 
(9)  Authority to assess for cost of improvements. 
(A)  The mayor and council shall be authorized to make special assessments with or without petition, after a public hearing, against benefited property within the corporate limits of the city for: 
(i)  Constructing, reconstructing, paving, widening, installing curbs and gutters, and otherwise building and improving streets; 
(ii)  Constructing, reconstructing, paving, widening, and otherwise building or improving sidewalks in any public street; 
(iii)  Constructing, reconstructing, extending, and otherwise building or improving water systems; 
(iv)  Constructing, reconstructing, extending, and otherwise building or improving sanitary sewer lines; and 
(v)  Constructing, reconstructing, extending, and otherwise building or improving sewage disposal systems. 
(B)  Assessments may be made on the basis of: 
(i)  The frontage abutting on the project at an equal rate per foot of frontage; or 
(ii)  The area of land served, or subject to being served, by the project, at an equal rate per unit of area; or 
(iii)  The value added to the land served by the project or subject to being served by it, being the difference between the appraised value of the land without improvements as shown on the tax records of the county and the appraised value of the land with improvements according to the appraisal standards and rules adopted by the county at its last revaluation, at an equal rate per dollar of value added; or 
(iv)  The number of lots served, or subject to being served, where the project involves extension of an existing system to a residential or commercial subdivision, at an equal rate per lot; or 
(v)  A combination of two or more of these bases. 
Whenever the basis selected for assessment is either area or value added, the mayor and council may provide for the laying out of benefit zones according to the distance of benefited property from the project being undertaken and may establish differing rates of assessment to apply uniformly throughout each benefit zone. 
For each project, the mayor and council shall endeavor to establish an assessment method from among the bases set out in this section which will most accurately assess each lot or parcel of land according to the benefit conferred upon it by the project. The council's decision as to the method of assessment shall be final and conclusive and not subject to further review or challenge. 
(C)  The procedures for execution of the power and authority granted herein shall be as prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the mayor and council. 
(10)  Territorial jurisdiction. For all police purposes, such as peace, good order, health, morals, the control and regulation over the water pipes, valves, hydrants, meters, and accessories used in supplying of water wherever extended, or through which water is served and supplied by the City of St. Marys waterworks outside the city limits of St. Marys, and for the full distance of all said water pipes, and for the full length of said mains, and for all pipes and service connections extending therefrom, and for a distance of 300 feet on all sides of said mains or pipes, the City of St. Marys shall have jurisdiction of the enforcement of all ordinances, rules, and regulations of said city, having for their purpose the exercise and control over the water service supplied by said city; and furthermore, the city shall have the right to make laws, rules, and regulations for the control of water service wherever supplied inside or outside of the city limits and to fix penalties for the violation thereof. Any person guilty of the violation of any of the ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City of St. Marys enacted for said purposes as aforesaid, within the jurisdiction as above extended, shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Recorder's Court of the City of St. Marys in the same manner as for offenses committed within the city limits. 
(11)  Rules and regulations. The mayor and council of the City of St. Marys be, and they are, hereby authorized and empowered to make rules and regulations not inconsistent with law for the regulation of its waterworks system and also to require the owner of any improved real estate within the corporate limits of said city to provide suitable water closet accommodations upon such improved premises, whenever in their judgment and discretion such improvements are necessary or proper to preserve the health or protect the sanitary interests of the citizens of any neighborhood or community of said city and also to prevent the use of water from wells and any and all places in said city for domestic purposes, whenever in their discretion they deem it necessary or proper to preserve the health of the citizens of any neighborhood or community within the corporate limits of said city. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 1) 
Section 1-104. - Construction of powers. 
    The powers of the city shall be constructed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Section 1-105. - Boundaries; official map. 
    The corporate boundaries of the city shall be the same as those of the City of St. Marys as provided by law and existing on the effective date of this Charter, or as hereafter lawfully changed. The city shall maintain a current map and written legal description indicating the boundaries of the city. Photographic, typed, or other copies of the map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. 
Editor's note- The corporate limits of the city were changed pursuant to 1986 Ga. Laws, page 4128 and 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5035. The legal descriptions of the various tracts set forth in such acts have been omitted from this codification. 
Section 1-106. - Section captions; rules of construction. 
(a)  The captions of the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be construed as a part thereof. 
(b)  The word "shall" in this Charter is intended to be mandatory and the word "may" is to be permissive. 
(c)  In the construction of this Charter, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the adopting body: 
(1)  City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(2)  County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Camden, Georgia. 
(3)  Governing body or governing authority. The words "governing body" or "governing authority" shall mean the mayor and council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(4)  Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
(5)  Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by title only, i.e., "mayor," "city council," "city clerk," they shall be deemed to refer to officials of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(6)  Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, and body politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
(7)  State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
(8)  Judge. The word "judge" shall mean judge of the Municipal Court of St. Marys, Georgia. 
ARTICLE 2. - THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Code reference- Mayor and council, § 2-36 et seq. 

CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2-101. - Creation; number; term of office; compensation. 
(a)  There shall be a mayor and council composed of the mayor and six councilmembers elected as provided in Article 3 of this Charter for four-year terms of office, except as provided in Article 3. Each councilmember shall hold a designated council post, the posts to be numbered one through six. All terms of office shall begin on the first Thursday after January 1 of the year following election to such office. 
(b)  The mayor shall be compensated in the amount of $950.00 per month, and council members shall be compensated in the amount of $750.00 per month. No additional compensation shall be paid for lost time from work. 
(c)  In addition, the mayor and each member of the council shall be entitled to receive their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of the duties of their office. 
(d)  The mayor and council are hereby authorized to fix the salary, compensation, and expenses of the mayor and each member of the council in accordance with the provisions of an Act known as "The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965" (Ga. Laws 1965, p. 298), as now or hereafter amended. 
(1982 Ga. Laws, page 5333; 1996 Ga. Laws, page 4100; Ord. of 7-12-99, § 1; Ord. of 8-11-08, § 1) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance enacted on Aug. 11, 2008, amended subsection (b), compensation of mayor and councilmembers. Effective on Jan. 1, 2010. 
Editor's note- With regard to determining the current status of provisions in this Charter relating to the length of municipal office terms, see O.C.G.A. § 21-3-63. 
Section 2-102. - Qualifications of office. 
(a)  To be eligible for election as mayor or as councilmember, a person at the time of qualification must: 
(1)  Have attained the age of 21 years; 
(2)  Have resided in the city for not less than one year immediately preceding the date of qualification for office and must continue in such residence during the term of office; 
(3)  Be a qualified elector of the city; and 
(4)  Meet any other requirements as may be established by general state law. 
(b)  The office of any elected official shall be declared vacant upon such elected official's qualifying in a general primary, general election, special primary, or special election for another state, Camden County, or municipal elective office or qualifying for the United States House of Representatives or Senate if the term of the office for which such official is qualifying begins more than 30 days prior to the expiration of such official's present term of office. The vacancy created in such office shall be filled as provided in section 3-202. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, page 4763; 1996 Ga. Laws, page 4100) 
Section 2-103. - Conflict of interest; interest in contracts. 
    It shall be unlawful for the mayor or any member of the council to be interested, either directly or indirectly, in any contract with the city on any public work or improvement or in furnishing supplies of any kind for the use of the city or in any transaction in any way involving the expenditure of the money of the city, except as may be approved in advance by the consent of a majority of the other members of the mayor and council. Violation of this section shall render any such contract or transaction void unless subsequently approved by a majority of the mayor and council at a regular or special meeting. 
Section 2-104. - Duties of council members. 
    All council members shall attend faithfully to their duties which shall include, but not be limited to, faithful, consistent and regular attendance at all duly scheduled or called meetings. Willful failure to attend for reasons other than temporary illness, disability or scheduling conflicts may result in a resolution invoking the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-5-1. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 2) 
CHAPTER 2. - POWERS OF THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL 

Section 2-201. - Legislative powers. 
    The municipal government of the city and all powers of the city shall be vested in the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall be the legislative body of the city. 
Section 2-202. - Execution of powers. 
    The mayor and council shall have full power and authority to provide for the execution of all powers, functions, rights, privileges, duties, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees granted by this Charter or by state law. 
Section 2-203. - Independent audits. 
    The mayor and council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for more frequent or continuing audits as it deems necessary. Audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants who have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the fiscal affairs of the city government or any of its officers. The mayor and council may also provide for special independent audits of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the city. 
Section 2-204. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The mayor and council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency of the city or any joint or independent commission, board, or authority of the city. For this purpose, the mayor and council may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence in the same manner as the Superior Court of Camden County. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued in the exercise of this power by the mayor and council may be held in contempt by a majority vote of all members of the mayor and council and punished as provided for contempt of municipal court. Appeal to the Superior Court of Camden County from a council contempt conviction shall be allowed as for any conviction in the municipal court. 
CHAPTER 3. - MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE 

Section 2-301. - Mayor; powers and duties. 
(a)  The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the city and shall have general supervision over its affairs. 
(b)  The mayor shall: 
(1)  See that the laws and ordinances of the city are faithfully carried out and executed within the city; 
(2)  Examine, audit, and approve all accounts against the city before payment; 
(3)  Exercise the power of veto as provided in Section 2-405 of Chapter 4 of this article; 
(4)  Keep the councilmembers advised from time to time of the general condition of the city; 
(5)  Recommend such measures as the mayor may deem necessary or expedient for the welfare of the city; 
(6)  Preside over the meetings of the council and call the council together at any time when deemed necessary by him; 
(7)  Vote on all matters when there is an equal division of the councilmembers; and 
(8)  Perform such other duties as required by the council. 
Section 2-302. - Mayor pro tempore; election; term; duties. 
    At the first regular meeting of each year, the mayor and council shall choose one of the councilmembers to serve as mayor pro tempore and, in the absence or disqualification of the mayor, he shall perform all the acts and duties vested in the office of mayor by law. In the event of a vacancy in the office of the mayor by reason of death, resignation, or other cause, the mayor pro tempore shall serve as mayor until a successor to the office of mayor is selected and qualified. 
CHAPTER 4. - ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURE 

Section 2-401. - Annual organizational meeting. 
(a)  The first regular meeting in January of each year shall be the annual organizational meeting of the mayor and council. 
(b)  At this meeting, any newly elected or reelected members of the mayor and council shall each qualify to take office by taking the following oath of office: 
    "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will truly perform to the best of my abilities the duties of (mayor or councilmember, as the case may be) by adopting and enforcing such measures as in my judgment shall be best calculated to promote the general welfare of the inhabitants of the City of St. Marys and the common interest thereof." 
(c)  At the annual organizational meeting, the mayor and council shall make any appointments and selections as may be required by this Charter or by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 3) 
Section 2-402. - Rules; quorum; voting; journal of minutes. 
(a)  The mayor, or mayor pro tempore, and council, by a motion approved by a majority vote of all members, may adopt any rules of procedure and order of business or amendments thereto that are consistent with this Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(b)  The mayor and four of the members of council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, unless a vacancy exists on the council, in which case the mayor and three members of council shall suffice to constitute a quorum. A number less than a majority may adjourn from time to time. All actions of the mayor and council shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the council members present, except that disqualification or abstention shall not operate to frustrate, prevent or impede the transaction of business. 
(c)  A journal of minutes shall be maintained, and every official action of the mayor and council shall be recorded therein. The journal shall be a public record. All actions shall require the recording of yeas and nays of each member in the journal for any votes taken by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 4) 
Section 2-403. - Meetings; regular and special. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall fix the date and time of regular meetings of the mayor and council by ordinance and there shall be at least one regular meeting each month. 
(b)  Special meetings of the mayor and council may be held on call of the mayor or a majority of all councilmembers other than the mayor. Notice of a special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, or otherwise notified as fully as is reasonably possible in advance of the meeting. This notice to councilmembers shall not be required if all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. This notice of a special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in the councilmember's presence or with his or her prior knowledge. Except by majority vote of the councilmembers attending the special meeting, only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting, and no action at a special meeting shall be valid unless the requirements of this section are met. 
(c)  All meetings of the mayor and council shall be public to the extent required by general state law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made fully as is reasonably possible prior to the meetings. 
Code reference- Meetings, § 2-36 et seq. 
Section 2-404. - Introduction, consideration, and enactment of legislation. 
(a)  Every official act of the mayor and council which is to become law shall be by ordinance and shall begin with the words: "Be it, and it is, hereby ordained by the Mayor and Council of the City of St. Marys." All other acts of the mayor and council shall be by resolution or shall take such other form as prescribed by rules of the mayor and council. 
(b)  The manner and procedure for introduction of ordinances shall be determined by rules of the mayor and council. Passage of ordinances shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the council members present. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 5) 
Code reference- Enactment of ordinances, § 2-49. 
Section 2-405. - Revision of legislation; veto. 
    The mayor shall have the revision of all ordinances, motions, orders, or resolutions passed by the council. The mayor shall have four days after the same shall have been passed by the council in which to file in writing with the city clerk the veto of such ordinances, motions, orders, or resolutions to which the mayor shall dissent; but the council within 30 days thereafter shall have the power to pass such ordinances, motions, orders, or resolutions, notwithstanding such veto, by an affirmative vote of four of the six members of the council, at a meeting of such body, to be taken by yeas and nays and entered upon the minutes. 
Section 2-406. - Code of technical regulations. 
(a)  The mayor and council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing the adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally. 
(b)  Any requirements for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance. 
(c)  A copy of each adopting code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the city clerk. 
(d)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the city clerk for distribution or for purchase by the public at a reasonable price. 
Code reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
ARTICLE 3. - ELECTION AND REMOVAL 
CHAPTER 1. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- With regard to determining the current status of provisions in this Charter relating to municipal elections, reference should be made to the Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-51. 

Section 3-101. - Applicability of general laws. 
    All municipal, general, or special elections and primaries shall be held and conducted in accordance with the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Title 34A of the Code of Georgia (Ga. Laws 1968, p. 885), as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 3-102. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
(a)  For the purpose of electing councilmembers, the City of St. Marys shall consist of one election district with six numbered posts. Each person seeking election as a councilmember shall designate the post for which he or she seeks election. The candidate receiving a simple majority of the votes cast for the designated city council post shall be elected. All councilmembers shall be elected for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(b)  The mayor shall be elected from the city at large by a simple majority of the votes cast to fill such office for a term of four years and until his or her successor is elected and qualified. 
(c)  All municipal elections shall be nonpartisan, and the names of candidates shall be listed alphabetically upon the ballot without party label. 
(d)  The terms of all councilmembers elected to city council posts in 2011 shall be for three years. The next succeeding election to fill those posts shall be held in 2014, and the terms of councilmembers elected to those posts in that election and subsequent elections shall be for four years. The terms of all councilmembers elected to city council posts in 2013 shall be for three years. The next succeeding election to fill those posts shall be held in 2016, and the terms of councilmembers elected to those posts in that election and subsequent elections shall be for four years. 
(e)  The term of the mayor who shall be elected in 2013 shall be for three years. The next succeeding election for mayor shall be held in 2016, and the term for the person elected mayor in that election and subsequent elections shall be for four years. 
(f)  There shall be a municipal general election biennially in even-numbered years on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November. Candidates shall qualify in accordance with paragraph (3) of subsection (c) of Code Section 21-2-132 of the O.C.G.A. 
(1996 Ga. Laws, p. 4100; Ord. of 2-14-05, §§ 6-10; 2005 Ga. Laws, p. 4277/Res. No. 2010-R011, §§ 1, 2, 8-23-10; 2005 Ga. Laws, p. 4277/Res. No. 2010-R012, § 1, 8-23-10; Act 465 , § 1, 4-27-16) 
Code reference- Polling place, § 2-86. 
CHAPTER 2. - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE 

Section 3-201. - Occurrence of vacancies. 
    A vacancy in the office of mayor or council member occurs when a duly elected person fails to qualify or when a person who has been duly elected and qualified either dies, resigns, becomes disabled, changes his legal residence to a location outside the boundaries of the city, abandons his office, or is removed from office. The provisions of O.C.G.A. § 45-5-1 shall govern the procedures to be employed in declaring the office vacant. Vacancies shall be filled as provided in section 3-202 of this Charter. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 11) 
Section 3-202. - Filling vacancies. 
    When a vacancy occurs in the office of the mayor or any council member as a result of death, removal, disqualification, resignation, abandonment, or other cause, and the unexpired term of office exceeds six months in duration, it shall be the duty of the remaining members of the offices of mayor and council member to call a special election, pursuant to the Georgia Municipal Election Code, to elect a successor and fill the vacancy. The election shall be held as provided by law, and the cost of the election shall be defrayed by the governing authority. In the event more than one vacancy exists, the remaining members of the offices of mayor and council member shall have the power to fill one such vacancy on a temporary interim basis, and pending such special election, in order that a quorum for the transaction of business may be obtained. 
(1989 Ga. Laws, page 4646; Ord. of 2-14-05, § 12) 
Section 3-203. - Impeachment. 
    The mayor and council shall have the sole right to try all impeachments. When sitting for the purpose they shall be under oath of affirmation. When the mayor is tried the judge of the municipal court of St. Marys or any judge of superior court in this state shall preside, and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the full council, and judgment shall not extend further than removal from and disqualification to hold any office of honor, trust, or profit in the City of St. Marys; but any party so convicted shall be liable to indictment and trial and upon conviction shall be punished as prescribed by law. 
ARTICLE 4. - ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 4-101. - City offices, departments, and agencies. 
    Except as provided by this Charter, the offices, departments, and agencies of the city shall be created and established by ordinance, and the offices and departments shall be responsible for the performance of the functions and services enumerated therein. The operations and responsibilities of city departments and agencies may be distributed among any divisions or bureaus which shall consist of any officers and employees as may be provided by ordinance or administrative regulations consistent therewith. 
Section 4-102. - Administrative organization. 
    The mayor and council may by ordinance organize, combine, consolidate, or discontinue any offices, departments, agencies, or divisions of the city government as it may from time to time deem desirable and consistent with this Charter. 
Code reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Section 4-103. - Boards and commissions. 
(a)  The mayor and council may by ordinance, unless otherwise provided by law, create boards and commissions which may perform the duties prescribed including, but not limited to, making studies, conducting research and investigations, holding hearings, and preparing recommendations as to needed ordinances and resolutions and for any other purposes authorized. 
(b)  The mayor and council may provide by ordinance, unless otherwise provided by law, for the manner of appointment, makeup, and composition of boards and commissions, their periods of existence, and for the compensation of their members and employees, in whole or in part. The mayor and council may provide by ordinance for reimbursement of the actual and necessary expenses incurred by the members of boards and commissions in the performance of their official duties. The mayor and council shall have the authority to annually appropriate money derived from taxation, contributions, or otherwise for and to boards and commissions to provide for their operation, either in whole or in part. 
(c)  Any vacancy in the office of any member of a board or commission shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment. 
(d)  Any member of a board or commission may be removed from office for cause by a majority vote of all of the councilmembers. 
(e)  Each board and commission may establish bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances, or applicable state law as it deems appropriate and necessary for its internal organization, election of officers, and the conduct of its affairs, copies of which shall be filed with the city clerk and approved by the mayor and council prior to their being effective. 
Code reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-111 et seq. 
Related laws reference- Airport authority, art. I. 
CHAPTER 2. - CITY OFFICERS 

Section 4-201. - City clerk; appointment; duties; compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall appoint a city clerk, and such assistant clerk or clerks as they deem appropriate, who shall hold office for an indefinite term or until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The city clerk shall be clerk of the mayor and council, shall attend all meetings of the mayor and council and keep the minutes, books, and files of each, shall attest to the mayor's signature on all official documents, shall sign and issue all executions and other writs and processes for the collection of taxes due the city, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(c)  The compensation of the city clerk shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
(d)  The city clerk shall be included in any system of personnel administration based upon merit principles which may be adopted pursuant to Chapter 3 of this article. 
(e)  On a day-to-day basis, the city clerk shall be subject to direction, supervision, and oversight of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 13) 
Section 4-202. - Finance director; appointment; duties; compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall appoint a finance director who shall hold office for an indefinite term, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The finance director shall oversee the collection of all fines, taxes, and other money due the city, shall attend to the issuance of all licenses and permits, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(c)  The compensation of the finance director shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
(d)  The finance director shall be included in any system of personnel administration based upon merit principles which may be adopted pursuant to Chapter 3 to this article. 
(e)  On a day-to-day basis, the finance director shall be subject to the direction, supervision, and oversight of the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, §§ 14, 15) 
Section 4-203. - City attorney; appointment; qualifications; duties; compensation. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall annually appoint a city attorney who shall hold office for one year, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. 
(b)  The city attorney shall be an active member of the State Bar of Georgia in good standing. 
(c)  The city attorney shall be legal counsel to the city and shall perform any other duties as may be provided by ordinance. 
(d)  The compensation of the city attorney shall be fixed by the mayor and council. 
Code reference- City attorney tasking, § 2-58. 
Section 4-204. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; duties; compensation. 
(a)  A city manager shall be appointed by a majority vote of all councilmembers for a term set by contract with the city manager. 
(b)  The city manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive, administrative, and managerial qualifications with special reference to actual experience in or knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office hereinafter set forth. At the time of appointment, the city manager need not be a resident of the city or the state but during the tenure of office shall reside within the geographical limits of the 29th District, G.M., Camden County, Georgia. 
(c)  No councilmember shall receive this appointment during the term for which the member was elected nor within one year after the expiration of that term. 
(d)  The mayor and council may remove the city manager by such procedure as may be set out in the city manager's contract with the city. 
(e)  (Repealed). 
(f)  The city manager shall: 
(1)  Be the chief administrative officer of the city; 
(2)  Be responsible to the mayor and council for the proper administration of all affairs of the city; 
(3)  Appoint and, when necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all officers and employees of the city except as otherwise provided by state law, this Charter, or personnel ordinances of the city; 
(4)  Be authorized to delegate the appointment and removal powers in paragraph (3) above to each department head of the city for that department; 
(5)  Prepare and submit an operating and capital improvements budget annually to the mayor and council; 
(6)  Prepare and submit to the mayor and council, at the end of each fiscal year, a report on the administrative and financial activities of the city for the preceding year; 
(7)  Make any other reports on the operation of any aspect of the city operation as the mayor and council may request by motion; and 
(8)  Perform any other duties and exercise any other powers as directed by ordinance consistent with this Charter and state law. 
(g)  The city manager shall appoint and remove all department heads with the consent of the mayor and council adopted by motion and may personally serve as department head of any and all departments. 
(h)  The city manager shall enter into contracts only with the consent of the mayor and council adopted by motion or as authorized by ordinance. 
(Ord. of 5-2-11(1)) 
CHAPTER 3. - PERSONNEL 

Section 4-301. - Merit system. 
(a)  The mayor and council may establish by ordinance a system of personnel administration based upon merit principles. The system shall be divided into a classified and an unclassified service which shall comprise such positions as provided by ordinance. 
(b)  The mayor and council may adopt by ordinance rules and regulations to govern the classification of positions, appointment, promotion, transfer, layoff, removal and discipline of employees, employee qualifications, terms and conditions of employment, pay, retirement and benefits, and other measures that promote the hiring and retaining of capable, diligent, honest, career employees. 
Code reference- Personnel, ch. 74. 
ARTICLE 5. - FINANCE AND FISCAL 
CHAPTER 1. - TAXATION AND OTHER REVENUE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Code reference- Taxation, ch. 90. 
Related laws reference- Homestead exemption, art. II; stabilized tax program, art. III. 

Section 5-101. - Ad valorem tax; grant of authority. 
    For the purpose of raising revenue for the support and maintenance of the city government and for other corporate purposes, the mayor and council shall be authorized to access, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to taxation for state and county purposes under the laws of this state and to provide for the manner and method in which such taxes shall be collected. 
Section 5-102. - Sanitary tax. 
    The mayor and council shall have power and authority to levy and collect a sanitary tax against all real estate owned, held, and possessed in the City of St. Marys. Said sanitary tax shall be fixed or assessed by the mayor and council by resolution or ordinance and may be collected either monthly, quarterly, semiannually, or annually, in the discretion of the mayor and council; and when said sanitary tax is levied it shall be a lien on the property against which it is assessed and shall be collected by the issuance of executions against said property or the owners thereof, or both. 
Section 5-103. - Occupation and business taxes. 
    The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to levy and collect any occupation and business taxes that are not prohibited by the Constitution and general law of Georgia. These taxes may be levied on any person, firm, partnership, company, or corporation which transacts business in the city or practices or offers to practice any trade, business, calling, avocation, or profession within the corporate limits of the city. For such purpose, these taxes may be levied and imposed on a fixed rate or gross receipts basis or any combination thereof. The mayor and council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of these taxes in any manner as is reasonable. The mayor and council shall have the authority to provide by ordinance for the return or registration for taxation of any trade, business, calling, avocation, or profession subject to a tax. Payment of these taxes may be compelled as provided in Section 5-110 of this chapter. 
Section 5-104. - Business licenses; permits; fees. 
    The mayor and council by ordinance shall have the authority to have any individual, person, firm, partnership, company, or corporation which transacts business in the city or practices or offers to practice any trade, business, calling, avocation, or profession therein to obtain a license or permit for these activities from the city and to pay a reasonable fee for the license or permit for the regulation of any activity not prohibited by general law. These fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in Section 5-110. The mayor and council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitates, including but not limited to denial or revocation for any violation of federal or state law or city ordinances. 
Code reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
Section 5-105. - Excise taxes; wholesale and retail dealers. 
    The mayor and council shall have the authority to impose, assess, levy, and collect an excise tax upon the sale, transfer, or dispensing of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages by wholesale or retail dealers within the city. 
Code reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10. 
Section 5-106. - Insurance premiums taxes and licenses. 
    The mayor and council shall have the power and authority to impose and collect license fees and taxes on life insurance companies in the manner provided by an Act of the General Assembly of Georgia, approved February 20, 1964 (Ga. Laws 1964, p. 122), as now or hereafter amended, and on fire and casualty insurance companies in the manner provided by an Act of the General Assembly, approved April 12, 1968 (1968 Ga. Laws, page 3706), as now or hereafter amended. 
Section 5-107. - Service charges. 
    The mayor and council by ordinance shall have the authority to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for water, sewer, sanitary, and health services, or any other services rendered within and without the corporate limits of the city. If unpaid, these charges or fees shall be collected as provided in Section 5-110. 
Section 5-108. - Special assessments. 
    The mayor and council by ordinance shall have the authority to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, drainage structures, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under any terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, these charges shall be collected as provided in Section 5-110. 
Code reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
Section 5-109. - Interpretation; other taxes. 
    The mayor and council shall be empowered to levy any other tax now or hereafter authorized by state law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this chapter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 5-110. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The mayor and council by ordinance may provide for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city pursuant to authority granted by this Charter or by the Constitution and general laws of Georgia or by any other authority not precluded by the Constitution and general laws of Georgia. This authority shall include providing for the dates when the taxes, fees, or other revenues are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fas.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes, fees, and other revenues personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes, fees, or other revenues imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes, fees, or other revenues; allowing exceptions for hardship; providing for the assignment or transfer of executions and collection of transferred executions; providing for the billing and collecting of principal, interest, and costs of delinquent executions as an addition to and a part of the annual ad valorem tax bill. 
Section 5-111. - Fee schedule. 
a.  General: The following fees are hereby set by Council for each fee noted. This schedule will be updated from time to time as directed by Council. 
b.  All fees noted herein shall supersede all fees noted elsewhere in these ordinances. Where an ordinance calls for a fee that is not listed herein, that fee shall be used for the service noted. 
c.  Fees assessed by the St. Marys Police Department, and/or the Municipal Court are not included in this fee ordinance and are set by State law and not City Council. 
1.  Cemetery fee Schedule: The following are the costs as per the date of this Ordinance. Council reserves the right to alter the fees as noted by Ordinance revision at any time: 
FEE a) Full size plot in the New Section (Residency at time of purchase - Admin. Fee must be paid at same Time) $1,500.00 City 
$2,000.00 County 
$3,000.00 Outside County b) Administrative Fee $50.00 c) Half size plot for cremation urns (Residency at time of purchase - Admin. Fee must be paid at same Time) $750.00 City 
$1,000.00 County 
$1,500.00 Outside County d) "Baby Land" plots (Admin. Fee must be paid at same Time) $600.00 e) Niches Fee to be determined when available f) Scattering Fee to be determined when available g) Plot layout and location or Monument marking $50.00 per session Mon-Fri 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. or $75.00 per hour evenings, weekends, Holidays measured in 15 minute increments h) Other services not listed $20.00 per hour for each hour expended Mon-Fri 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. or $75.00 per hour evenings, weekends, Holidays measured in 15 minute increments but required  
2.  Reserved: Occupation Tax Fees: 
3.  Reserved: Business license Fees: 
4.  Reserved: Building Permit Fees: 
5.  Reserved: Zoning Permit Fees: 
6.  Reserved: Alcohol License Fees: 
7.  Reserved: Electronic Sweepstakes License Fees: 
8.  Reserved: Aid-to-Construction Fees: 
9.  Reserved: Capital Recovery Fees: 
10.  Reserved: Open Records Fees: 
11.  Reserved: Notary Public Fees: 
12.  Reserved: Insurer's License Fees: 
13.  Reserved: Hotel/Motel Fees: 
14.  Reserved: FOG Ordinance Fees: 
15.  Reserved: Franchise Fees: 
16.  Reserved: Adult Entertainment Fees: 
17.  Reserved: Airport Usage Fees: 
18.  Reserved: Solid Waste Fees: 
19.  Reserved: Taxi and Limousine Fee: 
20.  Reserved: Tree Health Determination Fee: 
21.  Reserved: Sign Permit Fees: 
22.  Reserved: Private Disposal Fees: 
23.  Reserved: Nuisance Abatement Fees: 
24.  Reserved: Dilapidated Structures Fees: 
25.  Reserved: Low Vehicle Registration Fees: 
(Amend. of 2-6-12) 
CHAPTER 2. - BORROWING AND INDEBTEDNESS 

Section 5-201. - General obligation bonds. 
    The mayor and council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or by the Constitution and general laws of the state. This bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with state laws governing bond issuances by municipalities in effect at the time the issue is undertaken. 
Section 5-202. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the mayor and council as now or hereafter authorized by state law. 
Section 5-203. - Short-term notes. 
    The mayor and council may issue short-term notes as now or hereafter authorized by state law. 
Section 5-204. - Improvement bonds. 
(a)  In order to facilitate the financing of any municipal improvements authorized by law, the mayor and council shall have authority to issue bonds of the city in the aggregate amount of assessment for the improvement then unpaid, which bond or bonds and the interest thereon shall in no event become a liability of the city or of the mayor and council issuing them. 
(b)  These bonds shall mature at a date and bear an interest rate as the council may determine by ordinance but in no event shall the rate of interest exceed that which the assessments are to bear. 
(c)  These bonds shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and shall have the impression of the corporate seal of the city thereon and shall be payable at a place designated by ordinance. 
(d)  These bonds shall be designated as "improvement bonds" and shall, on the face thereof, recite the nature and location of the improvement for which they have been issued and shall recite that they are payable solely from assessments which have been levied upon the lots and tracts of land abutting upon or being the situs of the improvement made. 
(e)  These bonds shall be sold at not less than par and the proceeds thereof applied to the payment of the costs and expense of the improvement for which the bonds are issued or the bonds, in the amount that shall be necessary for that purpose, may be turned over and delivered to the contractor, in respect to the improvement at par value, in payment of the amount due on the contract and the portion thereof which shall be necessary to pay other expenses, incident to and incurred in providing for the improvements, shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as the mayor and council by ordinance shall direct. 
CHAPTER 3. - FISCAL CONTROL 

Section 5-301. - Fiscal year; municipal budget preparation and submission. 
    The mayor and council shall establish a fiscal year for the city and all its agencies by ordinance unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. 
Section 5-302. - Municipal appropriations; ordinance required. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall annually appropriate by ordinance the funds necessary to operate all the various agencies and departments and to meet the expenses of the city for the next fiscal year as provided in the municipal budget. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall not appropriate funds for any given fiscal year which, in aggregate, exceed a sum equal to the amount of unappropriated surplus expected to have accrued in the city treasury at the beginning of the fiscal year together with an amount not greater than the total municipal receipts from existing revenue sources anticipated to be collected in the fiscal year less refunds as estimated in the budget report and amendments thereto. 
(c)  All appropriated funds, except for the mandatory appropriations required by law and those required to meet contractual obligations or the continued appropriation and authorization of state or federal grants, remaining unexpended and not contractually obligated at the expiration of the municipal appropriations ordinance, shall lapse. 
Section 5-303. - Supplementary appropriations. 
(a)  In addition to the appropriations made by the municipal appropriations ordinance and amendments thereto, the mayor and council may make additional appropriations which shall be known as supplementary appropriations ordinances, provided no supplementary appropriations shall be made unless there is an unappropriated surplus in the city treasury or the revenue necessary to pay the appropriation has been collected into the general fund of the city treasury. 
(b)  In no event shall a supplementary appropriations ordinance continue in force and effect beyond the expiration of the municipal appropriations ordinance in effect when the supplementary appropriations ordinance was adopted and approved. 
Section 5-304. - Deficits. 
    If at any time during the year expenditures exceed revenues and a deficit is created, it shall be the duty of the mayor and council, before appropriating any other sum for any other purpose, to appropriate a sufficient sum to immediately discharge any such deficit which has occurred. 
CHAPTER 4. - PURCHASING, CONTRACTING, AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 

Section 5-401. - Contracting procedures. 
    The mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures to be followed in the making of contracts which shall bind the city. All contracts and all ordinances which shall make or authorize contracts shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. Standardized contracts prepared by city attorney do not require individual review. Standard form contracts previously prepared or approved by city attorney as such need not be reviewed. The mayor, with council approval, shall sign and authorize all contracts, except as provided in subsection (h) of Section 4-204 of this Charter. The city clerk shall attest all contracts. The original of all contracts shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(1981 Ga. Laws, p. 4763/Amend. of 6-4-12) 
Section 5-402. - Purchasing procedures. 
    The mayor and council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures for all purchases of real and personal property by the city. Competitive bidding shall be required for purchases and contracts and awards shall be made to the lowest or best bidder, except as where otherwise provided for by ordinance. Prior to the making of purchases and contracts, the availability of adequate funds shall be certified as provided by ordinance. 
    The City of St. Marys encourages the use of local suppliers of goods, services and construction products whenever possible. The City of St. Marys also vigorously supports the advantages of an open competitive market place. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to mean that the City Manager or Purchasing Agent are restricted in any way from seeking informal or formal bids or proposals from outside the City of St. Marys market area. 
    Local Vendor means a bidder or offeror which operates and maintains a brick and mortar business, i.e., a physical business address, within the city limits of the City of St. Marys, has a current business license, has paid in full all real and personal taxes owed the City, is considered a vendor in good standing with the City and can obtain an active vendor status. 
    A local vendor may receive an opportunity to match for purchases, bids, proposal or contracts over $1,000.00 and less than $50,000.00. The local vendor may be given an opportunity to match the lowest price proposal, if the quotation or bid of the local vendor is within 5% of the lowest price proposal by a non-local vendor. In the event a local vendor matches the lowest price proposal, including all other terms, quality, services and conditions, then the local vendor shall be awarded the contract. 
    In the event the price proposal of more than one local vendor is within 5% of the lowest overall price proposal of a non-local vendor, the local vendor with the lowest proposal will be given the first opportunity to match the lowest overall price proposal. If this local vendor declines to match the price proposal, then the local vendor with the next lowest bid within 5% will be given the opportunity to match the lowest proposal. This process will continue with all local vendors having proposal within 5% of the lowest overall bid by a non-local vendor. 
    Policy to be stated. This policy shall be so stated in all applicable solicitations. 
    Exemptions. This provision does not apply to public works construction projects or road projects pursuant to the laws of the State of Georgia (O.C.G.A § 36-91 or § 32-4). 
(Amend. of 8-6-12) 
Code reference- Purchasing, § 2-286 et seq. 
ARTICLE 6. - MUNICIPAL COURT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Code reference- Courts, ch. 38. 

Section 6-101. - Municipal court created. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of St. Marys. 
Section 6-102. - Presiding officer; qualifications; compensation; oath. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or standby associate judge as shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge of the municipal court unless such person shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All chief judges shall be appointed by the city council for terms of one year. The first such one-year judgeship commencing on the date of the next appointment of the chief judge following the effective date of this provision. 
(c)  Compensation for the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Before entering on the duties of his office, each judge shall take an oath given by the mayor that such judge will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of the office to the best of such judge's ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(e)  In the event of the absence or disability of the judge of the municipal court for any cause or during a vacancy in the office, such standby associate judge as shall be appointed by the mayor and council shall exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of the judge until the return of the judge or the removal of disability or until the vacancy in office has been regularly filled. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 16; Ord. No. 2018-8-6-001 , 8-6-18) 
Section 6-103. - Court sessions; jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance, but the court shall convene at least once a month. All sessions of the municipal court shall take place in the council chambers at city hall. 
(b)  Jurisdiction and powers shall be as follows: 
(1)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of all city ordinances. 
(2)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $100.00 or ten days in jail, or both. 
(3)  The city council may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction as permitted by state law and not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than 365 days, or both. 
Editor's note- O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B) restricts municipal corporations from extending home rule power over any action providing for confinement in excess of six months. 
(4)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(5)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall have made bail for such person's appearance and that person shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, such person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and defendant's sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge and declared forfeited to the city or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(6)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that a state law has been violated. 
(7)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(8)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by an officer as authorized by this Charter or by general state law. 
(9)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the jurisdictions and powers throughout the entire area of this city granted by general state laws to mayors and recorder's and police courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(Ord. of 11-15-83, § 1; Ord. of 2-14-05, § 17) 
Code references- General penalty, § 1-12; courts, ch. 38. 
Section 6-104. - Appeals; procedure; rules and regulations. 
(a)  The right of appeal and any bond as may be required to secure the costs on appeal to the Superior Court of Camden County from the municipal court shall lie in the same manner and under the same procedure as generally prescribed for appeals and appeal bonds from the probate court, provided that any person who fails to file an appeal within ten days of the date of conviction shall be deemed to have waived the right. An appeal to the superior court shall be a de novo proceeding. 
(b)  With the approval of the mayor and council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be available for public inspection. All defendants shall have such procedural and substantive rights as are now or hereafter granted by the Georgia and United States Constitutions to defendants in similar courts. 
ARTICLE 7. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7-101. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 18 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 14, 2005, repealed former § 7-101 of the Charter in its entirety. Former § 7-101 pertained to terms of present officers and derived without amendment from the original Charter. 
Section 7-102. - Ordinances and regulations. 
    Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city and its agencies now lawfully in effect not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall remain effective until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
Section 7-103. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 18 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 14, 2005, repealed former § 7-103 of the Charter in its entirety. Former § 7-103 pertained to contracts and obligations and proceedings and derived without amendment from the original Charter. 
Section 7-104. - City officers and employees. 
    All elected or appointed officers and employees of the city immediately prior to the adoption of revisions shall continue in their positions until the end of their terms of office or if no term is provided, then as otherwise provided by this charter or ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-14-05, § 19) 
Section 7-105. - Severability. 
    If any provisions of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this Charter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Charter are declared to be severable. 
Section 7-106. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 18 of an ordinance adopted Feb. 14, 2005, repealed former § 7-106 of the Charter in its entirety. Former § 7-106 pertained to the repeal of the Act creating the 1910 Charter and derived without amendment from the original Charter. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS, ORDINANCES 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws and Ordinances cited in the Charter. 
Georgia Laws 
Year Page  Section 
this Charter 1910 1086 2-101 1981 4763 2-102 5-401 1982 5333 2-101 1989 4646 3-202 1996 4100 2-101(a), 2-102(a)(2), 3-102 2005 4277 3-102(a), (b)       Added 3-102(d), (e)  
Date Section  Section 
this Charter 11-15-83 1 6-103  7-12-99 1 2-101  2-14-05 1 1-103(c)(5) 2 2-104 3 2-401(a) 4 2-402(b) 5 2-404(b) 6-10 3-102 11, 12 3-201, 3-202 13 4-201(e) 14, 15 4-202(b), (e) 16 6-102(b) 17 6-103(b)(3) 18       Rpld 7-101, 7-103, 7-106 19 7-104  8-11-08 1 2-101(b)  5- 2-11 4-204  2- 6-12       Added 5-111  8- 6-12 5-402  4-27-16 1 3-102  8- 6-18 6-102(b)  
PART II - RELATED LAWS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Part II contains local constitutional amendments and state laws of local application. Amendments to the original acts are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - AIRPORT AUTHORITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the 1964 act of the general assembly, as amended, which created the St. Marys Airport Authority. It may be cited as 1964 Ga. Laws, page 2438. 
Charter reference- Boards and commissions, § 4-103. 
Code reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-111 et seq. 
State Law reference- Acquisition, construction and maintenance of airports by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-20 et seq.; powers of counties and municipalities as to airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-25; authorization to enforce police regulations in airports, O.C.G.A. § 6-3-27. 

Section 1. - Short title. 
    This act may be cited as the "St. Marys Airport Authority Act." 
Section 2. - St. Marys Airport Authority. 
    There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the St. Marys Airport Authority, which shall be deemed to be a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation by that name, style and title and said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, implead and be impleaded, complain and defend in all courts of law and equity, except that the authority of the trustee acting under the trust indenture herein provided for shall in no event be liable for any torts committed by any of the officers, agents and employees of the authority. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
Editor's note- Because of an apparent scrivener's error in the act creating the airport authority, it was denominated as the Saint Marys Airport Authority. It is referred to throughout the text of this article as the St. Marys Airport Authority for consistency with section 1-101 of the city's Charter. 
Section 3. - Membership. 
    The St. Marys Airport Authority shall be composed of five members who shall be appointed by, shall serve at the pleasure of, and may be removed with cause by the mayor and city council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. Within 30 days after the approval of this act, it shall be the duty of the mayor and city council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia, to appoint by ordinance the membership of the authority, three of whom shall be appointed for a term of four years, ending December 31, 1967, and two of whom shall be appointed for a term of two years, ending December 31, 1965. All subsequent appointments shall be for a term of four years, and until their successors shall have been duly appointed and qualified. No person shall be appointed to membership on the Authority unless he or she is a free-holder in Camden County and has the same qualification as are required for a person to vote in Camden County, Georgia. 
(1979 Ga. Laws, page 3278) 
Section 4. - Meetings. 
    The authority shall hold their first regular meeting after the approval of this act, and the first regular meeting of each year thereafter shall be in January. The authority shall meet at such times as may be necessary to transact the business coming before it, but not less than quarterly. At its first meeting in January of each year thereafter, the authority shall elect one of its members as its chairman and another member as secretary-treasurer. Only one person shall hold the office of secretary-treasurer. These officers shall be elected for a term ending on December 31 of the year in which they were elected or until their successors are elected and qualified. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business coming before it. The members of the authority shall be compensated as determined from time to time by the mayor and council of said city, however, it is expressly provided that they shall be reimbursed for all actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
Section 5. - Vacancies in office. 
    In the event of a vacancy on the authority by reason of death, resignation or otherwise, the vacancy shall be filled by the appointing authority and the person so appointed shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
Section 6. - Definitions. 
    As used in this act the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
(a)  The word "authority" shall mean the "St. Marys Airport Authority" as created by the provisions of this act. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition, construction, equipping, maintenance, improving and operation of public airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft, and related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property, both real and personal, and the lease and sale of any part or all such facilities, including real and personal property so as to assure the efficient and proper development, maintenance and operation of such airports, and landing fields for the use of aircraft deemed by the authority to be necessary, convenient or desirable for the operation of such airports and landing fields and the industrial development of the area within the perimeter of the lands now held and owned by said city. 
(c)  The term "cost of the project" shall embrace the cost of construction, location of industry to be established within the industrial park area defined as being within said City of St. Marys Airport lands, the cost of all lands, properties, rights, easements and franchises acquired, the cost of all machinery, equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction, cost of engineering, architectural, fiscal and legal expenses, and of plans and specifications, and such other expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and improving the same, the placing of the same in operation. Any obligation or expense incurred for any of the foregoing purposes shall be regarded as a part of the cost of the project and may be paid or reimbursed as such out of any funds of the authority including the proceeds from any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act for any such project or projects. 
(d)  The terms "revenue bonds," "bonds," and "obligations" as used in this act, shall mean revenue bonds as defined and provided for in the Revenue Bond Law (1957 Ga. Laws, page 36 et seq.) amending the law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761, et seq., as amended) and such type of obligations may be issued by the authority as authorized under said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereto, and in addition shall also mean obligations of the authority the issuance of which are hereinafter authorized in this act. 
(e)  Any project shall be deemed "self-liquidating," if, in the judgment of the authority, the revenues and earnings to be derived by the authority therefrom and all properties used, leased and sold in connection therewith will be sufficient to pay the cost of operating, maintaining and repairing, improving and extending the project and to pay the principal and interest of the revenue bonds which may be issued to finance, in whole or in part, the cost of such project or projects. 
Section 7. - Powers. 
    The authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure; 
(b)  To acquire by purchase, lease or otherwise, and to hold, lease, dispose of real and personal property of every kind and character for its corporate purposes; 
(c)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, gift or otherwise, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or rights of easements therein or franchise necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same so long as its corporate existence shall continue and to lease or make contract with respect to the use of or disposition of the same in any manner it deems to the best advantage of the authority. Provided, however, in the event the mayor and council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia, sees fit to convey that certain tract of land now owned by it known as the "City of St. Marys Airport lands" which said city is hereby authorized to do, said city is hereby authorized to convey and said authority is hereby authorized to accept an instrument of conveyance of title upon any terms and conditions deemed proper and advisable in the premises by the mayor and council of said city including, at the discretion of the mayor and council, a reservation amounting to joint city-authority control thereby requiring the approval and joint execution by the city of all deeds, leases, mortgages, encumbrances and contracts in favor of third parties. 
(d)  To appoint, select and employ officers, agents and employees including engineering, architectural and construction experts, fiscal agents and attorneys, and fix their respective compensations; 
(e)  To make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient including contracts for construction of projects or leases of projects or contracts with respect to the use of projects which it causes to be erected or acquired and any and all persons, firms and corporations and any and all political subdivisions, departments, institutions, or agencies of the State are hereby authorized to enter into contracts, leases or agreements with the authority upon such terms and for such purposes as they may deem advisable; the said authority is further granted the authority to make contracts, leases and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient with the United States government or any agency or department thereof concerning the projects of the authority, subject to the rights and interests of the holder of any of the bonds or obligations authorized to be issued hereunder, and by the resolution or trust indenture of the authority authorizing the issuance of any of its bonds or obligations as provided in section 21 of this act; 
(f)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, add to, extend, improve, equip, operate and manage projects, as hereinabove defined, the cost of any such project to be paid in whole or in part from the proceeds of Revenue bonds or other funds of the authority or from such proceeds or other funds and any grant from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality thereof; 
(g)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the United States of America or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the United States of America or such agency or instrumentality or other source may impose; 
(h)  To accept loans and grants, or to accept loans or grants of money or materials or property of any kind from the State of Georgia or any agency or instrumentality or political subdivision thereof or from any other source, upon such terms and conditions as the State of Georgia or such agency or instrumentality or political subdivision or any other source, may impose; 
(i)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute evidences of such indebtedness and to secure the same and to issue negotiable revenue bonds payable solely from funds pledged for that purpose, and to provide for the payment of the same and for the rights of the holders thereof; 
(j)  To exercise any power usually possessed by private corporations performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the constitution and laws of this state, except the right of eminent domain; 
(k)  The authority and the trustee acting under the trust indenture, are specifically authorized subject from time to time to sell, lease, grant, exchange or otherwise dispose of any surplus property, both real or personal, or interest therein not required in the normal operation of and usable in the furtherance of the purpose for which the authority was created, except as such right and power may be limited as provided in section 2 and section 21 hereof; 
(l)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers especially given in this act. 
Section 8. - Revenue bonds. 
    The authority, or any authority or body which has or which may in the future succeed to the powers, duties and liabilities vested in the authority created hereby, shall have power and is hereby authorized at one time, or from time to time, to provide by resolution for the issuance of negotiable revenue bonds, for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost as herein defined of any one or more projects. The principal and interest of such revenue bonds shall be payable solely from the special fund herein provided for such payment. The bonds of each issue shall be dated, shall bear interest at such rate or rates as may be authorized by the authority from time to time, shall be payable semiannually, shall mature at such time or times not exceeding 30 years from their date or dates, shall be payable in such medium of payment as to both principal and interest as may be determined by the authority, and may be made redeemable before maturity at the option of the authority, at such price or prices and under such terms and conditions as may be fixed by the authority in the resolution providing for the issuance of the bonds. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be issued pursuant to and in conformity with the Revenue Bond Law (1937 Ga. Laws, page 36 et seq.) amending the Law formerly known as the Revenue Certificate Law of 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761, et seq., as amended), and all procedures pertaining to such issuance and the conditions thereof shall be the same as those contained in said Revenue Bond Law and any amendments thereof. 
Section 9. - Form, denominations, registration, place of payment. 
    The authority shall determine the form of the bonds and the place or places of payment of principal thereto, and shall fix the denomination or denominations of the bonds the place or places of payment of principal and interest thereof, which may be at any bank or trust company within or without the state. The bonds may be issued in coupon or registered form, or both, as the authority may determine and provision may be made for the registration of any coupon bond as to principal alone and also as to both the principal and interest. 
Section 10. - Signatures, seal. 
    In case any officer whose signature shall appear on any bonds or whose facsimile signature shall appear on any coupon shall cease to be such officer before the delivery of such bonds, such signature shall nevertheless be valid and sufficient for all purposes the same as if he had remained in office until such delivery. All such bonds shall be signed by the chairman of the authority and attested by the secretary-treasurer of the authority and the official seal of the authority shall be affixed thereto and any coupons attached thereto shall bear the facsimile signatures of the chairman and secretary-treasurer of the authority. Any bond may be signed, sealed and attested on behalf of the authority by such persons as at the actual time of the execution of such bonds shall be duly authorized or hold the proper office, although at the date of delivery and payment of such bonds such persons may not have been so authorized or shall not have held such office. 
Section 11. - Negotiability, exemption from taxation. 
    All revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall have and are hereby declared to have all the qualities and incidents of negotiable instruments under the negotiable instrument law of the state. Such bonds are declared to be issued for an essential public and governmental purpose and the said bonds, their transfer, and the income thereof shall be exempt from all taxation within the state. 
Section 12. - Sale, price. 
    The authority may sell such bonds in such manner and for such price as it may determine to be for the best interest of the authority, but no such sale shall be made at a price less than par as provided in the Revenue Bond Law unless said Revenue Bond Law be hereafter amended to permit the sale of such bonds at less than par. 
Section 13. - Proceeds of bonds. 
    The proceeds of such bonds shall be used solely for the payment of the cost of the project or projects, and unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture, additional bonds may in like manner be issued to provide the amount of any deficit for the cost of the project or projects, which unless otherwise provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture shall be deemed to be of the same issue and shall be entitled to payment from the same fund without preference or priority of the bonds first issued for the same purposes. If the proceeds of the bonds of any issue shall exceed the amount required for the purpose for which such bonds are issued, the surplus shall be paid into a sinking fund or used for additional construction as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture. 
Section 14. - Interim receipts and certificates or temporary bonds. 
    Prior to the preparation of definitive bonds, the authority may, under like restrictions issue interim receipts, interim certificates or temporary bonds, with or without coupons exchangeable for definitive bonds upon the issuance of the latter. 
Section 15. - Replacement of lost or mutilated bonds. 
    The authority may also provide for the replacement of any bond which shall become mutilated or be destroyed or lost. 
Section 16. - Conditions precedent to issuance, object of issuance. 
    Such revenue bonds may be issued without any other proceedings or the happening of any other conditions or things than those proceedings, conditions and things which are specified or required by this act. In the discretion of the authority, revenue bonds of a single issue may be issued for the purpose of any particular project. Any resolution, providing for the issuance of revenue bonds under the provisions of this act shall become effective immediately upon its passage and need not be published or posted, and any such resolution may be passed at any regular or special or adjourned meeting of the authority by a majority of the quorum as in this act provided. 
Section 17. - Credit not pledged. 
    Revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall not be deemed to constitute a debt of Camden County, or any municipality therein, but such bonds shall be payable solely from the fund hereinafter provided for and the issuance of such revenue bonds shall not be directly, indirectly or contingently obligate the said county, or any municipality therein, to levy or to pledge any form of taxation whatever therefor or to make any appropriation for the payment, and all such bonds shall contain recitals on their face covering substantially the foregoing provisions of this section. 
Section 18. - Trust indenture as security. 
    In the discretion of the authority, any issue of such revenue bonds may be secured by a trust indenture by and between the authority and a corporate trustee, which may be any trust company or bank having the powers of a trust company within or outside of the state. Such trust indenture may pledge or assign fees, tolls, revenues and earnings to be received by the authority, including the proceeds derived from the company which, shall act as trustee of such funds and shall hold and apply the same to the purposes hereof, subject to such regulations as this act and such resolutions or trust indentures may provide. 
Section 19. - To whom proceeds of bonds shall be paid. 
    The authority shall, in the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or in trust indenture, provide for the payment of the proceeds of the sale of the bonds to any officer or person who, or any agency, bank or trust any of the coupons appertaining thereto, and the trustee under the trust indenture, if any, except to the extent the rights herein given may be restricted by resolution passed before the issuance of the bonds or by the trust indenture, may, either at law or in equity, by suit, action, mandamus, or other proceedings protect and enforce any and all rights under the laws of the State of Georgia or granted hereunder or under such resolution or trust indenture, and may enforce and compel performance of all duties required by this act or by such resolution or trust indenture, to be performed by the authority, or any officer thereof, including the fixing, charging and collecting of revenues, fees, tolls, and other charges for the use of the facilities and services furnished. 
Section 20. - Sinking fund. 
    The revenues, fees, tolls and earnings derived from any particular project or projects, regardless of whether or not such fees, earnings and revenues were produced by a particular project for which bonds have been issued and any monies derived from the sale of any properties, both real and personal of the authority, unless otherwise pledged and allocated, may be pledged and allocated by the authority to the payment of the principal and interest on revenue bonds of the authority as the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust instrument may provide, and such funds so pledged from whatever source received, which said pledge may include funds received from one or more or all sources, shall be set aside at regular intervals as may be provided in the resolution or trust indenture, into a sinking fund which said sinking fund shall be pledged to and charged with the payments of (1) the interest upon such revenue bonds as such interest shall fall due, (2) the principal of the bonds as the same shall fall due, (3) the necessary charges of paying agent or agents for paying interest and principal and (4) any premium upon bonds retired by call or purchase as hereinabove provided. The use and disposition of such sinking fund shall be subject to such regulations as may be provided in the resolution authorizing the issuance of the revenue bonds or in the trust indenture, but, except as may otherwise be provided in such resolution or trust indenture, such sinking fund shall be a fund for the benefit of all revenue bonds without distinction or priority of one over another. Subject to the provisions of the resolution authorizing the issuance of the bonds or in the trust indenture surplus monies in the sinking fund may be applied to the purchase or redemption of bonds and any such bonds so purchased or redeemed shall forthwith be cancelled and shall not again be issued. 
Section 21. - Remedies of bondholders. 
    Any holder of revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act or sale from time to time of any surplus property of the authority, both real and personal. Either the resolution providing for the issuance of revenue bonds or such trust indenture may contain such provisions for protecting and enforcing the rights and remedies of the bondholders as may be reasonable and proper and not in violation of law, including covenants setting forth the duties of the authority in relation to the acquisition of property the construction of the project, the maintenance, operation, repair and insurance of the property, and the custody, safeguarding and application of all monies, including the proceeds derived from the sale of property of the authority, both real and personal, and may also provide that any project shall be constructed and paid for under the supervision and approval of consulting engineers or architects employed or designated by the authority, and satisfactory to the original purchasers of the bonds issued therefor and may also require that the security given by contractors and by any depository of the proceeds of the bonds or revenues or other monies be satisfactory to such purchasers, and may also contain provisions concerning the conditions, if any, upon which additional revenue bonds may be issued. It shall be lawful for any bank or trust company incorporated under the laws of this state to act as such depository and to furnish such indemnifying bonds or pledge such securities as may be required by the authority. Such indenture may set forth the rights and remedies of the bondholders and of the trustee, and may restrict the individual right of action of bondholders as is customary in trust indentures securing bonds and debentures of corporations. In addition to the foregoing, such trust indenture may contain such other provisions as the authority may deem reasonable and proper for the security of the bondholders. All expenses incurred in carrying out such trust indenture may be treated as a part of the cost of maintenance, operation and repair of the project affected by such indenture. 
Section 22. - Refunding bonds. 
    The authority is hereby authorized to provide by resolution for the issue of revenue refunding bonds of the authority for the purpose of refunding any revenue bonds issued under the provisions of this act and then outstanding, together with accrued interest thereon. The issuance of such revenue refunding bonds, the maturities and all other details thereof, the rights of the holders thereof, and the duties of the authority in respect to the same, shall be governed by the foregoing provisions of this act insofar as the same may be applicable. 
Section 23. - Validation. 
    Bonds of the authority shall be confirmed and validated in accordance with the procedures of said Revenue Bond Law. The petition for validation shall also make party defendant to such action any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the State of Georgia or the United States government or any department or agency of the United States government, if subject to be sued, which has contracted with the authority for the services and facilities of the project for which bonds are to be issued and sought to be validated and such municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality, shall be required to show cause, if any, why such contract or contracts and the terms and conditions thereof should not be inquired into by the court and the validity of the terms thereof be determined and the contract or contracts adjudicated as security for the payment of any such bonds of the authority. The bonds when validated, and the judgment of validation shall be final and conclusive with respect to such bonds, against the authority issuing the same, and any municipality, county, authority, subdivision or instrumentality of the United States government if a party to the validation proceedings, contracting with the said St. Marys airport authority. 
Section 24. - Venue and jurisdiction. 
    Any action to protect or enforce any rights under the provisions of this act or any suit or action against such authority shall be brought in the superior court of Camden County, Georgia, and any action pertaining to validation of any bonds issued under the provisions of this act shall likewise be brought in said court which shall have exclusive, original jurisdiction of such actions. 
Section 25. - Interest of bondholders protected. 
    While any of the bonds issued by the authority remain outstanding, the powers, duties or existence of said authority or of its officers, employees or agents shall not be diminished or impaired in any manner that will affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and no other entity, department, agency or authority will be created which will compete with the authority to such an extent as to affect adversely the interest and rights of the holders of such bonds, and upon the issuance of bonds under the provisions hereof, shall constitute a contract with the holders of such bonds. 
Section 26. - Monies received considered trust funds. 
    All monies received pursuant to the authority of this act, whether as proceeds from the sale of revenue bonds, as grants or other contributions, or as revenues, income, fees and earnings, shall be deemed to be trust funds to be held and applied solely as provided in this act. 
Section 27. - Purpose of the authority. 
    Without limiting the generality of any provisions of the act the general purpose of the authority is declared to be that of acquiring, constructing, equipping, maintaining, improving and operating airports and landing field for the use of aircraft, including any related buildings and the usual and convenient facilities appertaining to such undertakings and extensions and improvements of such facilities, acquiring the necessary property therefor, both real and personal, and to lease or sell any or all of such facilities including real property and to do any and all things deemed by the authority necessary, convenient or desirable for and incident to the efficient and proper development and operation of such types of undertakings, and the developing of an industrial complex within the perimeter of those certain lands now owned by the City of St. Marys, Georgia, together with any other undertaking incident thereto. 
Section 28. - Rates, charges and revenues; use. 
    The authority is hereby authorized to prescribe and fix and collect rates, fees, tolls and charges, and to revise from time to time and collect such rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished, including leases, concessions or subleases or [of] its lands or facilities, and in anticipation of the collection of the revenues and income of such undertakings or projects. 
Section 29. - Rules and regulations for operation of projects. 
    It shall be the duty of the authority to prescribe rules and regulations for the operation of the project or projects constructed under the provisions of this act, including the basis on which airports and landing fields for the use of aircraft shall be furnished. 
Section 30. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
    The foregoing sections of this act shall be deemed to provide an additional and alternative method for the doing of the things authorized thereby and shall be regarded as supplemental and additional to powers conferred by other laws, and shall not be regarded as in derogation of any powers now existing. 
Section 31. - Liberal construction of act. 
    This act being for the purpose of promoting the health, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the United States, of the State of Georgia and of Camden County, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
Section 32. - Jurisdiction. 
    All property, the title to which shall vest in said authority shall be and become a part of the corporate limits of the City of St. Marys and shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the City of St. Marys in the same manner and subject to the police powers of the City of St. Marys and the same laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as are now or may hereafter be in effect in the City of St. Marys. 
ARTICLE II. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1991 Ga. Laws ex. sess., page 460 which granted a homestead exemption for qualified residents as defined in the act. 
Code reference- Taxation, ch. 90. 

Section 1. - Grant of exemption. 
(a)  Each resident of the City of St. Marys who is 65 years of age or older is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of St. Marys ad valorem taxes for any city purposes, including, but not limited to, taxes to retire bonded indebtedness, for the value of that resident's homestead, as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(b)  The exemption provided by this act shall not be granted unless the resident's net income, together with the net income of that resident's spouse who also occupies and resides at such homestead, as net income is defined by Georgia law, from all sources, except as otherwise provided in this section, does not exceed $25,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year for income tax purposes. For the purposes of this act, net income shall not include income received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system, except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and that individual's spouse under the federal Social Security Act; and income from such sources in excess of such maximum amount shall be included as net income for the purposes of this act. 
Section 2. - Application; necessary information. 
    The governing authority of the City of St. Marys or its designee shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this act and shall require with the initial application an affidavit by the owner as to the age and income of the owner, the income of the owner's spouse who occupies and resides at the homestead, and such other information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
Section 3. - Eligibility. 
    The exemption granted by this act shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. Any person who, as of January 1, 1991, has applied for and is eligible for the $8,000.00 homestead exemption for each resident of the City of St. Marys who is 65 years of age or older and whose income does not exceed $10,000.00 pursuant to a local constitutional amendment found at 1980 Ga. Laws, page 2260, and continued in force and effect as statutory law pursuant to article VII, section II, paragraph IV of the Constitution, shall be eligible for the homestead exemption granted by this Act without further application. 
Section 4. - Duty of resident to notify city of ineligibility. 
    After any such owner has filed the proper affidavit and, if disabled, the proper certificate, as provided in this Act, and has been allowed the exemption provided in this act, it shall not be necessary that he make application and file such affidavit and certificate for any year thereafter and such exemption shall continue to be allowed to such owner. It shall be the duty of any resident of the City of St. Marys who has claimed the homestead exemption provided for in this act to notify the governing authority of the City of St. Marys or its designee in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason to receive such homestead exemption. 
Section 5. - Exemption to be in lieu of any other homestead exemption. 
    The exemption granted by this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption from City of St. Marys ad valorem taxes. 
Section 6. - Applicability. 
    The exemption granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991. 
Section 7. - Exemption does not effect county or state taxes. 
    The exemption granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any county taxes for county purposes, county school district taxes for educational purposes, or state taxes. 
Section 8. - Repeal of previous provision. 
    If this Act is approved in the referendum provided for in section 9 of this Act, that local constitutional amendment providing an $8,000.00 homestead exemption for each resident of the City of St. Marys who is 65 years of age or older and whose income does not exceed $10,000.00 found at 1980 Ga. Laws, page 2260, and continued in force and effect as statutory law pursuant to article VII, section II, paragraph IV of the Constitution, is repealed effective at the last moment of December 31, 1991. 
Editor's note- Section nine has been omitted from this compilation as unnecessary to codify. 
ARTICLE III. - STABILIZED TAX PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to 1959 Ga. Laws, page 460, art. 7, sec. 1 of the Georgia Constitution was amended to authorize the governing authority of the city to bind itself by contract to a stabilized property tax program. 
Code reference- Taxation, ch. 90. 

Sec. 1. - Authority to contract. 
    The City of St. Marys is hereby granted authority to bind itself by contract to a stabilized property tax program with any corporation, partnership or individual. 
ARTICLE IV. - OAK GROVE CEMETERY AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- See Ch. 30, "Cemeteries". 

Section 1. - Creation of authority. 
    There is created the Oak Grove Cemetery Authority which is referred to in this Act as the "authority." The authority shall be an instrumentality and political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation. The authority shall have perpetual existence. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 2. - Purpose of authority. 
    The purpose of the authority shall be to oversee the care and preservation of the cemetery for the City of St. Marys by creating a trust fund for the purpose of providing for the cemetery's maintenance, repair, and preservation in perpetuity; to raise funds and accept donations for such care and other special projects to enhance the cemetery; and to monitor conditions at the cemetery to ensure that it is kept in good condition. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Authority" means the Oak Grove Cemetery Authority created by this Act. 
(2)  "Cemetery" means the Oak Grove Cemetery in St. Marys, Georgia, and any additional property purchased by the City of St. Marys adjacent to such cemetery for the purpose of burials. 
(3)  "Mayor and council" means the mayor and council of the City of St. Marys. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 4. - Jurisdiction. 
    The authority shall have jurisdiction over the Oak Grove Cemetery and any additional property purchased by the City of St. Marys adjacent to the Oak Grove Cemetery for the purpose of burials. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 5. - Authority membership. 
    The authority shall be composed of five members appointed by the mayor and council of the City of St. Marys. The initial appointments shall be made no later than June 30, 2012. The initial appointees shall take office on July 1, 2012. In making the initial appointments, the mayor and council of the City of St. Marys shall appoint one member to a term of office ending on December 31, 2013, and until his or her successor is selected and qualified; two members to terms of office ending on December 31, 2014, and until their respective successors are selected and qualified; and two members to terms of office ending December 31, 2015, and until their respective successors are selected and qualified. Thereafter, a successor to each member shall be appointed not later than December 31 of the year immediately preceding the end of such member's term of office, shall take office on January 1 following such appointment, and shall serve terms of three years and until his or her successor is selected and qualified. A member shall not be eligible to succeed himself or herself after serving two full three-year terms of office. In making such appointments, the mayor and council shall, to the extent available and consistent with their discretion, give preference in their appointments to persons from the professional disciplines of financial investment, historic preservation, mortuary science, accounting, and the ministry. All persons appointed shall be residents of the City of St. Marys and shall remain residents throughout their terms of office. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 6. - Vacancies. 
(a)  A member's position on the authority shall be vacated by failure to attend three consecutive meetings of the authority unless such member is excused in writing by the chairperson for good cause shown. 
(b)  Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and council for the unexpired term of the member whose position on the authority has been vacated. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 7. - Chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary-treasurer. 
    At its initial meeting and at the first meeting of each calendar year, the authority shall elect from among its members a chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary-treasurer. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 8. - Meetings. 
    The authority shall meet not less than quarterly in regular meetings or in special meetings upon call of the chairperson or two members of the authority to monitor the financial investments of the authority and to discuss conditions in the cemetery which need to be addressed. Three members of the authority shall constitute a quorum. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A., tit. 50, ch. 14. Minutes of all meetings of the authority shall be kept and filed with the city clerk of the City of St. Marys. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 9. - Financial report. 
    A financial report shall be made annually by the authority to the mayor and council of the City of St. Marys at a time designated by the mayor and council. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 10. - Conflicts of interest and ethics. 
    The members of the authority shall be subject to the St. Marys ethics ordinance in the same manner as the mayor and members of the mayor and council. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 11. - Powers. 
    The authority shall have the power: 
(1)  To contract with other entities, including the City of St. Marys, and be contracted with to provide regular maintenance and repairs of the cemetery; to lay out, sell, and record lots; to supervise burials; and to generally provide all operations necessary to keep the cemetery in good order; 
(2)  To hire professionals when needed for matters requiring outside expertise on technical subjects regarding the cemetery's care; 
(3)  To monitor conditions at the cemetery and notify the mayor and council when the cemetery is not in good condition; 
(4)  To receive donations, grants, and funds from various sources and to ensure that those funds are used prudently to improve or maintain the cemetery in the manner specified by the donors or grantors; 
(5)  To seek state and federal funds for cemetery preservation for conducting educational programs and the enhancement of the grounds, for signage to encourage tourism, and for any other benefit to the cemetery as deemed necessary by the authority; 
(6)  To raise funds for special needs and projects for the cemetery; 
(7)  To establish, with the approval of the mayor and council, other burial alternatives such as mausoleums, scattering fields for ashes, and columbaria, in order to increase income to care for the cemetery or for other projects to enhance the cemetery for the visiting public; 
(8)  To participate in private, city, state and federal historic preservation programs in the City of St. Marys; 
(9)  To work with the St. Marys Historic Preservation Commission to preserve the historic and aesthetic values of the cemetery; 
(10)  To adopt rules of operation for the authority; 
(11)  To create and adopt an investment policy to provide for the safety of the funds held by the authority; and 
(12)  To decide upon and adopt a method of assessing the performance of the investments chosen to increase the funds held by the authority. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 12. - Funding. 
    A portion of the proceeds from the sale of each burial lot in the cemetery for the City of St. Marys, to be not less than one-half of the proceeds from each such lot, shall be deposited in trust with the authority in an account held by the authority and designated solely for the care of the cemetery in accordance with the purposes of the authority as specified in Section 2 of this Act. The authority shall have the power to invest such funds subject only to a general duty of fiduciary responsibility. The authority shall be authorized to make prudent investments without being limited to those investments allowed to municipalities under Georgia law. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 13. - Distribution of investment income. 
    As the City of St. Marys' income from lot sales diminishes, an increasing portion of the authority's annual investment income shall be used to replace it until such time as the entire expense of the cemetery's maintenance and care is paid from authority funds. No uses for authority funds, including investment income, shall be made other than those set forth in this Act. The principal amount held in the authority's care shall remain intact and at no time shall any part of it be used for any purpose, except in the case of emergency damage occurring to the cemetery property itself, such as extreme storm damage or vandalism. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 14. - Responsibilities of the City of St. Marys. 
    The authority shall contract with the City of St. Marys to provide the maintenance and operations services of the cemetery in exchange for all or part of the annual investment income generated by the principal of the funds held by the authority. Annually, the amount of payment from the authority to the city shall be determined by comparing the investment income of the funds held by the authority and the records of expenses incurred by the city to operate the cemetery. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
Section 15. - [Conflicting provisions.] 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
(H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002, Exh. A, 2-6-12) 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of Georgia Laws that are not amendatory of the Charter and are included in the Related Laws Part II. 
Georgia Laws 
Year Page Section this 
Related Laws 1979 3278 3 H.B.1188/ 
Res. No. 2012-R002       Added Art. IV, §§ 1-15  
PART III - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required by law, an undertaking in writing, without seal, is sufficient; in all bonds where the names of the obligors do not appear in the bond, but are subscribed thereto, they shall be bound thereby. 
    Charter. "Charter" means the Charter of the City of St. Marys, Georgia, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
    City. "City" means the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
    Code. "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
State Law reference- Municipal home rule, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 2; O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; exemplification of municipal minutes and other records, O.C.G.A. § 24-7-21; authority to adopt ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
    Code compliance officer. Where the terms "city marshall" or "code enforcement officer" or any variation of these terms are present within all sections of these ordinances, these terms shall be replaced with the phrase "code compliance officer or designated staff". 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Corporate limits. "Corporate limits" means the corporate limits of the City of St. Marys. 
    County. Whenever the words "county," "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Camden County, Georgia. 
    Court. "Court" means the court provided by law for the punishment of offenders against the laws or ordinances of the city, whether the same shall be the court now constituted or a court hereafter established pursuant to law. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision requires the head of a department or an official of the city to do some act or perform some function, it shall be construed to authorize the head of such department or the official to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required function, unless the terms of the provisions designate otherwise. 
    Gender. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
    Governor. "Governor" means the governor of the State of Georgia. 
    Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Legislative intent. In all interpretations of this Code or of ordinances or resolutions, the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the mayor and council, keeping in mind at all times the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate any provision, and a transposition of words and phrases may be resorted to when a clause or sentence is without meaning as it stands. 
    Mayor and council. "Mayor and council" means the Mayor and Council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
    Month, year. "Month" and "year" mean calendar month and calendar year unless otherwise provided. 
    Names of officers, departments. The name or title of any officer or department shall be read as though the words "of the City of St. Marys" were added thereto. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. The ordinary significance shall be applied to all words, except words of art, or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter, in which case they shall have the significance attached to them by experts in such trade, or with reference to such subject matter. 
    Number. The singular or plural number shall each include the other, unless expressly excluded. 
    Oath. "Oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "affirm" and "affirmed" shall be equivalent to the words "swear" and "sworn." 
    Officer. "Officer" includes those officials appointed by the mayor and council on a parttime or temporary basis, including the city attorney and municipal court judge. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. "Owner," when applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
    Person. "Person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations and bodies politic, or any combination thereof, as well as to natural persons. 
    Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property as defined in this section. 
    Preceding and following. "Preceding" and "following" mean generally next before and next after unless the context requires a different significance. 
    Property. "Property" includes real and personal property. 
    Real property. "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Requirements. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than another more general provision, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed controlling. 
    Residence. "Residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Right-of-way. "Right-of-way" means land that is dedicated or otherwise legally established for public use. 
    Roadway. "Roadway" means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall; may. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory; "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means that portion of the street right-of-way which is improved and designated for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription includes the mark of an illiterate or infirm person. 
    State. Whenever the words "state," "the state" or "this state" are used they shall refer to the State of Georgia. 
    Statute references. Whenever reference is made, for example, to O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, it shall be construed to refer to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, section 1-3-3, as amended, or to whatever section is cited. 
    Street. "Street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, lane, path, viaduct, bridge or any other name a street is commonly known by, or any public place and the approaches thereto within the city when any part thereof is open to the use of the public and established for purposes of vehicular traffic. 
    Substantial compliance. A substantial compliance with any requirement of this Code or ordinances amendatory hereof, especially on the part of public officers, shall be deemed and held sufficient; and no proceeding shall be declared void for want of such compliance, unless expressly so provided. 
    Tenant, occupant. The word "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and the present. 
    Title of office. The title of any office shall be construed to include the words "of the City of St. Marys, Georgia." 
    Writing, written. The word "writing" or "written" includes printing and all numerals, and also pictures, illustrations and printed or written designs. 
    Year. "Year" means calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-004 , § 1, 2-3-14) 
State Law reference- Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
State Law reference- Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code; 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee; 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term; 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(10)  Any zoning ordinance; 
(11)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat; 
(12)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city; 
(13)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(14)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein; 
(15)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city; 
(16)  The city's purchasing policies and procedures; 
nor shall such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed or matter covered under the ordinance repealed. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of the repeal of chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (division, article or chapter) to be numbered ____________ , which section (division, article or chapter) reads as follows: ...." The new section, division, article or chapter shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, divisions, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code is declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
State Law reference- Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-11. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with this Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
State Law reference- Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-12. - General penalty. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of an act is required or the failure to do an act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor the violation of any such provision of this Code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, or by imprisonment in the city or county jail not to exceed six months. Any one or more of these punishments may be inflicted, and the fines imposed therefor may be collected by execution. Each day any violation continues shall be a separate offense. 
Editor's note- The provision for punishment by imprisonment for not more than six months is being used in this section for consistency with O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(B) which restricts municipal corporations from extending home rule power over any action providing for confinement in excess of six months. 
Charter reference- Punishment for offenses, § 6-103(b)(3). 
State Law reference- Penalty to be imposed in certain criminal and traffic cases and upon violation of bond, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; authority to confine persons convicted of violating ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8; punishments authorized, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1(c); limitations on home rule powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6; revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Administrative organization, § 4-102. 
Cross reference- Personnel, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- Supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Mayor and council, § 2-101 et seq. 

Sec. 2-36. - Meetings. 
(a)  The regular monthly meeting time of the mayor and city council shall be on the first and third Monday of each month at 6:00 p.m. at city hall. 
(b)  In the event any regular monthly city council meeting shall fall on a legal holiday as officially recognized by the City of St. Marys, the mayor and council reserve the right to adjust said meeting accordingly. 
(c)  Nothing contained herein shall preclude the mayor and/or council from calling or holding special council meetings. In addition to notice otherwise required in section 2-403 of the Charter, the city clerk (or designee) shall send out an email and telephone call to the elected officials as soon as the call for a special meeting is made by the appropriate official(s). As to the order of business at a special meeting, the chair will determine whether or not "granting audience to the public" is appropriate for the special meeting. 
(d)  The first city council meeting date of each year shall continue to be at 6:00 p.m. at the first regular meeting in January following city elections, at city hall. 
(Ord. of 11-19-85; Ord. of 7-8-96; Ord. of 10-9-06, § 1; Ord. of 1-14-08(1), § 1; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Note- Ordinance of Oct. 25, 2010(1), states subsection (a) of this section shall become effective on Jan. 1, 2011. 
Charter reference- Annual organizational meeting, § 2-401; regular and special meetings, § 2-403. 
State Law reference- Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of city council, due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-37. - Agenda. 
    All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, documents, or other matters to be submitted to the council for discussion or action shall be delivered to the city clerk by 9:00 a.m. on the Wednesday immediately preceding the next council meeting. No items may be added to the agenda by anyone other than elected officials or the city manager. Staff members will submit agenda items (other than those from elected officials) for approval through the city manager or the mayor's office. The city clerk shall immediately arrange an agenda of such matters according to the order of business. Each member of council, the mayor, the city attorney, the city manager, department heads, and the media shall be furnished with a copy of the same by the close of business on the Thursday immediately preceding the council meeting. Any urgent matters that need to be added to the agenda after a deadline may be added by motion and vote of the council as part of the "approval of the agenda" at the council meeting. No items may be added after the deadline for submission of agenda items except as stated above. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 1; Ord. of 10-25-93; Ord. of 3-13-95, § I; Ord. of 2-14-00, § I; Ord. of 1-3-02, § 1; Ord. of 9-23-02, § 1; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-38. - Duties of presiding officer. 
    The mayor, or in absence, the mayor pro tem, shall be the presiding officer and shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the city council. He/she shall state every question coming before the city council and announce the decision of the city council on all subjects. The councilmember named mayor pro tem in compliance with section 2-302 of the Charter of St. Marys shall be identified as such on their nameplate displayed in council meetings. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 2; Ord. of 3-13-95, § II; Ord. of 2-14-00, § II; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-39. - Call to order. 
    All meetings of the city council shall be open to the public except as otherwise allowable by law. The mayor, or in absence, the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for any regular, temporarily adjourned, special or called meeting, and shall immediately call the council to order. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 3; Ord. of 3-13-95, § III; Ord. of 2-14-00, § III) 
Sec. 2-40. - Order of business. 
(a)  The following order of business shall be observed: 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Invocation. 
(3)  Pledge of Allegiance. 
(4)  Roll call. 
(5)  Reading and approval of minutes of previous meeting(s) as provided in these rules of procedure. 
(6)  Presentations. Only groups or individuals which provide visual presentation or handouts prior to deadline for submission of items for placement on the agenda and who have approval of mayor may be heard under this item. Presentations shall be limited to ten minutes unless the time is extended by the mayor or council. 
(7)  Set consent agenda. 
(8)  Approval of the agenda. 
(9)  Grant audience to the public. The amount of time allotted to each individual being limited to five minutes, provided that such request contains the address of the individual requesting to address council. The request shall stipulate the subject, details relative to the subject or concern to be addressed, and the desired solution. 
(10)  Old business. 
(11)  New business. 
(12)  Report of authorities, boards, commissions and committees. 
(13)  Report of mayor. 
(14)  Report of city manager. 
(15)  Granting audience to the public. Members of the public shall be permitted to address council in the same manner as prescribed in subsection (a)(9) above. 
(16)  Executive session (if necessary). 
(17)  Adjournment. 
(b)  A "town meeting" designated and advertised as such will be held at 6:00 p.m. on the first Thursday of each quarter (January, April, July and October) which is not a city recognized holiday, to solicit input and requests from the general public. The issues coming before the town meeting will require no formal agenda. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 4; Ord. of 10-25-93; Ord. of 3-13-95, § IV; Ord. of 2-14-00, § IV; Ord. of 1-3-02, § 2; Ord. of 8-11-03, § 1; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Note- Ordinance of Oct. 25, 2010(1), states subsection (b) of this section shall become effective on Jan. 1, 2011. 
Sec. 2-41. - Parliamentarian. 
    There shall be a position known as parliamentarian which shall be held by the city attorney or, in the attorney's absence, the city clerk. All questions of order and procedure shall be referred to the parliamentarian who shall provide the city council with a ruling on such questions. Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the parliamentarian may immediately appeal the same to the entire council, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 5; Ord. of 3-13-95, § V; Ord. of 2-14-00, § V; Amend. of 5-7-12) 
Charter reference- City attorney, § 4-203. 
Sec. 2-42. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of, October 25, 2010(1) deleted § 2-42, entitled "Standing committees", and derived from Ord. of Feb. 21, 1984, § 6; Ord. of Feb. 12, 1990(2); Ord. of Mar. 13, 1995, § VI; and Ord. of Feb. 14, 2000, § VI. 
Sec. 2-43. - Committee reports. 
    Any business coming before the city council concerning the subject matter of which any special committee has jurisdiction, may be referred by the majority of council, to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of each special committee, by the majority vote of council, to examine any matter referred to such committee and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the city council, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the mayor. Committees will meet only at the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 7; Ord. of 2-12-90(2); Ord. of 10-14-91; Ord. of 3-13-95, § VII; Ord. of 2-14-00, § VII; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-44. - Quorum. 
    A quorum shall be considered to be four councilmembers plus the mayor, or in absence, the mayor pro tem, making a total of five persons. In the absence of a quorum, the presiding officer shall, at the instance of any three members present, urge the attendance of absent members by appropriate means. The city clerk, or an appointed alternate, shall also be present. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 8; Ord. of 3-13-95, § IX; Ord. of 2-14-00, § IX) 
Sec. 2-45. - Rules of procedure. 
    In all cases, Robert's Rules of Order, as amended, shall govern the proceedings of the city council and all committee meetings except as otherwise provided in the Charter, ordinances or other applicable law. In the event the provisions of these rules and Robert's Rules conflict, the provisions of the rules shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(2); Ord. of 3-13-95, § VIII; Ord. of 2-14-00, § VIII; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-46. - Limits on addressing city council. 
    Any person not a member of the city council who desires to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so, then shall step up in front of the podium, give his name and address in an audible voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the council as a body rather than to any particular councilmember, limiting such remarks to five minutes unless additional time is granted by the presiding officer. No response need be made to any comment. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 10; Ord. of 2-12-90(2); Ord. of 3-13-95, § X; Ord. of 2-14-00, § X; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-47. - Rules of debate. 
    No member, while the city council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking be called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 11; Ord. of 3-13-95, § XI; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XI) 
Sec. 2-48. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of, October 25, 2010(1) deleted § 2-49, entitled "Closing debate", and derived from Ord. of Feb. 21, 1984, § 12; Ord. of Mar. 13, 1995, § XII; and Ord. of Feb. 14, 2000, § XII. 
Sec. 2-49. - Minutes. 
    The yeas and nays of the councilmembers present shall be recorded in the minutes on any question taken. The minutes of the meeting will be concise and limited to the recording of the motions and the vote and a listing of the discussion topics by the members. The only verbatim comments will be when members state a comment "for the record". Lengthy comments for the record will be provided to the city clerk in writing or electronically by the member making the comments. Comments by the public in the "granting audience" portion of the meeting will be recorded by subject matter only and without detail. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 13; Ord. of 2-12-90(2); Ord. of 3-13-95, § XIII; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XIII; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-50. - Rules governing introduction, passage, etc., of ordinances and resolutions. 
    The following rules shall apply to the introduction, passage, amendment, or repeal of ordinances of the city: 
(1)  It shall be in order at each regular monthly meeting of the council to introduce ordinances, or other matters, without any previous notice having been given for that purpose. 
(2)  Every ordinance before its introduction must be reduced to writing and before its passage must be read at one council meeting. Passage of ordinances shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present. 
(3)  No ordinance shall be entertained by the council that contains more than one subject matter; provided, however, this rule shall not apply to the adoption of a Code of Ordinances for the city. 
(4)  No ordinance shall be declared passed and become a law of the city unless it receives a majority of votes in favor of its passage. 
(5)  No ordinance or section of an ordinance shall be amended or repealed by mere reference to its title, but the amending or repealing ordinance shall distinctly describe the ordinance or code section to be amended or repealed, as well as the alteration to be made. 
(6)  No ordinance or resolution appropriating money shall be passed unless its passage the yeas and nays are recorded. 
(7)  All ordinances and resolutions shall be prepared or reviewed by the city attorney except that standard form ordinances or resolutions previously prepared or approved by city attorney as such need not be reviewed. No ordinances shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by the mayor or council. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 14; Ord. of 2-12-90(2); Ord. of 3-13-95, § XIV; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XIV; Ord. of 11-10-08(1), § 1; Amend. of 5-7-12) 
Charter reference- Enactment of ordinances, § 2-404. 
Sec. 2-51. - Method of voting. 
    Unless a member of the council states that he is not voting or abstaining, his silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 15; Ord. of 2-12-90(2); Ord. of 3-13-95, § XV; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XV) 
Sec. 2-52. - Motion to reconsider. 
    A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be either immediately or during the same session, or at a recessed or adjourned session thereof. Such motion must be made by one of the prevailing side, but may be seconded by any member. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of the council from making the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(2); Ord. of 3-13-95, § XVI; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XVI) 
Sec. 2-53. - Reading of minutes. 
    Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading, if the clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 16; Ord. of 3-13-95, § XVII; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XVII) 
Sec. 2-54. - Decorum. 
(a)  Councilmembers. When the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum and a member shall neither by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council, nor disturb any member while speaking, or refuse to obey the orders of the council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided. 
(b)  Others. Any person or persons making personal impertinent, or slanderous remarks, or who shall become boisterous while addressing the council or while attending in council chambers during a council meeting, shall be forthwith by the presiding officer, barred from further audience before the council or further attendance at that council meeting, unless permission to continue be granted by a majority vote of the council. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 17; Ord. of 3-13-95, § XVIII; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XVIII; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-55. - Enforcement of decorum. 
    The chief of police, or such member or members of the police department as he may designate, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the council meetings. He or they shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms, or any of them present, to remove from the meeting place any person who violates the order of the council meeting. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 18; Ord. of 3-13-95, § XIX; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XIX) 
Sec. 2-56. - Executive session. 
    The city council may, at any time, upon call therefor by the presiding officer, or if in session, upon a motion of a councilmember, duly carried, meet in executive session. Attendance at such sessions shall be limited to the mayor, members of the council, the city attorney, the city manager, and such invitees as shall be invited with the majority consent of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 19; Ord. of 3-13-95, § XX; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XX) 
Sec. 2-57. - Governing of members. 
    The city council shall sit in the judgment of itself and shall have the power to discipline its members by censure, reprimand, or warning, as the conduct of any individual member so warrants. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 20; Ord. of 3-13-95, § XXI; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XXI) 
Sec. 2-58. - Correspondence. 
    Copies of all correspondence to the mayor and city manager shall be available to all council members and kept in a central location by the city clerk. Copies of all major correspondence shall be sent at once by the city clerk to all council members and, as needed, to the city attorney. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 21; Ord. of 10-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 2-59. - Telephone calls. 
    The city manager shall keep and maintain a written log of all out-going long distance telephone calls concerning city business. Such log shall be maintained on file by the city clerk and shall be open for inspection at all times. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 22) 
Sec. 2-60. - City attorney tasking. 
(a)  A city attorney employed by the city shall work at the will of the mayor and council. 
(b)  A city attorney under general retainer by the city, shall charge the city for work authorized by the council as a governing body. This work shall include all tasks necessary for the completion of an authorized assignment. 
(c)  No individual councilmember shall task a city attorney under general retainer with more than two hours work on any single issue on any one occasion without prior approval from council. The mayor shall be authorized to task the city attorney under general retainer with up to ten hours work on any single issue on any one occasion without prior approval from council. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 23; Ord. of 3-24-08, § 1; Ord. of 10-25-10(1); Ord. of 3-21-11(1)) 
Charter reference- City attorney, § 4-203. 
Sec. 2-61. - Amendments. 
    These rules may be amended by a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-21-84, § 24; Ord. of 3-13-95, § XXI; Ord. of 2-14-00, § XXII) 
Sec. 2-62. - Retention of city records. 
(a)  The City of St. Marys does hereby adopt the records retention policy and schedules attached hereto as Exhibits "A and B", and by such reference is made a part hereof. 
(b)  Henceforth, the official Retention Schedule and Policy of the City of St. Marys shall be adopted and maintained in accordance with approved retention schedules, in the most updated version of the Retention Schedule for Local Government Records published by the Georgia Secretary of State's Department of Archives and History. 
(c)  The city clerk is hereby designated as the coordinator of the records management program and authorized to act for and on behalf of the City of St. Marys in directing and coordinating all records management matters under the Georgia Records Act. 
(d)  The City of St. Marys does hereby create a records management committee consisting of the city clerk, police chief, fire chief, public works director, finance director, and records coordinator (or their designees), and any other necessary staff members to discuss and recommend changes/modification to the records retention schedule. It shall be the duty of the city manager to review and recommend approval, disapproval, or modification of the records retention schedules to the city council. Review of the records retention schedules shall be based upon legal, fiscal, administrative and historical retention requirements. The city clerk shall serve as chairperson of the committee, and final approval and authority shall be with the city council. 
(e)  An archival depository shall be selected to store those records determined to have permanent historical value. 
(f)  A centralized records center (and/or local holding area) shall be established, and all records not required for day to day operation shall be transferred to the records center or local holding area until destroyed in accordance with the approved records retention schedule. 
(g)  No record shall be altered or destroyed except in accordance with provisions set forth in the duly approved records retention schedule as referenced in subsection (a) above. 
(h)  Records retention schedules approved by the City of St. Marys shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-28-05, § 1; Ord. of 1-9-06(1); Ord. of 7-9-07(2), § 1; Ord. of 7-14-08, § 1) 
Editor's note- Exhibits "A" and "B" to an ordinance adopted July 14, 2008, referred to in § 2-62(a) above, has not been set out within this Code, but may be found on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Secs. 2-63-2-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-125 the city by motion approved February 11, 1991, voted to transfer responsibility of the municipal voter list to the county. 
Charter reference- Elections, § 3-101 et seq. 
State Law reference- Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-86. - Precincts described; location of polling places. 
(a)  For the purposes of conducting all city elections, both general and special, the city shall be divided into a northern precinct and a southern precinct, which are described as follows: 
(1)  Northern precinct. Beginning at a point where the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street intersects the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street; and thence, running west along the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street to the point at which the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street intersects the northernmost right-of-way of State Highway 40 (Osborne Road); thence, continuing in a westerly direction along the northernmost right-of-way of State Highway 40 to the westernmost boundary of the city, which boundary is located in the vicinity of the intersection of County Road 78 and State Highway 40; thence, running in a general northeasterly direction along the city boundaries to Crooked River Road (State Highway Spur 40); and thence, running in a general northerly direction along the westerly right-of-way of Crooked River Road and to the southwestern boundary of Crooked River State Park; thence, running southeasterly along the southern boundary of Crooked River State Park to the easternmost right-of-way of Crooked River Road; thence, running south along the easternmost right-of-way of Crooked River Road to a point located at the northernmost boundary of Kings Bay Submarine Base and the southern boundary of Crooked River State Park; thence, continuing south along the easternmost right-of-way of Crooked River Road to a point coincident with the northernmost extent of Oak Street (such point being also located at the boundary of the Kings Bay Submarine Base); thence, running eastwardly and then in a southern direction to the extreme southwestern corner of the Kings Bay Submarine Base; thence, running in a generally eastward direction along the southernmost boundary of the Kings Bay Submarine Base and the city limits boundary to Point Peter Creek; thence, following the course of Point Peter Creek south to the St. Marys River; thence, running eastward with the St. Marys River to a point located at the intersection of the mouth of the North River and the northernmost margin of the St. Marys River; thence, running in a northerly direction along the center or thread of the North River to the point of intersection of the common district line for county voting districts 3 and 4; and thence, running west along the common county voting district line to a point located at the intersection of the common county voting district line and a line coincident with an extension northward of the westernmost right-of-way line of Wheeler Street; and thence, running south along the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street to the intersection of the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street and the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street, the point of intersection being the point of beginning for the voting precinct described in this subsection. 
(2)  Southern precinct. Beginning at the point where the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street intersects the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street, and thence running west along the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street to the point at which the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street intersects with the northernmost right-of-way of State Highway 40 (Osborne Road); and thence, continue in a westerly direction along the northernmost right-of-way of State Highway 40 to a point located at the intersection of the northernmost right-of-way line of State Highway 40 and St. Marys Road; thence, running with the easternmost right-of-way of St. Marys Road in a generally southwesterly direction to the intersection of St. Marys Road and Interstate 95; thence, running across Interstate 95 in a westerly direction along the northernmost right-of-way of Scrubby Bluff Road to the westernmost extent of the boundaries of the city; thence, running south with the city boundary to the southernmost right-of-way of Scrubby Bluff Road; and thence, running east to the easternmost right-of-way Interstate 95, and thence running south along the easternmost right-of-way of Interstate 95 to the St. Marys River; and thence, running in a general easterly direction along the St. Marys River to a point located at the intersection of the center of the mouth of the North River and the northernmost margin of the St. Marys River; and thence, running north along the center or thread of the North River to the point of intersection of the common district line for county voting districts 3 and 4; and thence, running west along the county voting district line to a point located at the intersection of the county voting district line and the extension of the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street; thence, running south along a line coincident with the extension of the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street; thence, running south along a line coincident with the extension of the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street to the intersection of the westernmost right-of-way of Wheeler Street and the northernmost right-of-way of Finley Street, the point of intersection being the point of beginning for the voting precinct described in this subsection. 
(b)  For the purpose of conducting city elections according to the voting precinct plan set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the city fire station located at 201 N. Dandy Street, St. Marys, is hereby designated as a polling place for all city elections. Such structure shall serve as the polling place for those registered city voters residing within the boundaries of the northern precinct as described in subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(c)  For the purpose of conducting city elections according to the voting precinct plan set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the Union Hall located at 709 Osborne Street, St. Marys, is hereby designated a polling place for all city elections. Such structure shall serve as the polling place for those registered city voters residing within the boundaries of the southern precinct as described in subsection (a)(2) of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95, §§ 1-3) 
State Law reference- Duty of governing authority to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-163. 
Secs. 2-87-2-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Boards and commissions, § 4-103. 
Cross reference- Historic preservation commission, § 62-61 et seq. 
Related laws reference- Airport authority, art. I. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-111-2-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF PILOTAGE COMMISSIONERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Pilots and pilotage, O.C.G.A. § 52-6-1 et seq.; reciprocal pilotage in Port of St. Marys, O.C.G.A. § 52-6-11. 

Sec. 2-126. - Created. 
    There is hereby created, authorized and placed in being a board of pilotage commissioners in and for the bar of St. Marys and all bars and inlets between the St. Marys bar and the St. Andrews bar. 
(Ord. of 2-4-60, § 1) 
Sec. 2-127. - Duty. 
    The duty of the board of pilotage commissioners shall be to comply with O.C.G.A. § 52-6-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 2-4-60, § 3) 
Secs. 2-128-2-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Grants of state funds to municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; downtown development authorities, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-3 et seq.; city business improvement districts, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-3 et seq.; Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq.; area planning and development commissions, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-30 et seq. 

Sec. 2-146. - Declaration of need. 
    There is a need for a development authority to function as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-62-2 for the promotion, development and enlargement of the business and industrial communities, to function, exist and to be operation in and for the city and there is therefore hereby activated, created and organized such an authority to be known and cited as the "Development Authority of the City of St. Marys" all as authorized and provided for in and by O.C.G.A. § 36-62-1 et seq. 
(Res. of 11-13-79; Ord. of 11-23-81) 
Sec. 2-147. - Function, powers. 
    The development authority of the city shall be deemed to exercise public and governmental functions and shall have all the power necessary or convenient to carry out and effect the purposes and provisions of law including all the authority authorized under the state development authorities law. 
(Res. of 11-13-79; Ord. of 11-23-81) 
Sec. 2-148. - Composition, terms. 
    The development authority of the city shall consist of a board of seven directors. The initial appointment of two of the directors shall be for a term of two years beginning on April 1, 1978. 
Secs. 2-149-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-186. - Created. 
    There is hereby created within the city an industrial development commission (referred to in this division as the commission), which shall consist of seven members who are residents of the city, each of whom shall be elected by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
(Res. of 6-21-79) 
Sec. 2-187. - Members; designated posts, terms, compensation. 
    Each member of the commission shall be elected to a specific post, the posts to be designated by numbers one through seven. The term of the members shall be for three years, except that in the appointment of the first members of the commission pursuant to this division, the directors chosen to fill post one and post two shall be elected for a term expiring May 31, 1980; the members chosen to fill post three and post four shall be elected for a term expiring May 31, 1981; and the members chosen to fill post five, post six and post seven shall be elected for terms expiring May 31, 1982; and thereafter, the terms of all members shall be three years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the mayor and council as hereinbefore provided for full terms. The members of the commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Res. of 6-21-79) 
Sec. 2-188. - Organization, meetings. 
    The members of the commission shall elect a chairman and a secretary, hold meetings at least once per month, and establish such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper for the carrying on of its function. Any member who fails, without good cause, to attend any two consecutive regular meetings of the commission may be removed by majority vote of the mayor and council. The commission shall keep minutes of each meeting, and shall provide a copy of such minutes to the city clerk. 
(Res. of 6-21-79) 
Sec. 2-189. - Duties, powers. 
    It shall be the duty and power of the commission to promote the development of the city; to encourage desirable industries to locate within the city limits of the city; to assist and advise the mayor and council in all matters concerning the promotion of tourism and trade within the city; to further the development of the industrial park area heretofore set aside by the mayor and council; and to develop and promote the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities available in the city. 
(Res. of 6-21-79) 
Secs. 2-190-2-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLANNING COMMISSION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Historical preservation, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

Sec. 2-211. - Created. 
    In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, a city planning commission is hereby created and established as authorized by the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. The planning commission shall be organized and empowered as set out in this division. 
(Ord. of 1-3-63) 
Sec. 2-212. - Membership. 
    The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city appointed by the city council. The terms of the members shall be for four years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission under the terms of this division, the first member shall be appointed for a term of two years, the third member shall be appointed for three years and the remaining members shall be appointed for terms of four years each. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the city council which shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, or written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any member of the planning commission who misses more than four regular meetings and/or public hearings of the planning commission during any calendar year shall be automatically removed from the planning commission by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 1-3-63; Ord. of 9-3-81) 
Sec. 2-213. - Organization, rules, staff and finances. 
(a)  The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be a public record. No vote shall be taken by the planning commission on any matter unless at least three members are present when the vote is taken. 
(b)  The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the council. 
(Ord. of 1-3-63; Ord. of 9-3-81; Ord of 11-24-08(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-214. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities set forth in the Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 
(Ord. of 1-3-63) 
Secs. 2-215-2-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RECREATION COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Library, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(5); authority to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; state commission on physical fitness created, O.C.G.A. § 50-12-40 et seq. 

Sec. 2-231. - Creation. 
    There is created a commission the title of which shall be the "St. Marys Recreation Commission." The recreation commission shall be considered a part of the administration of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-9-87) 
Sec. 2-232. - Members; appointment, terms, compensation. 
    The recreation commission shall consist of seven members appointed as follows: One member shall be appointed by the mayor, and one member shall be appointed by each one of the city councilmembers. The members shall be residents of the city and have a demonstrated interest, expertise or knowledge in public recreation. Members shall be appointed to serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve continuity on the commission, the initial board of commissioners shall be appointed as follows: Two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary for their service although they may be reimbursed for out-of-pocket expenses. 
(Ord. of 11-9-87) 
Sec. 2-233. - Powers. 
    The recreation commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Recommend to the mayor and council specific plans, programs, expenditures and any other recommendations deemed to be necessary for the promotion of recreational activities within the city. 
(2)  Perform any function delegated to it by the mayor and council for the purpose of providing recreation for the city and the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-9-87) 
Sec. 2-234. - Rules of procedure, organization. 
(a)  The recreation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and consideration of all matters coming before it; shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. 
(b)  The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules of procedure without amendment to this division. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. The commission shall select a chairman and such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. 
(Ord. of 11-9-87) 
Sec. 2-235. - Records of meetings. 
    A public record shall be kept of the recreation commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. of 11-9-87) 
Sec. 2-236. - Removal of members. 
    If a member of the recreation commission misses more than three consecutive meetings in one year without written notification to the chairman of the commission, he shall be automatically taken off the commission and the mayor and city council shall appoint a replacement. The mayor or city councilmember whose appointee has been removed shall make the replacement. 
(Ord. of 11-9-87) 
Secs. 2-237-2-255. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PLACE NUMBERING 

Sec. 2-256. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "The St. Marys Place Numbering Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 11-13-89, § 1) 
Sec. 2-257. - Required. 
    All houses or places of dwelling, business, profession, establishment or other location situated on city streets, alleys or other ways of access in the city shall be numbered in accordance with a system of numbering established by the city's administrative procedures. 
(Ord. of 11-13-89, § 2) 
Sec. 2-258. - Display. 
    The number assigned by the city to each and every place as established in section 2-257 shall be promptly displayed by the attachment of the number assigned by the city to that particular place in plain lettering of sufficient size and placement as to be seen and identified from a vehicle moving along the city streets. Such size shall be no less than three inches in height. The colors of the numbers shall be in contrast to their background. 
(Ord. of 11-13-89, § 3) 
Sec. 2-259. - Assignment of correct numbers. 
    Prior to displaying a number or numbers, each resident or person in charge of such place or places shall apply to the director of planning of the city or his authorized representative to obtain the correct number for the dwelling or place in question, which number shall be assigned by the aforesaid agent of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-13-89, § 4) 
Sec. 2-260. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall fail to comply with the terms and provisions of this article shall be charged with a violation hereof and upon trial and conviction in municipal court shall be fined and/or sentenced as for a misdemeanor in accordance with the Charter of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-13-89, § 5) 
Secs. 2-261-2-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- The city's purchasing policies and procedures are compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of such policies and procedures is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Charter reference- Independent audits, § 2-203; purchasing, contracting and disposition of property, § 5-401 et seq. 
State Law reference- Power of expenditure, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 4, par. 2; discretion of governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1; disposition of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 

Sec. 2-286. - Identity theft prevention program. 
(a)  [Purpose.] The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 CFR section 681.2 in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(b)  Definitions. For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    City means the City of St. Marys. 
    Covered account means: (i) an account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account; and (ii) any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefore. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(c)  Findings. 
(1)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR section 681.2, due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(2)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include water and sewer and solid waste services. 
(3)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(4)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. The finance department is authorized to access of the financial software. 
(5)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: 
a.  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts. 
b.  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(d)  Process of establishing a covered account. 
(1)  As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city or restoring an existing covered account, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer with the following requirements: 
a.  An application is required on the individuals requesting services to be activated; 
b.  A government form of identification with a picture is required and is attached to the application; 
c.  The Social Security Number is requested on the application and entered into the city's computer system to see if proper service was established and if so, it is matched by name to ensure against fraudulent activity; 
d.  Each account is assigned an account number; 
e.  Applications with personal information are kept in filing cabinets that are locked in the city vault with limited access; 
f.  If and when disposed of, personal information is shredded. 
(2)  Each account shall be assigned an account number which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. Customers may also provide passwords to their accounts that must be verified by the customer service representative before information can be released regarding payments or any updated personal information. 
(e)  Access to covered account information. 
(1)  Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. Computers are only accessible with the password to initially sign on by each employee. The financial software is also password protected in order to obtain account information and access customer accounts for payments. 
(2)  Such password(s) shall be changed by the director of the department providing the service for which the covered account is created on a regular basis, shall be at least six characters in length and shall contain letters and/or numbers. The password for initial sign on to the computer is prompted for change by the computer program every 90 days. 
(3)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. 
(4)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(f)  Credit card payments. 
(1)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(2)  All credit card payments made over the telephone will be written by the CSR in order to obtain applicable information for the payment to be entered in the computer payment screen. Once the information has been processed through the credit card machine and payment entered into the computer data base, credit card information obtained will be immediately destroyed for no further use. 
(3)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card used for payment of the covered account. 
(g)  Sources and types of red flags. All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(2)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(3)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: 
1.  The customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments. 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
e.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
f.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
g.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(4)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(h)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(1)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the director of the department. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the director of the department, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the director of the department in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the director of the department: 
a.  Contact the customer; 
b.  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
1.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
2.  Close the account. 
c.  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
d.  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
e.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(2)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the director of the department. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the director of the department, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the director of the department in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the director of the department: 
a.  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
b.  Deny the application for the new account; 
c.  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
d.  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(i)  Updating the program. The city council shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(j)  Program administration. Finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(k)  Outside service providers. In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. of 10-27-08, § 1) 
Note- Other than "city" and "personal identifying information", definitions provided in this section are based on the definitions provided in CFR § 681.2. 
Secs. 2-287-2-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS 

Sec. 2-311. - Workers' compensation. 
    Volunteer firefighters, certified volunteer police officers, noncertified auxiliary police officers, and elected officials shall be covered under the G.M.A. Self-Insurance Workers' Compensation Fund while performing their duties on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § I) 
Sec. 2-312. - Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-5-40, the City of Saint Marys hereby subscribes to a plan of employee benefits consisting of group health offered through the GMEBS. Said benefits shall be provided to eligible employees and dependents as defined by the insurance carrier under Policy Number 1016955 (health) issued by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia (or successor). The city agrees to include only qualified active employees. The city subscribes to the PPO 80/60 Plan. 
(b)  The city agrees to remit to GMEBS the monthly contributions necessary to keep in force the coverage provided. Such contributions shall be due and payable on the first day of each month and late fees or charges, as established by the GMEBS Board of Trustees, shall be collected on any contributions not received by the 15th day of each month. The city agrees to provide 30 days advance written notice to GMEBS of its intent not to continue participation in the employee benefit program. 
(c)  The plan year for the provision of employee benefits offered by the city to its employees shall begin on the first day of August 2007 with the next renewal plan year beginning on the first day of August, 2008. The renewal date in succeeding years to be established by GMEBS in accordance with its operating rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 6-11-07(3), §§ 1-3) 
Secs. 2-313-2-350. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - ETHICS[10] 
Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 11-10-08(2) § 1, amended art. VIII in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art.VIII, §§ 2-351-2-385, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 6-14-04, § 1(3-1-3-15). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-351. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the term: 
    Business means any corporation, partnership, proprietorship, organization, self-employed individual and any other entity operated for economic gain, whether professional, industrial or commercial, and entities which for purposes of federal income taxation are treated as nonprofit organizations. 
    Complaint means a written statement filed with the mayor or mayor pro tem containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
    Confidential information means information which has been obtained in the course of holding public office, employment, an independent contract or otherwise acting as an official or employee, and which information is not available to members of the public under state law or other law or regulation and which the official or employee is not authorized to disclose. 
    Governing authority or member of the governing authority means the mayor or any council member of the city and any member appointed to any board, authority, or commission of the city. 
    Interest means any direct pecuniary benefit, which is not a remote or slight interest, held by or accruing to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract or transaction that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
(1)  Any person in the member's immediate family (spouse, domestic partner, mother, father, sister, brother, and natural or adopted children); 
(2)  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid a commercially reasonable rate; 
(3)  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; 
(4)  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-352. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No member of the governing authority shall: 
(1)  By conduct give reasonable basis for the impression that any person can improperly influence him/her or unduly enjoy his/her favor in the performance of official acts. 
(2)  Directly or indirectly request, receive or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise or thing of value for himself/herself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of official duties. 
(3)  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his/her official position for his/her or another person's private gain. 
(4)  Use his/her official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public. 
(5)  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties. 
(6)  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by law now existing or hereafter enacted, which is applicable to him/her by virtue of being a member of the governing authority. 
(7)  Use his/her position to request or require a city employee to: 
a.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member's family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest; 
b.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment; 
c.  Purchase goods or services to be used for personal, business or political purposes; and 
d.  Work for the member personally without paying the city employee just compensation. 
(8)  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he/she direct city employees to use such property for any purposes other than those officially approved. 
(9)  Use his/her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself/herself or persons having an interest. 
(10)  Order any goods and services for the city without prior applicable required authorization for such expenditure. 
(11)  Draw per diem or expense monies from the city to attend a seminar, convention or conference and then fail to attend the seminar, convention or conference without refunding the pro-rata unused per diem or expense monies to the city. 
(12)  Use the city attorney or attorneys who are under retainer by the city for personal or private business without paying just compensation. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
(1)  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value. 
(2)  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service. 
(3)  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction. 
(4)  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
(5)  The borrowing of funds from any bank or lending institution, which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan. This section shall not apply in the case of the designation of a bank or trust company as a depository for city funds. 
(6)  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the mayor prepares a written record explaining the emergency. 
(7)  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city manager following disclosure. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears on behalf of any applicant in such professional capacity so long as disclosures required by section 2-353, are made to the council or mayor 30 days prior to any action being taken, and the member is associated with the project at the time the initial application is filed. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-353. - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
(a)  An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he/she has reason to believe may be affected by his/her official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement 30 days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and abstain from discussion and voting. 
(b)  An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he/she has at the time such matter is presented to mayor and council for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members regarding the matter in which he/she has an interest. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-354. - Disqualification. 
    A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself/herself from participating in any official act or action of the city in which he/she has an interest, when such pecuniary benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-355. - Prohibited contracts. 
    The city shall not enter into any contract involving property or services with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, except as may be approved in advance by the consent of a majority of the other members of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-356. - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
    The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by a person, who has been within the preceding 12-month period a member of the governing authority, unless a contract is awarded as a result of a competitive bid, or a committee selection process, or as may be approved in advance by the consent of a majority of the members of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Secs. 2-357-2-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 2-371. - Complaints; investigating committee. 
(a)  Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged violation under this article shall file in writing a complaint using the approved official ethics complaint form, setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation against the governing authority. The complaint shall be filed with the mayor, or in the event the complaint regards the mayor, shall be filed with the mayor pro tem. No action will be taken on any compliant received unless said complaint uses the official City of St. Marys Board of Ethics Complaint Form, properly completed including name, address and signature of complainant. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the complaint, the mayor or the mayor pro tem, if the complaint regards the mayor, shall appoint three members of the board of ethics who shall constitute an investigating committee to determine whether the complaint sets forth significant facts and circumstances so as to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics. Appointment to the investigating committee shall be made on a rotational basis commencing at the top of the official list of members on file with the city clerk. 
(c)  The investigating committee shall conduct an investigation, which in all circumstances, must at least include interviewing the member of the governing authority who is the subject of the complaint. The investigating committee shall provide a written report to the board of ethics within 30 days of appointment. The mayor, or mayor pro tem if the complaint regards the mayor, shall approve an extension of time for reporting if exigent circumstances exist. 
(d)  In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or patently unfounded, the investigating committee shall make a recommendation to dismiss to the board of ethics. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall take action as provided herein. 
(e)  The complaint shall not be announced to the public until it is found to be justified by the investigating committee, but shall be subject to open records under Georgia law. 
(f)  The investigating committee shall review any additional complaint filed against any member of the governing authority even if the additional complaint is based upon the same act or occurrence of another complaint. No member of the governing authority shall be subject to a hearing based on additional complaints regarding the same act or occurrence already decided upon in which no violation is found, unless the investigating committee, relying upon all files and records related to the original complaint, determines the additional complaint sets forth sufficient facts to constitute an alleged violation that is separate from the original act or occurrence or that it sets forth new information that may justify a new hearing before the board of ethics. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 3-9-09, § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-372. - Creation, composition and authority of board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics shall be comprised of eight members. The mayor and each city council member shall appoint one person who shall be a resident of the city and who shall possess strong professional leadership. The mayor or councilperson shall appoint these members of the board at the beginning of each term of office for the mayor or councilperson. Said board member shall serve as a board member during the mayor or council members' term of office. One member shall be appointed by the Camden County Bar Association and be an attorney and good standing member of the State Bar of Georgia. 
(b)  The board of ethics shall meet as required under its own procedures; however, the board shall meet at least one time per year in January in order to elect a chair to serve for that calendar year. Such meetings shall be held at city hall and shall be conducted as required by the Georgia Open Meetings Act. The board shall conduct its annual meeting and any general administrative business meetings with at least five or more members of the board of ethics present. However, an official hearing shall only be conducted with a quorum which shall consist of at least five members, one of which shall be the member appointed by the Camden County Bar Association, and a majority vote of the board members sitting at any meeting or hearing shall govern the decisions of the board. 
(c)  The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for it to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(d)  Any member may be removed from office for any misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance and for any cause which, in the opinion of the St. Marys City Council, casts doubt upon the members ability to perform his or her duties effectively and without favor. Prior to removal of any member of the board of ethics, the member shall be furnished with written notice of the charges against him or her and shall be afforded an opportunity for hearing after reasonable notice served personally or by mail. The notice shall include time, place and nature of the hearing. The member so charged shall be given the right to present evidence in his or her own behalf and only after a finding by a majority of the City Council of St. Marys, that good cause for removal exists, i.e., misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance, may a member be removed. If a pending issue is before the board of ethics at the time notice is given to any member, said pending issue will be tabled pending resolution of the charge or charges against the member of the board of ethics. Once removed from the board, a former member may not be re-appointed for five years. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 3-9-09, § 2; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1; Ord. of 2-22-11; Ord. of 6-20-11) 
Sec. 2-373. - Board of ethics powers and duties. 
(a)  The constituted board of ethics shall have the following duties and powers: 
(1)  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs. 
(2)  To hold a hearing, if necessary, within 60 days after the board's receipt of written report from the investigating committee. The mayor, or mayor pro tem if the complaint regards the mayor, shall approve an extension of time for reporting if exigent circumstances exist. 
(3)  To adopt forms, issue subpoenas, and take testimony. All testimony shall be under oath which may be administered by a member of the board. 
(4)  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosure required in this division and to make available to the public information disclosed as provided in this section. 
(5)  To receive and hear complaints of violations of the standards required by this division. 
(6)  To make such investigation and response to a complaint as it deems necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this division. 
(7)  To hold such hearings and make such inquiries as deemed necessary to investigate and rule upon complaints. 
(8)  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority deems appropriate. 
(b)  The board of ethics may consult with the city attorney, however in the event of a conflict, the board of ethics may consult with outside counsel upon majority vote. 
(c)  At the direction of mayor and council, the board of ethics may be asked to provide an advisory opinion based upon a real or hypothetical set of circumstances. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-374. - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
(a)  The board of ethics as appointed herein set forth, shall cause the warranted complaint to be served upon the member of the governing authority charged as soon as practicable. Service may be in personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  A hearing deemed necessary by the board of ethics, shall be held within 60 days after the board's receipt of the written report from the investigating committee. 
(c)  The procedure may include the following: 
(1)  Proceedings generally: 
a.  The proceedings shall be informal but orderly. The facts not in dispute may be stipulated; however, the presiding officer may in his or her discretion reject any stipulated fact. 
b.  The complainant and then the member of the governing authority who is the subject of the inquiry may make an opening statement to the board of ethics. The complainant shall present his or her evidence first. After that, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of the inquiry may present his or her evidence. After all evidence is presented, the complainant may make a closing argument following which the member of the governing authority who is the subject of the inquiry may make a closing argument. The complainant may then make a final statement. 
c.  All hearings shall be open to the public as a meeting under the Georgia Open Meetings Law. The presiding officer of the board of ethics may order the removal of any person disrupting the proceedings. 
(2)  Witnesses: 
a.  The member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry, the complainant or the board of ethics may request the attendance of city employees as witnesses when their testimony will aid in establishing the facts in the case. Requests shall be made to the city manager who will make reasonable efforts to assure the attendance of city employees. The member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry, the complainant or the board of ethics may subpoena any witness to appear and testify at any hearing conducted by the board. The board of ethics acting through the presiding officer unless overruled by a majority of the board of ethics members in attendance may in its discretion, limit the number of witnesses from whom testimony will be taken in order to eliminate duplicate testimony. 
b.  Nothing in this section shall be construed to establish any right in the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry or the complainant or a duty on the part of the city to compel the attendance of any witness. 
c.  No person shall directly or indirectly use, or threaten to use, any official authority or other influence which tends to discourage any other person from testifying. 
d.  All witnesses shall testify under oath or affirmation. 
e.  At least one week before the hearing, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry and the complainant shall provide the city clerk a list of witnesses or speakers who are expected to be present and testify. Persons not on the list may not testify unless permitted by the board of ethics acting through the presiding officer unless overruled by a majority of the board of ethics members in attendance. 
f.  The member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry, the complainant or the board of ethics may insist on the sequestration of witnesses. 
(3)  Cross-examination: The member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry or the complainant may conduct such cross-examination as shall be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. The members of the board of ethics may also examine the witnesses. 
(4)  Evidence: 
a.  Irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and may be noted in the record. 
b.  Evidence may be admitted if it is the type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
c.  Objections to evidentiary offers may be made and may be noted in the record. 
d.  Documentary evidence may be received in the form of copies of excerpts if the original is not readily available. Upon request, and at the discretion of the presiding officer, the parties will be given the opportunity to compare the copy with the original. 
e.  When a hearing will be expedited and the interest of the parties will not be substantially prejudiced, any part of the evidence may be received in written form including, but not limited to, the use of depositions, interrogatories, affidavits, or other written forms of evidence as allowed by the presiding officer in his or her discretion. 
f.  Rules of evidence as generally understood in the civil and criminal courts are not binding. 
(5)  Recordings or transcripts: If an audio or video recording or a written transcript or other type of recording is made by either the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry, the complainant or the board of ethics during a hearing, then the recording or transcript shall be made immediately available to either party or the board of ethics who may be charged the cost of reproduction. A recording on behalf of the city of all hearings under this section will be made using a device approved by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1; Ord. of 6-20-11) 
Sec. 2-375. - Penalty and member rights. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code of ethics provided in this division shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
(b)  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Sec. 2-376. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any member of the governing authority or the complainant adversely affected by these findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in the section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Camden County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedes. 
(Ord. of 11-10-08(2), § 1; Ord. of 8-24-09, § 1) 
Secs. 2-377-2-399. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OPEN RECORDS 

Sec. 2-400. - Open records officer. 
    There is hereby created the office of open records officer. The city clerk is hereby designated as the city's open records officer; the open records officer may designate, in writing, an assistant open records officer(s) as required to perform the duties of his or her office. 
(Amend. of 8-20-12(1)) 
Sec. 2-401. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the open records officer and his or her duly designated assistant open records officer(s) to accept written requests to inspect and copy public records, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq., and to produce to the requester all records responsive to a request within a reasonable amount of time not to exceed three business days of receipt of a request, unless the time for response is extended in accordance with law. The open records officer shall ensure that all open records requests are handled in accordance with the Georgia Open Records Act. No request shall be deemed filed until served upon the open records officer, either by hand delivery to the officer at the clerk's office, City Hall of the City of St. Marys, Georgia; by certified United States Mail, return receipt requested; by statutory overnight delivery; by email to darlene.roellig@stmarysga.gov ; or by facsimile transmission to 912-510-4013 or such other fax number designated on the city's official website for such purpose. Oral requests and requests, whether oral or in writing, served upon any other officer or employee of the city shall not be deemed filed, until the requester has filed his or her request, in writing, with the open records officer. In the absence or unavailability of the open records officer, an assistant open records officer shall perform the duties of the open records officer. The absence or unavailability of a designated open records officer shall not delay the city's response to a properly served request. 
(Amend. of 8-20-12(1)) 
Sec. 2-402. - Request response. 
    Upon receipt of a request, it shall be the duty of the open records officer to promptly ascertain the availability of all public records responsive to the request and to produce to the requester those records that can be located and produced within a reasonable time, not to exceed three business days of receipt of a request. For purposes of computing the time within which a response must be made, the open records officer shall not count the business day on which a request is received, nor any intervening Saturday, Sunday, or designated holiday on which city offices are closed for general business. Upon intake of a request, the open records officer shall stamp the request with the date and time of receipt, and initial the request. In any instance where records are unavailable within three business days of the request, it shall be the duty of the open records officer to provide the requester with a written description of such records and a timeline for when the records will be available for inspection or copying and to provide the responsive records to the requester as soon thereafter as practicable. Such response shall also contain a good faith estimate of the cost to the requester for the search, retrieval, redaction, and production and copying of records. The open records officer shall confer with every officer or department manager of the city, as necessary, to ascertain the existence of public records responsive to a request (including electronically-stored information), and it shall be the duty of every city officer and department manager to confer with and provide records, or true and correct copies of the originals thereof, to the open records officer promptly, time being of the essence. Upon receipt of a public record responsive to a request, the open records officer shall determine, in consultation with the city attorney, if the record is exempt from disclosure by order of a court of this state or by law; if the record is exempt from disclosure, the written response by the open records officer shall set forth the specific legal authority under which withholding of inspection of the record is claimed. The open records officer shall maintain a log or other documentation of his or her due diligence to comply with a proper request. 
(Amend. of 8-20-12(1)) 
Sec. 2-403. - Fees. 
    The open records officer shall further have the duty to collect from a requester a reasonable charge for the search, retrieval, redaction, and production/copying of records, utilizing the most economical means available to identify and produce nonexcluded records. The charge for the search, retrieval, or redaction of records shall not exceed the prorated hourly salary of the lowest paid full-time employee who, in the reasonable discretion of the open records officer, has the necessary skill and training to perform the request; provided, however, no charge shall be made for the first quarter hour. In addition thereto, where certified copies of specific records are sought, the fees for certified copies prescribed by law shall apply; otherwise, a fee for the copying of records shall not exceed $0.10 per page for letter or legal size documents or, in the case of other documents and electronic records, the actual cost of reproducing the document or media on which the records or media are produced. 
(Amend. of 8-20-12(1)) 
Sec. 2-404. - Litigation. 
    Requests by civil litigants, or their counsel of record, in any ongoing civil action or administrative proceeding shall be made in writing and shall include the style of the action or proceeding, the names and addresses of all parties and, if a party is represented by counsel, the name, address and telephone number of the party's attorney; a copy of the request shall be served by the requester upon all parties or their counsel of record in the action or proceeding contemporaneous to filing the written request with the open records officer. The open records officer shall make duplicate set(s) of records provided in response to the request available to all parties or their counsel for the cost of copies only, unless a party or its counsel elects not to receive the records and pay the copying charge. If the city is a party to the action or proceeding, a set of responses shall be provided to counsel for the city at no charge. 
(Amend. of 8-20-12(1)) 
Secs. 2-405-2-430. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; handbills and advertising matter, § 70-1; posting signs on utility poles, § 70-4; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Regulation of signs used by retail distilled spirits dealer, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-3; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; regulation of outdoor advertising in vicinity of interstate highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 10, 1997(1), repealed former Art. II, §§ 6-36-6-39 of this chapter, which pertained to political signs and derived from §§ 101-401 of an ordinance adopted March 27, 1989. 

Secs. 6-36-6-39. - Reserved. 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 7, 2011(1), amended ch. 10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 10 §§ 10-1-10-51, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from ordinances of Dec. 11, 1989, §§ 1-6; March 23, 1998, § 2; May 13, 2002, § 2; May 12, 2003, §§ 1-3; Dec. 13, 2004, § 1; Jan 14, 2007, § 1; June 11, 2007(2), §§ 1, 2; June 9, 2008(1), §§ 1-11; and Nov. 24, 2008(2), §§ 1, 2. 
Charter reference- Excise tax on alcoholic beverages, § 5-105. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; business, ch. 22; courts, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; public intoxication, § 70-5; taxation, ch. 90; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Use of proceeds of alcoholic beverage tax for prevention, education and treatment, Ga. Const. art. 3, sec. 9, par. 6; Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; furnishing to, purchase of or possession by persons under 21 years of age, use of false identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23; public drunkenness, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41; furnishing alcoholic beverages to persons under 21 years of age, jurisdiction of municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10; treatment of alcoholics and intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 37-8-1 et seq.; driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-391. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-0. - [Statement of purpose.] 
    This chapter, in addition to regulating the licensing, sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages within the city limits of the City of St. Marys, shall also: 
(1)  Regulate the consumption of alcohol on city streets, within city buildings, and within city parks and recreation facilities; 
(2)  Establish limited areas where consumption of alcohol on city streets, within city buildings, and within city parks and recreation facilities is permitted; 
(3)  Establish rules and regulations pertaining to such areas; 
(4)  To prohibit open containers in areas other than limited special event areas; 
(5)  Prohibit the outside delivery of alcoholic beverages; 
(6)  Provide for severability; 
(7)  To repeal conflicting ordinances; 
(8)  To provide an effective date; 
(9)  And for other purposes as set forth herein. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-1. - Sale within corporate limits of the city. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold in the city under a license granted by the city council upon the terms and conditions provided herein. 
(b)  All licenses pursuant to this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "This license is subject to suspension and/or revocation at any time, for legal cause, upon majority vote of council, and is subject to any further ordinance which may be enacted." 
(c)  Any holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter is required to apply for and obtain an alcoholic beverage license from the state before any sales commence. Additionally, city licensees are required to abide by all applicable local ordinances, state laws and regulations. 
(d)  All premises and activities where alcohol is served (including special events) shall be regulated herein and shall also conform to all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the following definitions ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where a word is not defined herein, the definition provided by the New American Dictionary, Latest Edition, shall govern: 
    Alcohol: Ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage: Includes all alcohol and distilled spirits, as defined in this section regardless of alcohol content. 
    Alcoholic beverage package store: A bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. Alcoholic beverage package store shall include all alcoholic beverages in their original container, sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. This definition shall not apply to special events as defined herein nor shall it apply to wine/beer retail package store (see definition). 
    Alcoholic treatment center: A facility owned and operated by the state, county, or city. 
    Beer or malt beverage: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume, including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. Also included are beverages known as "nonalcoholic beer", which is made by fermentation of an infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or other products, and containing less than three percent, but more than 0.1 percent alcohol by volume. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    College campus: Shall apply only to the educational buildings of such state, county, city, church or other colleges as teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as stenography, business, music, art, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not apply to college grounds, stadiums or recreational areas. 
    Container: An open container as defined in article II. 
    Distance requirements: Each license classification shall conform to the distance requirements listed in "separation distance table" for that classification. 

(1)  Door to door distances shall be measured from the centerline of the main entrance door of the licensed establishment, as if proceeding by foot in the most direct legal manner to the centerline of the main entrance door to the facility noted under each license classification. Legal manner shall be defined as being perpendicular to the main entrance door to a sidewalk or street, parallel to the sidewalk or street to a legal crossing of the street at an intersection or corner, then parallel to the street or sidewalk to a point perpendicular to the centerline of the main entrance door to the facility noted under each license classification. Street crossings at an intersection do not need to be marked, but any corner of any legal street can be considered an implied crosswalk for the purposes of this chapter. Jaywalking is illegal in St. Marys. Therefore using a diagonal crossing of any street for measurement of distance is not permitted. 
(2)  Where building to building is listed as a requirement, then the distance shall be measured in a straight line from the closest edge of the building to the closest edge of the adjacent building as defined in the appropriate license classification. 
(3)  Where there are multiple main entry doors, the closest main entry door to the licensed establishment shall be used. Other doors that are not main entry doors shall not be used to calculate distance. In the case of dispute, the planning director shall determine the door to be used. 
(4)  Distances shall be measured using on the ground survey. The applicant shall provide a signed and sealed survey provided by a Georgia licensed professional engineer of the property with the distances shown to the appropriate adjacent structure as measured in the field by said Georgia registered surveyor for all requests for a new license for existing structures or new structures. The planning director or designated staff shall confirm the distances in the field to the best of their ability. 
    Distilled spirits or spirituous liquor: Any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to all fortified wines. 
    Dwelling: A building or portion thereof that provides living facilities for person, persons or families, including single-family and other multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels, bed and breakfast inns or motels. 
    Eating establishment: Any public place, including a place available for rental by the public, selling prepared food for consumption by the public on the premises with a full-service kitchen. As a minimum, a full-service kitchen will consist of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, with code approved and permitted exhaust hood, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health department and city building official. An eating establishment shall be prepared to serve food every hour within which such establishment is open to the public, shall derive at least as much gross receipts annually from the sale of prepared meals or food as it derives from the sale of alcohol beverages, and shall have a seating capacity of at least 15 people. Such establishment shall also have employed therein a sufficient number of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. (See also certification requirements for employees.) 
    Festival: A festival is a special event, usually and ordinarily staged by a local community, which centers on and celebrates some unique aspect of that community. 
    Financial interest: Any ownership interest in any entity seeking or holding a license under this chapter amounting to 20 percent or more or more of the entire ownership thereof. 
    Fortified wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Fortified wine includes, but is not limited to brandy. 
    Governing authority: The City Council of the City of St. Marys. 
    Hotel: Any hotel, inn, motel, bed and breakfast or other establishment which offers overnight accommodations to the public for hire that has a valid occupation tax license or current special use permit issued by the City of St. Marys. Hotels of any size without an eating establishment must obtain a noneating establishment license to provide for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages solely to occupants of the hotel and their guests by the drink for consumption only on the premises. Premises shall be defined as the interior of the structure, including any attached porches or decks. 
    In-room service: (a) the delivery of alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages to a registered guest of verified age, by an employee of the hotel to the registered guest's room or to a registered guest at any other location in the same building as the hotel when such alcoholic beverages have been ordered by the guest and when the guest shall be billed for the cost of such alcoholic beverages at the time of delivery and when the sale of such alcoholic beverages is completed at the time of delivery; and (b) the provision of a cabinet or other facility located in a hotel's guestroom which contains alcoholic beverages and which is provided upon written request of the guest and which is accessible by lock and key only to the guest and for which the sale of the alcoholic beverages contained therein is deemed to be final at the time requested except for a credit which may be given to the guest for any unused portion. 
    License: An authorization granted by the City of St. Marys to operate as a retail consumption dealer, retail package dealer or wholesale dealer. 
    License classification: There are eight classifications of licenses issued by the City of St. Marys. These licenses shall be classified as: 
(1)  Eating establishment (restaurant) in the C-1 zone with food/beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(2)  Noneating establishment (bar, lounge, etc.) in the C-1 zone with beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(3)  Eating establishment (restaurant) in the C-2 or C-3 zone with food/beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(4)  Noneating establishment (bar, lounge, etc.) in the C-2 or C-3 zone with beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(5)  Noneating establishment (package store) in the C-1, C-2 or C-3 zone with either beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor off-premises only. 
(6)  Club license-Public or private club on-premises only. 
(7)  Temporary-daily (two days per year) on city-approved location/premises only. 
(8)  Special events and festivals as classified and approved by city council. 
    Licensee: The individual to whom a license is issued or, in the case of a partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors of the partnership or corporation. 
    Liter: Metric volume measurement as defined by the United States Commerce Department's National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
    Manufacturer: Any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. Manufacturer also means, in the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; in the case of malt beverage, any brewer. 
    Noneating establishment: As used herein, a noneating establishment shall be a venue where beer, wine, and/or liquor are sold without food. This designation shall be divided into two classifications: Classifications 2 and 4 shall include bars and lounges, and other similar venues; classification 5 shall include package stores, wine/beer package stores, liquor package stores, and other similar venues. In the instance of wine and/or beer package stores only, wine or beer tasting shall be permitted in one ounce dispensers, one per customer for a maximum of five samples of wine or beer. 
    Nonprofit/not-for-profit organizations: Institutions that conduct their affairs for the purpose of assisting other individuals, groups, or causes rather than garnering profits for themselves. Nonprofit groups have no shareholders; do not distribute profits in a way that benefits members, directors, or other individuals in their private capacity; and often receive exemption from various taxes in recognition of their contributions to bettering the general social fabric of the community. Proof of nonprofit or not-for-profit status shall be by current valid copy of IRS 501-C3 or equivalent certification. Status will not be granted simply based on verbal or written representations of the applicant. 
    Person: Any individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Premises: The definite closed or partitioned establishment, whether room, shop or building wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or consumed. Premises shall also include the sidewalk serving area of sidewalk cafes permitted under section 10-33 and an outside, open air or patio-type serving area on the private property of an establishment. Such outside, open air or patio-type serving area must meet all planning and zoning requirements and adjoin or be connected to the main service building in such a manner as to prevent the movement of pedestrians or vehicular traffic between the outside serving area and the main service building. 
    Pre-purchased wrist band: A bracelet-type wrist band that identifies the ability of the participant in any event within the permitted specific event location 1, 2, 3, as per definition for zone limit diagram, to carry alcoholic beverages in an open container. Wrist bands shall be issued by the event organizer and/or license holder to any participant for a fee as noted on the fee schedule after review of a valid and unaltered state driver's license. Personnel of the event organizer and/or license holder that issues the wrist band shall place their initials on the band prior to putting it on the wrist of the participant. No band shall be issued to anyone under the legal age for consumption of alcoholic beverages. Band shall not be able to be removed without damaging the band, so that transference of the band to another participant will not be possible. Band color and/or pattern shall be selected by the event organizer. The band shall be presented to any authorized law enforcement personnel upon request. Participants who are legally intoxicated shall not receive a band. The band shall be revoked by any authorized law enforcement personnel for obvious public drunkenness or disorderly conduct. 
Issuance of a wrist band is a license that can be revoked at any time by the event organizer and/or license holder. All income derived from the sale of the wrist bands shall be paid to the City of St. Marys to cover police, fire, emergency, and public works personnel that are in attendance at any event. Income over and above such expenses shall be refunded to the event organizer and/or license holder. 
    Private club (a/k/a bona fide private club or club): 
(1)  A nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of the State of Georgia which: 
a.  Has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued pursuant to this chapter; 
b.  Has at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
c.  Owns, hires, or leases a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
1.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and 
2.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests. 
d.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(2)  "Fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a bona fide private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission on any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Private clubs shall only serve to bona fide members and bona fide guests of members. 
(4)  All members and guests served shall be of legal age for drinking. 
    Public hearings: Shall be conducted in accordance with this chapter and/or section 10-17 as applicable. 
    Retail consumption dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale, such as restaurants, bars, lounges, or equivalent. 
    Retail package dealer: Any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
    School, school building or educational building: Shall not include dwellings or other structures within which "home schools" are conducted or operated by parents and guardians for children residing in that home. 
    Special event: "Special event" means a group activity including, but not limited to, a performance, meeting, assembly, contest, exhibit, ceremony, parade, athletic competition, reading, or picnic involving more than 20 people or a group activity involving less than 20 people for which specific space is requested to be reserved. Special event shall not include casual park use by visitors or tourists. Special events shall be regulated herein and shall also conform to the requirements of article II of this chapter. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale dealer: Any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
    Wine: Any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. Wine includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at the point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
    Wine/beer retail package store: Shall include all wine/beer/ale beverages in a bottle, can or other original consumer container sold at retail to the final consumer, and not for resale. This definition shall not apply to special events as defined herein. Wine/beer tasting as defined herein are permitted under this designation. 
    Zone limit diagram: The three zones shall be as follows: 

(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-3. - Classifications of licenses. 
(a)  There are eight classifications of licenses that are issued by the city in conformance with state law: 
(1)  Eating establishment (restaurant) in the C-1 zone with food/beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(2)  Noneating establishment (bar, lounge, wine/beer retail package store, etc.) in the C-1 zone with beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(3)  Eating establishment (restaurant) in the C-2 or C-3 zone with food/beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(4)  Noneating establishment (bar, lounge, wine/beer retail package store etc.) in the C-2 or C-3 zone with beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor on-premises only. 
(5)  Noneating establishment (alcoholic beverage package store) in the C-1, C-2 or C-3 zone with either beer/wine or beer/wine/liquor or liquor off-premises only. 
(6)  Club license-Public or private club on-premises only. 
(7)  Temporary-daily (two days per year) on city-approved location/premises only. 
(8)  Special events and/or festivals as classified and approved by city council. 
(b)  Each classification of license has specific requirements. Specific requirements for each classification of license are as listed. General requirements of this chapter which shall apply to all licenses are as follows: 
(1)  A separate license is required for each premises. 
(2)  The distance requirements for each classification of license are listed in the separation distance table (attached to the ordinance from which this chapter derives) which is incorporated herein by reference. 
(c)  [Classifications.] 
(1)  Classification 1: Eating establishment (restaurant) license in the C-1 zone with food/beer/wine/liquor. 
a.  An eating establishment as defined herein. 
b.  A separate license is required for each premises. 
c.  The distance requirements for each classification of license are listed in the separation distance table which is incorporated herein by reference. 
d.  No person may knowingly and intentionally sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form from an eating establishment except as provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and the regulations of the state department of revenue adopted thereunder. 
e.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages for sale for consumption off the premises. 
f.  A new alcoholic beverage license for an eating establishment as defined in this subsection, for on-premises consumption may be issued a maximum of one alcoholic beverage license per C-1 central business district lot. 
(2)  Classification 2: Noneating establishment (bar, lounge, wine/beer retail package store etc.) license in the C-1 zone with beer/wine/liquor. 
a.  This classification also includes an establishment that provides wine or beer tasting in small containers as part of the sale of the item as defined herein. 
b.  A separate license is required for each premises. 
c.  The distance requirements for each classification of license are listed in the separation distance table which is incorporated herein by reference. 
d.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form from an eating establishment except as provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and the regulations of the state department of revenue adopted thereunder. 
e.  A new alcoholic beverage license for a noneating establishment as defined in this subsection, for on-premises consumption may be issued a maximum of one alcoholic beverage license per C-1 central business district lot. 
(3)  Classification 3: Eating establishment (restaurant) license in the C-2 or C-3 zone with food/beer/wine/liquor. 
a.  An eating establishment as defined herein. 
b.  A separate license is required for each premises. 
c.  The distance requirements for each classification of license are listed in the separation distance table which is incorporated herein by reference. 
d.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form from an eating establishment except as provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and the regulations of the state department of revenue adopted thereunder. 
e.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages for sale for consumption off the premises. 
f.  A new alcoholic beverage license for an eating establishment as defined in this subsection, for on-premises consumption may be issued a maximum of one alcoholic beverage license per C-2 or C-3 commercial business district lot. 
(4)  Classification 4: Noneating establishment (bar, lounge, wine/beer retail package store etc.) license in the C-2 or C-3 zone with beer/wine/liquor. 
a.  This classification also includes an establishment that provides wine or beer tasting in small containers as part of the sale of the item as defined herein. 
b.  A separate license is required for each premises. 
c.  The distance requirements for each classification of license are listed in the separation distance table which is incorporated herein by reference. 
d.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form from an eating establishment except as provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and the regulations of the state department of revenue adopted thereunder. 
e.  A new alcoholic beverage license for a noneating establishment as defined in this subsection, for on-premises consumption may be issued a maximum of one alcoholic beverage license per C-2 or C-3 district lot. 
(5)  Classification 5: Noneating establishment (alcoholic beverage package) license in the C-2 or C-3 zone without food. 
a.  A noneating establishment as defined herein. 
b.  A separate license is required for each premises. 
c.  The distance requirements for each classification of license are listed in the separation distance table which is incorporated herein by reference. 
d.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form from a noneating establishment except as provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and the regulations of the state department of revenue adopted thereunder. 
e.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages for sale for consumption off the premises. 
(6)  Classification 6: Club license. 
a.  These licenses shall be issued to bona fide clubs which are and remain in compliance with state and federal tax regulations. These types of clubs may include Eagles, Masonic, veterans, golf, social and other similar clubs. 
b.  A separate license is required for each premises. 
c.  The distance requirements for each classification of license are listed in the separation distance table which is incorporated herein by reference. 
d.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form from a club establishment except as provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and the regulations of the state department of revenue adopted thereunder. 
e.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages for sale for consumption off the premises. 
(7)  Classification 7: Temporary license-All zones. 
a.  The city upon the submission of a completed application, shall permit temporary alcohol licenses for a maximum of two per year. 
b.  All distance requirements for a temporary license shall be complied with. 
c.  All server certification requirements shall be complied with. 
d.  No alcohol shall leave the temporary permit site, either in opened or unopened containers. 
e.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages in package form from a temporary license establishment except as provided by the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code (O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2 et seq.) and the regulations of the state department of revenue adopted thereunder. 
f.  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell and no license shall be issued for retail sale of alcoholic beverages for sale for consumption off the premises. 
(8)  Classification 8: Special events. As classified and approved by city manager. 
Separation Distance Table-2016 
License Type Religious School College Resident Mental/Alcohol Health Public Housing Navy Distance Between Venues Door 
To 
Door Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. Door 
To 
Door Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. Door 
To 
Door Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. Door 
To 
Door Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. Door 
To 
Door Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. Door 
To 
Door Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. Door 
To 
Door Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. Bldg. 
To 
Bldg. 1. Eating Establishment (Restaurant) 
 C-1 Zone with food/beer/wine/liquor on premises only (see note 4) 300 N/A 600 N/A 300 N/A 0 N/A 500 N/A 500 N/A N/A N/A 0 2. Non-Eating Establishment (Restaurant) 
 Lounge, Wine/beer retail package store, etc. C-2 zone without food and with beer/wine/liquor on premises only (see notes 4, 6) 300 N/A 600 600 300 300 15 N/A 500 N/A 500 N/A N/A N/A 0 3. Eating Establishment (Restaurant) 
 C-2 or C-3 Zone with food/beer/wine/liquor on premises only 300 N/A N/A 600 N/A 300 N/A 300 N/A 300 N/A 200 N/A 500 0 4. Non-Eating Establishment (Bar, Lounge, wine/beer retail package store, etc.) 
 C-2 or C-3 Zone with food/beer/wine/liquor on premises only (see notes 4, 6) 300 N/A 600 N/A 300 N/A 0 N/A 500 N/A 500 N/A N/A N/A 0 5. Non-Eating Establishment (Alcohol beverage package store) 
 C-2 or C-3 Zone with food/beer/wine/liquor on premises only (see note 5) Wine/beer retail package store only is licensed type 2 and 4 600 N/A N/A 600 N/A 6 N/A 100 N/A 900 N/A 900 N/A 900 16,000 6. Club License 300 N/A 600 N/A 300 N/A 0 N/A 500 N/A 500 N/A N/A N/A 0 7. Temporary license (all zones) 100 N/A N/A 600 N/A N/A 0 N/A 500 N/A 500 N/A N/A N/A 0 8. Special Events As directed by Council for the specific event within the green line with wrist bands NOTES TO TABLE: 
  1. All figures are in feet. 
  2. See definitions for "door to door" and "building to building" measurements 
  3. N/A means not applicable or unnecessary or 0 
  4. Distance to C-1 residential component is 0 
  5. Distance between venues is radius from existing front door of existing establishment 
  6. Does not include alcoholic beverages package store  
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1), Ord. No. 2017-001 , 2-6-17; Ord. No. 2017-6-5-003 , 6-5-17) 
Sec. 10-4. - Consumption of alcohol on city streets prohibited and limited in certain areas. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to dispense any alcoholic beverage into an open container for removal from the premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove from an alcoholic beverage establishment any open container of alcoholic beverage or to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from any open container or to possess in any open container any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private, within the corporation limits of the City St. Marys. Article II of this chapter shall remain in force and be enforced outside of the designated event location zones 1, 2 and 3. 
(b)  The area comprising the premises for a license under this classification (based on the approved specific event location 1, 2, 3 as per this chapter and as specifically attached to the application for participants wearing a pre-purchased "wrist band") shall be outlined or otherwise delineated on the ground by an event organizer or the license holder in any manner approved by the ranking St. Marys Police Officer in attendance such that participants know where the licensed area is. The ranking St. Marys Police Officer in attendance may require clearer or additional delineation be made by the license holder at any time during the event. Failure to comply with such request shall result in the automatic and immediate termination of the license and require termination of the event. Within this area, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container though not a container made of glass or metal or other material for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from licensed premises. 
(2)  No container in which and alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises may exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall have in their possession on the streets or sidewalks, in parks and squares or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container unless a "wrist band" has been previously obtained from the event sponsor and/or license holder. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispense, drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(c)  The city clerk shall maintain list of events and or festivals sponsored by the city that are pre-approved. Any event not on this list shall require specific city manager approval. This list shall be updated annually by the city clerk and council. 
(d)  Applicant shall refer to article II of this chapter for data relating to the City Open Container Act. 
(e)  Outside delivery of drinks prohibited. Retail consumption dealers under this chapter shall not sell or permit the sale of alcoholic beverages except within the physical confines of the licensed premises. The sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages through any window, door, or other opening in the license premises to persons outside the physical confines of the structure, and any sale or delivery of beverage alcohol upon the street, sidewalk, or grounds outside the license premises/event location is prohibited. 
(f)  Should the licensed special event either be a nuisance or cause a nuisance as defined in other sections of the ordinances of the City of St. Marys, the city reserves the right to deny subsequent permits for special events/festivals and/or restrict the use of alcohol in future events by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1); Ord. No. 2017-6-5-003 , 6-5-17) 
Sec. 10-5. - Applications for a profit business or function. 
(a)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages shall make application on the form prescribed by the city council. Only fully complete applications will be presented to council for the scheduling of a public hearing. Incomplete applications will be returned for completion and the city will not be responsible for delays in processing or approving the application due to said incompletion. 
(b)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
(1)  Full and complete name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Social Security Number or tax I.D. number of the applicant; 
(3)  The exact name of the business to be located at the licensed location; 
(4)  Complete and accurate street address and identification of the premises or location to be licensed; 
(5)  If applicant is a general or limited partnership, the complete names, Social Security Numbers, and residence addresses of all partners, whether general, managing, or limited; 
(6)  If a corporation, the names, addresses, and titles of all officers, shareholders, directors, and registered agent for service of process; 
(7)  The names, Social Security Numbers, and residence addresses of all on-site managers for the establishment to be licensed; 
(8)  The names, Social Security Numbers, and residence addresses of all other persons who have or may have a financial interest in the operation and business of the establishment to be licensed; 
(9)  Complete and full disclosure of any prior criminal convictions, alcohol license suspensions or revocations, and other administrative sanctions imposed upon applicant, its principles, and manager(s) in relation to alcoholic beverage licensure by any governmental entity. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish such data, fingerprints, and other documentation or records as required by the city council to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish information or documentation pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(d)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(e)  All applications for a new license shall be accompanied by a plat of survey prepared, signed and sealed by a registered land surveyor depicting or showing the proximity of the location to be licensed to: 
(1)  Churches; 
(2)  School buildings, educational buildings, and school; 
(3)  Housing authority properties; 
(4)  Location for which a valid alcoholic beverage license exists; 
(5)  Any dwelling lying within the distance requirements noted in the separation distance table for each license classification; 
(6)  College campus or property employed as a college campus; 
(7)  Alcohol treatment facility or mental health facility located within the distances noted in the separation distance table; 
(8)  Accurate street address or legal description of the property upon which the establishment is to be located. 
All applications required to be accompanied by a plat under this provision shall include an additional fee for site plan review as set forth in section 10-11. 
(f)  In all instances in which an application is denied under the provision of this chapter the applicant may not re-apply for a license for at least one year from the final date of such denial. 
(g)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied. Such written notification shall set forth the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  All applications shall be accompanied by a consent from the proposed licensee for the city clerk to secure a criminal background report on that person(s) and a check for the cost thereof. 
(i)  All applicants shall complete a criminal history record information consent form provided by the city clerk, and shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(j)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a copy of the building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the city building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the immediately adjacent street(s) on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-6. - Application for a not-for-profit business or function. 
    Documented nonprofit/not-for-profit application forms for temporary license. 
(1)  All persons desiring to sell alcoholic beverages, shall make application on the form prescribed by the city council. 
(2)  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to the following: 
a.  Full and complete name and address of the applicant; 
b.  Social Security Number or tax I.D. number of the applicant; 
c.  The exact name of the business to be located at the licensed location; 
d.  Complete and accurate street address and identification of the premises or location to be licensed; 
e.  If applicant is a general or limited partnership, the complete names, Social Security Numbers, and residence addresses of all partners, whether general, managing, or limited; 
f.  If a corporation, the names, addresses, and titles of all officers, shareholders, directors, and registered agent for service of process; 
g.  The names, Social Security Numbers, and residence addresses of all on-site managers for the establishment to be licensed; 
h.  The names, Social Security Numbers, and residence addresses of all other persons who have or may have a financial interest in the operation and business of the establishment to be licensed; 
i.  Complete and full disclosure of any prior criminal convictions, alcohol license suspensions or revocations, and other administrative sanctions imposed upon applicant, its principals, and manager(s) in relation to alcoholic beverage licensure by any governmental entity. 
(3)  All applicants shall furnish such data, and other documentation or records as required by the city council to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to furnish information or documentation pursuant to such request shall automatically serve to dismiss the application with prejudice. 
(4)  All applications shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or other officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(5)  The city clerk shall provide written notice to any applicant whose application is denied. Such written notification shall set forth the reasons for such denial and shall advise the applicant of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. 
(6)  All applications shall be accompanied by a consent from the proposed licensee for the city clerk to secure a criminal background report on that person(s) and a check for the cost thereof. 
(7)  All applicants shall complete a criminal history record information consent form provided by the city clerk, and shall be sworn to by the applicant before a notary public or officer empowered by law to administer oaths. 
(8)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will be located is complete and detailed plans of the building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval when completed by the city building inspector. Each building in which the business will be located shall contain sufficient lighting so that the building itself and the premises on all sides of the building are readily visible at all times from the front of the street on which the building is located so as to reveal all of the outside premises of such building. Each applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall attach to the application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building, or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. If the applicant is a franchisee, then such applicant shall attach a copy of the franchise agreement or contract with the application. All premises for which an alcoholic beverage license shall be issued shall afford therein adequate sanitary toilet facilities and shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by the customers therein. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-7. - Consumption. 
(a)  No retail consumption dealer licensed under this chapter shall keep any beer or wine or other alcoholic beverages at any place except the licensed place of business. No retail consumption dealer shall be permitted to enter into any type of arrangement whereby distilled spirits ordered by a licensee are stored by a licensed wholesaler. 
(b)  No retail consumption dealers licensed under this chapter shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for herself/himself, or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the beverage; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for herself/himself or for the others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic beverage or nonalcoholic beverage or money with which to purchase the beverage. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-8. - Advertisement, public hearing and method of granting licenses. 
(a)  Council shall vote in public session to advertise a public hearing only when a fully completed application, verified as complete by staff, is submitted to council for review. 
(b)  Upon a majority vote of council to advertise the application for public hearing, notice of the time and date of such public hearing shall be published in the official legal organ of the county at least two times during the two weeks immediately preceding the date of the public hearing. 
(c)  The council shall conduct, prior to the granting of a new license, a public hearing on the fitness and qualifications of the license applicant. 
(d)  The city council at a regularly scheduled meeting shall consider the license application and/or application for license transfer and shall determine whether the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. Council may, in its discretion, entertain or grant a license application at the meeting wherein the public hearing is held. Council shall either grant or deny such application within 90 days of the public hearing on a proper and complete license application. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-9. - Withdrawal, amendment and rejection of application. 
(a)  Any license application may be withdrawn by the applicant at any time. If the application is withdrawn before advertising pursuant to subsection 10-8(a), all sums deposited as license fees will be refunded. Thereafter, any costs incurred by the city in advertising and otherwise processing the application shall be deducted from any sums to be refunded to the applicant. 
(b)  All license applications must be fully complete and accurate at the time of filing with the city clerk. Once filed, license applications may not be amended or revised. Upon the applicant's written request, an application requiring amendment or revision may be withdrawn, corrected, revised, or amended, and then refiled. An additional application fee must be paid at the time of the refiling of a revised, corrected, or amended application. 
(c)  Applications which are incomplete or inaccurate with regard to any material matter or information, or which are filed without accompanying documents, date or information required in this chapter, may be rejected by city council at any stage of the license approval process and any costs incurred by the city in processing such incomplete, rejected application shall be deducted from license fees refundable to applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-10. - Licensing qualifications. 
(a)  No license for sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who is not a citizen of the United States or a naturalized citizen lawfully admitted for permanent residence or an alien who has been granted permanent resident status by the United States. Proof of legal citizen status shall be available for review if requested. The applicant shall cooperate with city staff to verify his or her lawful presence in the United States, including making any affidavit required by state law. 
(b)  Where the applicant is a partnership or corporation, the provisions of this section shall apply to all its partners, or stockholders with a financial interest in the entity and all officers and general partners and/or majority stockholders. In the case of a corporation, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and the majority stockholder, if an individual. Where the majority stockholder is not an individual, the license shall be issued jointly to the corporation and its agent registered under the provisions of this chapter. In the case of a partnership or limited partnership, the license will be issued to all the partners owning at least 20 percent of the partnership; or if no partner owns 20 percent of the partnership, then the general partner, managing partner or the partner with the greatest ownership will be licensed. 
(c)  No person shall be granted any alcoholic beverage license or registration certificate if it shall appear to the city council or clerk respectively that any of the grounds for denial of a license exists as the same are set forth in section 10-16 of this chapter. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any city employee directly involved in the issuance of alcoholic beverage licenses under this chapter to have any whole, partial or beneficial interest in any license to sell alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(e)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted to any person who has had any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages revoked, for reasons other than location requirements, revoked or suspended, by any governmental entity in Georgia during a period of 24 months immediately preceding the date of the filing of a license application with the city clerk. 
(f)  The city council may decline to issue a license when any person having any ownership interest in the operation of such place of business or control over such place of business does not meet the same character requirements as set forth in this section for the licensees. 
(g)  If applicant is not a city resident, all licensed establishments must designate and continuously maintain a resident of Camden County upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this chapter to be served upon the licenses or owner may be served. The applicant shall file the name of such representative, along with the written consent of such person, if different from applicant, with the city clerk and shall be in such form as the city clerk may prescribe. Lack of a continuous permanent resident is grounds for denial of the application or revocation of the application after issuance. 
(h)  A license application may be denied to any applicant, or the license revoked, for any alcoholic beverage license where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person or persons who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(i)  For purposes of this chapter, a conviction or plea of guilty or nolo contendere shall be ignored as to any offense for which a defendant who was allowed to avail themselves of the Georgia First Offender Act (1968 Ga. Laws, page 324), as amended. Except, however, that any such offense shall not be ignored where the defendant has violated any term of probation imposed by the court granting first offender treatment or committed another crime and the sentencing court entered an adjudication of guilt as to the crime for which the defendant had previously been sentenced as a first offender. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1); Ord. No. 2015-001 , 1-5-15) 
Sec. 10-11. - Fees. 
(a)  Before a license shall be granted, the applicant shall comply with all rules and regulations adopted by the city council regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages and each applicant shall pay a license fee as set forth below. 
(b)  License fees applicable to this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  Eating establishments (restaurants): Beer, wine and malt beverages and/or distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, per approved fee schedule. 
(2)  Noneating establishments (bars, lounges, etc): Beer, wine and malt beverages and/or distilled spirits sold in original packages for consumption on the premises, per approved fee schedule. 
(3)  Noneating establishments (package stores): Beer, wine and malt beverages and/or distilled spirits sold in original packages for consumption off the premises, per approved fee schedule. 
(4)  Temporary license, per approved fee schedule, up to a maximum of two days per year. 
(5)  Public and/or nonprofit private club distilled spirits, beer wine and malt beverages to be consumed on the premises, per approved fee schedule. 
(6)  Special events approved by council as per fee schedule. 
(7)  Transfer fee per approved fee schedule. 
(8)  Appeal fee as per approved fee schedule. 
(9)  Site plan review fee as per approved fee schedule. 
(10)  Server permit as per approved fee schedule. 
APPROVED FEE SCHEDULE 
New Application Fee\$150.00 
Beer and Wine License\$1,100.00 
Spirituous Liquor License\$1,650.00 
Beer and Wine and Liquor License\$2,750.00 
Private Clubs\$550.00 
Temporary Daily (two per yr. maximum)\$110.00 each 
Transfer Fee (active license)\$165.00 
Application Refiling Fee\$100.00 
Applicant Appeal Fee (after denial)\$100.00 
Server Permit\$5.00 
Background Check\$25.00 
Wrist Bands for Special Events\$3.00 
for each band issued 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-12. - Collection of fees or tax sums due. 
    If any person shall fail to pay the sum due under this chapter, the city clerk or his or her designee shall issue an execution against the person so delinquent and his property, for the amount of the delinquent fee or tax. The alcohol license shall be immediately and automatically revoked and all rights thereunder, including the right to any refund terminated. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-13. - Transferability of license. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  In case of the death of a licensee, the establishment shall be allowed to continue to sell alcoholic beverages for a period of 45 days from the date of death or until expiration of the license or until approval of a new license, whichever shall first occur, provided that no sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed unless a personal representative of the estate, appointed by a probate court of competent jurisdiction, shall make application for authorization with the city clerk within ten days of the death of the licensee. 
(c)  If a license is surrendered or a licensee severs his association with a licensed establishment, the establishment may not continue to sell alcoholic beverages and no sale of alcohol beverages shall resume unless and until a new license is issued. 
(d)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners of a general or limited partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. This section shall not prohibit transfer of stock between persons who held stock in the corporation at the time of issuance of the license, nor shall it prohibit transfers of stock which do not result in any person increasing his stock holdings to a total of ten percent or more of any class of stock. 
(e)  Except as provided in subsections (a) through (d) of this section, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed establishment shall cancel and revoke any license pursuant to this chapter automatically, without the necessity of any hearing. 
(f)  Violation of this section shall result in revocation of the license being used and a fine on the new ownership and the old ownership of not less than $550.00. No license will be issued to the old or the new owner in the city for one year from the date of such violation. 
(g)  Application for transfer must be made by the licensee holding the license to be transferred. Should a licensee make application to the city clerk for a transfer of location and should such a transfer of a location be approved, with no change in ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the previous license shall be applied to the new location. Each applicant for transfer of location shall pay transfer fee in the amount listed on the approved fee schedule. 
(h)  All applications shall be accompanied by a letter certifying that the applicant does not have any pending criminal charges and that applicant has no convictions from any county, state or federal court for the past ten years. 
(i)  When a change of ownership has occurred for any licensee which is not eligible for a transfer of the existing license to the new owner and the new owner(s) has applied for a new license, sales may continue under the prior license until the city council makes a decision on the application for the new license. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1); Ord. No. 2013-034 , 11-18-13) 
Sec. 10-14. - Display of license at place of business. 
    The City of St. Marys Alcoholic Beverage License shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view to the public at the place of the business of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-15. - Expiration; renewal of license. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each year. Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file applications, with the requisite fee enumerated in section 10-11, with the city clerk on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal must be filed on or before November 30 of each year. Applicants for renewal application received after November 30 shall pay in addition to the annual fee, a late charge of 20 percent of the license fee. If a license application is received after January 1, such application shall be treated as an initial application and the applicant shall be required to comply with all rules and regulations for the granting of licenses as if no previous license had been held. If a license application is received after January 1, investigative and administrative costs will be assessed. 
(b)  All licenses granted under this chapter shall be for the calendar year, and the full license fee must be paid for a license application filed prior to July 1 of the license year. One-half of a full license fee shall be paid for a license application filed after July 1 of the license year except for applications for temporary licenses under section 10-17, which shall not be halved. 
(c)  Any person renewing any license issued under this chapter who shall pay the required fee, or any portion thereof, after January 1, shall, in addition to the annual fee and late charges, pay interest on the delinquent balance at a rate of 11/2 percent per month (18 percent per annum). 
(d)  All eating establishments must provide an annual report of daily sales showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately when renewing any license under this chapter to the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-16. - Automatic forfeiture and cancellation for nonuse. 
(a)  All applicants for licenses hereunder must, within six months after approval and issuance of said license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license and begin the sale of the product or products authorized by the license. Failure to open such establishment within such six-month period shall result in an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of such unused license with no refund of the license fees previously paid. 
(b)  Unless an extension is granted by the city council for good cause shown, the failure of any licensee to operate the licensed establishment for a period of 90 consecutive days after commencing business and the exercise of the license granted hereunder shall result in the automatic forfeiture and cancellation of such license with no refund of license fees previously paid. 
(c)  Any place of business that is intended to be sold, shall maintain an active attempt to sell said business. If the business is not actively in the process of being marketed, as evidenced by a valid real estate broker agreement for a period of 24 months, the license shall be deemed void and any new license at that location shall comply with all terms of this chapter as they exist at the time of the application for the new license. There will be no grandfathering under this section. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-17. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    The council may at any time and without prejudice deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any alcoholic beverage license for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The violation by the applicant, licensee or licensee's employees of any state or federal law or regulation or any provision of this Code or other municipal ordinance, whenever adopted, relating to the sale, use, possession or distribution of drugs or alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The failure of the licensee or his employees to report promptly to the police department any violation of law or municipal ordinances, including but not limited to, the sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons, breach of peace, disturbance or altercation occurring in or adjacent to the licensee's premises. 
(3)  The conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere of the applicant or its partners, or officers or directors, if not a natural person, to any crime involving moral turpitude, illegal gambling, illegal possession or sale of alcoholic beverages, including sale or transfer of alcoholic beverages to minors, keeping a place of prostitution, pandering, pimping, public indecency, prostitution, solicitation of sodomy or any sexually-related crime within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application. 
(4)  The operation of the licensee's business in such a manner as to constitute a threat to public safety, welfare or health or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance or the operation of a licensed business where violations of federal, state or local laws or ordinances frequently or regularly occur. 
(5)  The making of any untrue or misleading statement in the application for a license or any renewal thereof or the omission from such application or renewal of any information required in the application. 
(6)  The revocation by the state of any state license to sell any alcoholic beverage shall result in the automatic revocation of the license issued under this chapter without any action by the council or any city officer or employee. Upon revocation or suspension of a license by the state, such license holder(s) shall report said revocation or suspension to the city clerk. 
(7)  All licenses issued under this chapter shall be subject to compliance with all city ordinances and the rules and regulations set forth in the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, as now or hereafter amended, and those regulations prescribed by the state department of revenue; and violation of these statutes and regulations shall be violations of this Code. 
(8)  The violation by and conviction of the applicant under the city's noise ordinance or adult entertainment ordinance. 
(9)  An act or omission of a licensee, owner of more than 20 percent interest in the licensed establishment, or employee of the licensee or licensed establishment willingly or knowingly performed, which constitutes a violation of federal or state law or any provision of this chapter will subject the licensee to suspension or revocation of its license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when the city council determines to its own satisfaction that the act or omission did occur, regardless of whether any criminal prosecution or conviction ensues; provided, however, in the case of any employee, the city council must determine that the acts of the employee were known to or under reasonable circumstances should have been known to the licensee, were condoned by the licensee, or where the licensee has not established practices or procedures to prevent the violation from occurring. 
(10)  Whenever the licensee has defaulted in any obligation of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city, the city council, in its discretion, shall revoke the license of such licensee. 
(11)  The council shall not revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any license provided for in this chapter without notice and an opportunity for a hearing as provided for herein. 
(12)  Any licensed establishment where three or more violations of this chapter or violation of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Laws and Regulations, have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the third offense within any 36-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed 90 days; and 
b.  For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed one year; and 
c.  In any event, no suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining under the license. 
As to the penalties as set forth above, if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the prior ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violation of its predecessor(s) if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(13)  Wherever this chapter permits the city to suspend any license issued under this chapter, the council, in its discretion, may determine the period of suspension within the following guidelines: 
a.  No suspension shall be for a period of time longer than the time remaining on such license; and 
b.  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension as set out above: 
1.  Consistency of penalties set by the city council. 
2.  Likelihood of deterring future wrongdoing. 
3.  Impact of the offense on the community. 
4.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial or corrective steps taken by licensee. 
5.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure by the licensee to take remedial or corrective steps. 
6.  The cumulative number of prior violations of federal, state or local laws, ordinances and any provisions of this Code since the original license was issued. 
7.  Whether such violation was committed by any employee of the licensee and whether such employee has been terminated permanently from licensee's employment. 
(14)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the contrary, the conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere of the applicant or its partners, officers or directors, if a corporation, of any crime involving the sale, possession or distribution of narcotics or controlled substances as defined in the Georgia Criminal Code, or any crime involving the sexual abuse, molestation, or exploitation of a minor, shall be grounds for the denial of or renewal of a license application or the suspension of a license previously granted, regardless of the period of time which has elapsed since the date of the conviction or entry of the conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere and the date of the filling of such application. 
(15)  Notwithstanding any provision contained in this chapter to the contrary, the commission or omission of any act which constitutes a crime of any kind or nature stemming from or related to the management, ownership or operation by an applicant or its partners, officers or directors (if not a natural person), of another establishment licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages in a jurisdiction other than the City of St. Marys shall be grounds for denial of a license application within the City of St. Marys. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-18. - Hearings. 
(a)  No license shall be denied, suspended or revoked without the opportunity for a hearing as provided in this section. 
(b)  As to any registration certificate for employees of a licensed establishment, the city clerk shall provide written notice to the applicant or licensee of his or her order to deny, suspend or revoke the license. Such written notification shall set forth the reasons for such action and shall notify the applicant or licensee of the right to appeal under the provisions of this chapter. Any applicant or licensee who is aggrieved or adversely affected by a final action of the city clerk may have a review of a final action by appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be by written petition, filed in the office of the city clerk within 15 days after the date of the final order or action of the city clerk. Any such appeal must be accompanied by a filing fee as outlined in the approved fee schedule. The filing fee for appeals relating only to pouring permits for employees shall also be as outlined in the approved fee schedule. The city council may, at the request of the appellant, refund the filing fee by a majority vote if it finds such refund to be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. All hearings by the city council under this chapter shall be conducted within 30 days of the date of filing of an appeal with the city clerk unless a continuance of such date is agreed to by the appellant and the city clerk. 
(c)  All hearings by the city council under this chapter shall be conducted at a time set by the city council. The appellant at such hearing shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the appellant, and to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. Should the appellant desire a transcript of the appeal proceedings the appellant shall provide a court reporter to take down and transcribe the hearing and provide the city with a copy of such transcript at no cost to the city. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city clerk to notify the appellant in writing of the action of the city council within 15 days of the decision. 
(e)  The findings of the city council shall not be set aside unless found to be: 
(1)  Contrary to law or ordinances; 
(2)  Unsupported by any evidence on the records as a whole; or 
(3)  Clearly unreasonable. 
(f)  The findings of the city council shall be final unless appealed within 30 days of the date of the finding by certiorari to the Camden County Superior Court. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-19. - Notice. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered when personally served by certified mail, within three days after the date of deposit in the United States Mail addressed to the last known address of the addressee. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-20. - Audits of licensees. 
(a)  If the city deems it necessary to conduct an audit of the records and books of the licensee, the city clerk shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit. The city may designate the city's internal auditor or other qualified person to perform any audit authorized in this Code. The licensee shall cooperate with the audit or forfeit any license(s) issued under this chapter. 
(b)  All licensed establishments must maintain the following records for a three-year period and make them available for audit at the licensed premises: 
(1)  Daily sales receipts showing liquor, beer, wine and food sales separately (this requirement does not apply to package beer and wine licensees). 
(2)  Daily cash register receipts such as "Z tapes" or guest tickets. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-21. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
(a)  No retailer shall purchase alcoholic beverages from any person other than a wholesaler licensed under this chapter. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverage to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter; provided, however, that his section shall not prohibit the purchase by one retailer of another retailer's entire stock in a bona fide purchase of an ongoing business. 
(b)  The city clerk may request, from time to time, information concerning purchases and sales of alcoholic beverages from retailers and wholesalers. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-22. - Addition to contents of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    No person shall add to or permit the adding to or refilling of any alcoholic beverage manufacturer's container in any matter. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-23. - Subterfuge prohibited. 
    Any act, practice or conduct of or on the part of a licensee or employees or agents of a licensee which may be construed as a subterfuge in an attempt or effort to circumvent any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a violation of the provision attempted or sought to be circumvented. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-24. - Employment of underage persons prohibited; exceptions. 
    No person shall allow or require a person in his or her employment under 18 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-25. - Failure to require and properly check identification. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter not to require and properly check identification to ensure that an underage person is not sold, served, or does not have in his or her possession, alcoholic beverages while in a licensed establishment. Identification in this section shall mean any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph and giving such person's date of birth and shall include, without being limited to, a passport, military ID card, driver's license or state department of public safety ID card. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-26. - Sales to underage person prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any holder or employee of the holder of a license authorizing the sale of alcoholic beverages to: 
(1)  Sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits, wines, malt beverages, or any other alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years. 
a.  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall purchase or possess any alcoholic beverage. 
b.  No person under the age of 21 years of age shall attempt to purchase any alcoholic beverage or misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  The prohibition in subsection (1) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of distilled spirits to a person when such person has furnished proper identification showing that the person to whom the distilled spirits are being sold is 21 years of age or older. For the purposes of this subsection proper identification means any document issued by a government agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth, including but not limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license, or identification card authorized under an act to require the department of public safety to issue identification cards to person who do not have a motor vehicle driver's license. Proper identification shall not include a birth certificate. 
(3)  Sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, who is of unsound mind, or who is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to the licensee or his employees. 
(4)  Sell alcoholic beverages upon the licensed premises or permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed thereon, on any day or at any time when the sale or consumption is prohibited by law. 
(5)  No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink shall allow any minors to be in, frequent or loiter about the licensed premises of the establishment or lounge unless such minors are accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian; provided, however, that such minors shall be permitted in eating establishments, as defined in this chapter without being accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or custodian and provided further that this section shall not apply to minors who are employees under the terms of this chapter. 
(6)  Any licensed establishment where three or more violations of this chapter or violation of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Laws and Regulations, have occurred within any 36-month period shall be punished as follows: 
a.  For the third offense within any 36-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed 90 days; and 
b.  For the fourth and any subsequent violation within any 36-month period, suspension of license(s) for a period not to exceed one year. 
As to the penalties in subsection (6), if there is a change in a majority of the licensed establishment's owners, partners or shareholders, the violations under the old ownership shall not count against the new owners; however, a different corporation, partnership or other association will be charged with the violations of its predecessor(s) if a majority of the owners, partners or shareholders are the same. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-27. - Registration and regulations as to employees and manager. 
    The following regulation shall apply to all establishments holding a license for consumption of alcoholic beverages on/off the premises: 
(1)  No person shall be employed to dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages, or serve in any managerial capacity by an establishment holding a license under this chapter unless and until such person has obtained or holds a registration certificate issued by the chief of the city police department. 
(2)  All persons desiring a registration certificate shall make application in a form prescribed by the city council. The application shall be accompanied by an administrative fee of $5.00, and a copy of the "responsible alcohol sales and server training program" completion certificate. 
a.  The application shall include, but shall not be limited to, the name, Social Security Number, date of birth, driver's license number, and prior arrest record of the applicant. 
b.  The applicant shall participate in a City of St. Marys approved "Responsible Alcohol Sales and Server Training Program," which shall not be waived. A certificate will be awarded upon completion of the program. Instructors, trainers, or any persons associated or employed by the organization conducting the training referenced in this subsection shall not appear before the city clerk, mayor, or council as a representative, attorney, advocate or witness for an applicant. 
c.  Any persons holding an out of state "responsible alcohol sales and server training program" completion certificate shall be given a grace period of six months to obtain the City of St. Marys approved "Responsible Alcohol Sales and Server Training Program" certificate. 
(3)  The chief of police or his designee may deny, suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any registration certificate upon conviction or nolo contendere plea by the holder thereof of any local, state or federal offense of selling or supplying alcoholic beverages to minors. 
(4)  In the event of a denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a registration certificate the applicant shall be notified of such action by certified mail, return receipt requested whereupon such applicant shall have the right within 30 days of mailing of such notification to appeal such action to the city council under section 10-17 of this chapter. 
(5)  Such registration certificate must be in the possession of the employer by whom the permit holder is employed and must be available for inspection by officers of the police department. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of all alcoholic beverage licensees to file quarterly with the chief of police or his designee, a list of all employees holding such certificates. 
(7)  All temporary alcohol licenses approved by council shall have a designated individual who shall complete a city approved "responsible alcohol sales and service policy workshop" before being granted a temporary alcohol license. This individual will be responsible to insure responsible alcohol sales and service policy are adhered to and enforced. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-28. - Open areas and patio sales. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverage sales can be made by a licensed consumption on-premises establishment in a patio/open area type environment if the establishment has been approved to do so by the city council. 
(b)  The requirement for approval is that the patio/open area be enclosed by some structure providing for public ingress/egress only through the main licensed premises. The purpose of this requirement is to prevent a customer from leaving the outside sales area with an open drink. 
(c)  The height of such structure shall be a minimum of 31/2 feet above ground level. It does not have to be solid, nor does it have to restrict visibility into or out of the patio/open sales area. It must be permitted and approved by the city's building inspection department and the city's fire department, as required by their governing regulations or codes. 
(d)  The only exit from this type of area is to be through the licensed establishment's main premises and through an approved fire exit, not for general public use unless an emergency exists. The fire exit should be of the type that sounds an alarm so that the establishment will be alerted in the event of unauthorized use when no emergency exists. 
(e)  If a licensee desires a patio/open sales area inside an existing structure, plans will be reviewed and approved on an individual basis by the city council. Interior type patio/open sales areas must also meet the requirements of the city's building code. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a hotel or motel with a consumption on the premises license from making sales and allowing consumption of alcoholic beverages in ballrooms, meeting rooms, reception rooms, or patio areas of such hotel or motel, provided such functions are catered in connection with a meeting, conference, convention or similar type gathering at such hotel or motel. "Patio areas," as that term is used in this subsection, do not have to conform to the standards in this section. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-29. - No consumption outside premises for classifications 1 through 7. 
(a)  It is prohibited for customers to leave the premises with open alcoholic beverages, and it is the licensee's responsibility to ensure that no open beverages are sold and carried out. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the carrying out of wine or malt beverages for consumption at a publicly owned or privately owned golf course. 
(b)  It is prohibited for customers to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It is prohibited for the manager or any employee to allow persons to gather outside an alcoholic beverage establishment and consume alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-30. - Inspection of licensed establishments by the police department. 
    Certified officers of the police department shall have the authority to inspect establishments licensed under the alcoholic beverages ordinances of the city during the hours in which the premises are open for business. These inspections shall be made for the purpose of verifying compliance with the requirements of this chapter and state law. This section is not intended to limit the authority of any other city officials to conduct inspections authorized by other provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-31. - Establishment can be closed in cases of emergency. 
    The chief of police, or his designee, may immediately close an establishment licensed under this chapter in case of emergency, for the safety of the public or to investigate a crime, for a period of time not to exceed 24 hours. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-32. - Sale on election days. 
    Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to this governing authority by Act No. 750 (House Bill No. 247) approved April 10, 1985, amending O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b)(2)(B), the wholesale and retail sale of alcoholic beverages, to wit: Distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages, shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-33. - Brown bagging prohibited. 
(a)  Subject to the exceptions as hereinafter set forth, it shall be unlawful for a person, business, establishment, or employee thereof, which imposes, collects, or charges any admission charge, ticket charge, entertainment fee, cover charge, setup or mixer charge, or contribution and which is not licensed under this chapter for on-premises consumption to permit any container of alcoholic beverages to be possessed or consumed by any guest, patron, or customer while on such premises. It is the intent and purpose of this provision to prohibit the operation of bottle clubs and brown bagging establishments which do not obtain and hold a valid on-premises consumption license. 
(b)  Such prohibition shall not, however, apply to activities or events sponsored or conducted by bona fide nonprofit civic or service organizations on an occasional basis. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Hours of sale. 
(a)  Off-premises consumption and package sales. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, offered for sale, dispensed or distributed by licensees holding package or off-premises consumption licenses between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(b)  On-premises consumption. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, offered for sale, dispensed or distributed by licensees holding on-premises consumption licenses between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. All customers and patrons of such licensees shall vacate the premises by 3:00 a.m. 
(c)  Sunday sales. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises shall be permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. 
(d)  Sunday sales for package stores. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off-premises by a wine/beer retail package store or alcoholic beverage package store as defined herein shall be permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(e)  Sunday sales for consumption on the premises. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises shall be permitted from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in establishments licensed for such sales on any Sunday in a year falling on December 31. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1); Ord. of 6-20-11(2); Ord. No. 2017-12-4-002 , 12-4-17) 
Sec. 10-35. - Knowledge of chapter. 
    All licensees of licenses issued under this chapter shall keep a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct all employees of its terms and content. Licensees and employees shall at all times be familiar with the provisions of this chapter and ignorance or neglect shall not constitute a defense or excuse for noncompliance. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Investigative and administrative costs. 
    Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a certified check for the full amount of the license fee, together with a separate certified or cashier's check or cash in the amount of $150.00 to defray investigative and administrative costs. If the applicant is denied a state license, the deposit representing the license fee shall be refunded, but the $150.00 cost paid for investigation and administrative costs shall be retained. However, any person applying for more than one license shall pay only one fee to defray investigative and administrative expenses, which fee shall be the largest of the investigative and administrative fees authorized under this Code. Any applicant for a license under this article who has in existence at the time of making the new application an existing license under this article shall pay no investigative and administrative costs. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-37. - Levy and amount of excise tax; rate of tax, manner of imposition. 
    The maximum excise tax allowable by state law for the sale of distilled spirits or wines and malt beverages shall be collected by the wholesale supplier from the retail seller and turned over to the city monthly. The wholesaler shall remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next succeeding the calendar month in which such sales were made, the tax as allowed by state law. The failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for a penalty equal to ten percent of the total amount due during the first 30-day period following the date such report and remittance were due and a further penalty of 15 percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive 30-day period or any portion thereof, during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable for a penalty equal to 25 percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. Such tax is in addition to the fees imposed upon the licensee. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-38. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
    In addition to loss of license or registration certificate, any person who violates any provision of this chapter may, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of up to $500.00, or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-39. - Sale or possession for sale without license or beyond boundaries of premises covered by license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverage where the person does not have a license granted by the city to sell or possess for sale these alcoholic beverages, or to sell or make deliveries beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-40. - Temporary licenses. 
    Upon request by an applicant, the city council may issue a temporary license to an applicant who has applied for an annual license to allow alcoholic beverage sales for no more than 60 days in a manner consistent with the annual license if it appears to city council: 1) that there is a substantial likelihood that the annual license applied for will be granted; and 2) the applicant's business will be materially damaged by the inability to sell alcoholic beverages while awaiting action by city council on the application for an annual license. A temporary license may be granted without any advertisement or background check. All requirements including those for background check and advertisement for the annual license sought by the applicant shall continue to apply to the consideration of that license. No more than one license under this section may be granted to an applicant within a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 2014-018 , 5-13-14) 
Secs. 10-41-10-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPEN CONTAINERS 

Sec. 10-46. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the "St. Marys Open Container Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage: All alcoholic beverages, distilled spirits, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine as defined in O.C.G.A. title 3. 
    Broken package: A bottle, can, keg or other original container which has been opened, or the seal to which has been broken, so as to allow the contents thereof to be immediately consumed. 
    Motor vehicle: Every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
    Occupant: Any person who is occupying any vehicle on a public street, road or public place. 
    Open container: A glass, cup, jar, can or other receptacle designed for or capable of being used to hold liquids. 
    Public place: Any and all public property, owned or operated by any of the following or combination thereof: The federal government, the state government, the county government, the city government, or any political subdivision thereof; any area of a business enterprise where the public has general access; and any property other than a private residence and curtilage held in private ownership. 
    Street or road: The entire width between right-of-way lines publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-48. - Operation of motor vehicle. 
    It shall be a violation of this article to operate a motor vehicle on a public road or street or public property in the city, while the operator or any occupant thereof has in his possession an open container or broken package containing alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-49. - Occupancy of motor vehicle. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any occupant of a motor vehicle being driven or parked on a public road or street or public property in the city to possess an open container or broken package containing alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-50. - Possession of open container in or on public place. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any person who is upon any public property of this city to possess an open container or broken package containing alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Sec. 10-51. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to the passengers in any chartered bus designed for carrying more than ten persons when it is being used for the transportation of persons, or a passenger in a chauffeured limousine driven by a person holding a valid chauffeur's license issued by a state agency and which limousine service in addition has a valid city business license, or to the occupants in living quarters of a camper or motorhome. 
(b)  This article shall not apply to broken packages contained in any locked compartment accessible only from outside the motor vehicle. 
(c)  Properly submitted and approved special events as defined in article I and as approved by council shall be exempt from this section in the special event locations specified. Any possession of an open container outside the limits of the approved zone(s) shall remain covered by section 10-50 without exception. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(1)) 
Secs. 10-52-10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BREWERIES 

Sec. 10-76. - Definitions. 
    Brew pub. Any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. As used in this chapter, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
    Brewer means a manufacturer of malt beverages. 
    Brewery means a place where malt beverages are manufactured or brewed. 
    Microbrewery. Any brewery designed to accommodate the processing of fewer than 5,000 barrels of beer or ale within any consecutive 12-month period. 
(Ord. No. 2015-042 , 11-2-15) 
Sec. 10-77. - Brewer license authorized. 
    Brewer's licenses are authorized in the city; provided, however, that no individual shall be permitted to own or operate a brewery, brew pub, or microbrewery without first obtaining a proper brewer's license from the city in the manner provided in this chapter, and each holder of a brewer's license shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable state statutes, including rules and regulations promulgated by the department of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 2015-042 , 11-2-15) 
Sec. 10-78. - License fee. 
    The license fee for a brewer shall be $500.00 annually. 
(Ord. No. 2015-042 , 11-2-15) 
Sec. 10-79. - Tastings. 
    Tastings shall be permitted in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-38, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 2015-042 , 11-2-15) 
Sec. 10-80. - Restrictions. 
    (a) Microbreweries shall be restricted to a production of less than 5,000 barrels of beer and/or ale per year. 
    (b) Breweries shall be located on a major arterial street. 
    (c) No offensive odors or odors evidencing the presence of a brewery shall be emitted beyond the walls of the building occupied by a microbrewery. 
    (d) Location of a brewing facility shall abide by the Separation Distance Table-2016, of section 10-3 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-042 , 11-2-15) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed former ch. 14 in its entirety and enacted new provisions as ch.14 as herein set out. Former ch. 14, §§ 14-1-14-8, 14-36-14-39, 14-66-14-69, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from ordinances adopted July 9, 1979; and May 9, 1994. Current provisions in ch. 14 are the provisions of the Camden County animal control ordinance which have been adopted by the city. 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 46-36; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- City's and county's authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(3); livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal means any living thing other than a plant or a human being. 
    Animal control officer means any employee of the county duly designated as an animal control officer by the commissioners to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Confined means restricted by a fence or leash to the premises of the owner or custodian at all times or merely on the property under the control of the owner or custodian whereby the animal shall not be permitted to leave those premises, unless leashed and accompanied by the owner or custodian. Exempted are hunting dogs while being trained and during the act of hunting. 
    Exotic animal or pet. The definition of exotic animals is a subset of the definition of animals and is as defined as follows: An exotic pet is a rare or unusual animal or pet, or an animal kept within human households which is generally thought of as a wild species not typically kept as a pet and/or is an animal normally not present within the City of St. Marys environment or is out of place in the City of St. Marys environment. This definition will include wild animals that have been allegedly "tamed". Examples of an exotic animal or pet would include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Boa constrictors; 
(2)  Lizards; 
(3)  European polecats; 
(4)  Alligators; 
(5)  Amphibians; 
(6)  African pygmy hedgehogs; 
(7)  Arctic fox; 
(8)  Bears; 
(9)  Coyotes; 
(10)  Wolves and wolf/dog hybrids; 
(11)  Feimec foxes; 
(12)  Tame silver foxes; 
(13)  Tame red foxes; 
(14)  Sugar gliders; 
(15)  Indian star tortoises; 
(16)  Skunks; 
(17)  Degus; 
(18)  Genets; 
(19)  Raccoon; 
(20)  Capybaras; 
(21)  Wallaroos; 
(22)  Hares; 
(23)  Felines such as lions, tigers, bobcats, servals, and ocelots; 
(24)  Reptiles such as snakes, turtles, tortoises, and lizards; 
(25)  Arachnids such as spiders and scorpions; 
(26)  Insects such as praying mantises, Madagascar hissing cockroaches, fleas, and some beetles; 
(27)  Crustaceans such as yabbies, marron, crabs, and shrimp; 
(28)  Rare birds; 
(29)  Numerous species of rodents such as chinchillas, acacia rats, African pygmy dormice, African pygmy mice, gambian pouched rats, mouse-like hamsters, jirds, jerboas, lemmings and zebra mice amongst many others; 
(30)  Hyenas; 
(31)  Non-human primates. 
    Fowl means a bird of any kind. 
    Guard dog means any dog which has been trained to attack persons and/or animals independently or upon command, and any dog which, while not so trained, has a known propensity to attack persons or animals and is used for the purpose of providing security to any person or premises. 
    Health department means the county health department. 
    Livestock means all animals of the equine, bovine or swine class, including goats, sheep, mules, and other grazing animals. 
    Nuisance animal means any animal which: 
(1)  Molests passersby or passing vehicles; 
(2)  Attacks other animals; 
(3)  Trespasses on school grounds, recreational areas or parks; 
(4)  Is repeatedly at large; 
(5)  Damages private or public property; 
(6)  Barks, whines or howls in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion; or 
(7)  Constitutes a nuisance as the term is defined by the law of this state. 
    Owner means any person having a right of property of any animal; who keeps or harbors any animal or has its care; who permits any animal to remain on or about the premises owned, possessed or occupied by him; who voluntarily abandons an animal; or who runs an animal away after possessing or owning it. 
    Rabies certificate means a certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian bearing a license number, ownership, name, address, breed, color and sex of animal, which shall be issued for each animal vaccinated. The date of last vaccination of such animal shall be clearly stated on such certificate, and a copy of such certificate shall be sent by such veterinarian to the health department. 
    Running at large means the conduct of any animal, other than a hunting dog while hunting, not confined by its owner or keeper within walls or a fence of proper design, controlled by a leash, or kept in some manner as to keep it from coming in contact with members of the public. 
    Vaccinate or inoculate means the injection of a specified dose of an antirabies vaccine by a veterinarian into the proper site of an animal, such vaccine having the U.S. Department of Agriculture Biological Control Section license number and approval stamped on the label of the container and having been approved by the state department of human resources. 
    Vaccine means an injectable material containing killed or live rabies virus, licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture Biological Control Section, and approved by the state department of human resources. The vaccine used for the purpose of this chapter shall be stored at the temperature prescribed on the package label. Outdated vaccine shall not be used. 
    Veterinarian means any person who holds a valid license to practice the profession of veterinary medicine in any state of the United States or any province of Canada. 
    Vicious animal means an animal which has, without provocation, attacked and bitten a person or other animal. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-035 , § 1, 12-2-13) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The civil and criminal provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated by the county. The animal control officer shall have the power to conduct such investigations as may be deemed reasonably necessary to carry out the duties as referred to in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-3. - Animal control officer. 
(a)  The animal control officer will be an employee of the board of commissioners and/or other employee of the county, duly designated as an animal control officer, to enforce the rules and regulations of this chapter. 
(b)  The duties of the animal control officer will include: 
(1)  Investigating and maintaining a record of animal bites in the county. 
(2)  Providing for proper confinement of an animal involved in a bite; or if the animal is dead or killed, immediate notification of the health department. 
(3)  Enforcing proper disposition of animals exposed to known rabid animals. 
(4)  Providing stray animal pickup and impoundment. 
(5)  Other related duties as stated in this chapter or as ordered by the board of commissioners. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
Sec. 14-4. - Interference with the animal control officer. 
    It shall be unlawful to resist, interfere with, hinder or molest the animal control officer or any person charged with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, in the performance of any duties imposed by this chapter, nor shall any person seek to release or remove any animal captured in the animal control department's humane traps or impounded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Damage to or removal of the department's traps is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-5. - Violations of chapter. 
    Whenever it has been determined that any provision of this chapter has been violated, prior to filing a warrant or accusation pertaining to such violation, the appropriate authority may serve the owner of the premises on which the violation has occurred with a copy of this chapter; provide such owner with written notice of the violation; and allow such owner a reasonable time as determined by the appropriate authority or his representative, but not exceeding 30 days, in order to permit such owner to avoid prosecution by correcting the condition constituting the violation. For purposes of this chapter, the appropriate official includes an official of the county health department, the animal control officer or a member of the sheriffs department. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-6. - Penalty. 
    Whenever by this chapter any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided, the violation of such provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punishable by fine or imprisonment as provided in section 1-19. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-7. - Animals constituting a nuisance-Determination. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of: 
(1)  A domesticated animal; 
(2)  Fowl - domesticated or wild; 
(3)  Any animal of fowl present and treated as a pet; and/or 
(4)  Any exotic animal, exotic fowl, and/or exotic pet (as defined herein), 
to permit, whether willfully or through failure to exercise due care or control, such animal or fowl (domesticated and/or exotic) to commit a public nuisance by barking, whining, howling, hissing, squawking, or making other objectionable noises; by chasing or running after vehicles, or persons; by destroying or damaging property of another; by causing annoyance to a neighboring residence and interfering with reasonable use and enjoyment of their property; by causing a fearful reaction or negative reaction, or physical stress to any person (who reasonably perceives a potential threat to his or her safety) by its presence on any public street or in any public building or in any public park; or by doing any other thing which is so offensive as to create a nuisance. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1; Ord. No. 2013-035 , § 2, 12-2-13) 
Sec. 14-8. - Same-Impoundment authorized. 
    Should any owner or custodian of an animal or fowl fail upon proper notice of not less than seven days to abate a nuisance created by such animal or fowl, or fail to take the necessary steps to provide adequate confinement or properly care for the animal, after the necessary notice, the animal control officer shall be empowered to impound the animal or fowl under the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-9. - Vicious animals and guard dogs. 
(a)  Muzzling or caging. No owner or custodian of an animal, having been notified of such animal's viciousness by the animal control officer and/or health department, or having knowledge of such viciousness, shall permit such animal to leave his property unless such animal is restrained by a leash as well as being properly muzzled so as to prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
(b)  Reports. All reports of vicious animals shall be made to the health department and/or animal control department. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-10. - General care and feeding. 
    Animals within the county shall be adequately confined by a fence, leash, or other appropriate measure, to the premises of the owner or custodian at all times, which confinement shall be clean and provide adequate and safe food, water, exercise space and protection from the weather. The animal shall not be permitted to leave those premises unless leashed and accompanied by the owner or custodian and shall not be permitted to run loose on the property of others or on public streets, alleys, beaches, parks, picnic areas, recreation areas, and/or public sites at any time. This section shall not apply to those animals actively engaged in animal shows, exhibitions or field trials, or while hunting or training during hunting season as prescribed by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-11. - Female animals in heat. 
    Any female animal, while it is in breeding season, shall be kept on the premises of the owner or custodian and shall be confined in such place and manner as to avoid nuisances caused by the attraction of male animals. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
State Law reference- Permitting female dog in heat to roam free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6 et seq. 
Sec. 14-12. - Livestock. 
    No owner or custodian of livestock shall knowingly permit such livestock to run at large or stray upon any public roads of this county or on any private property not belonging to such owner or custodian unless by permission of the owner of such property. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
State Law reference- Livestock running at large, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-3 et seq. 
Sec. 14-13. - Dangerous dog control law. 
    The state law regulating dangerous dogs is adopted in its entirety. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
State Law reference- Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Sec. 14-14. - Hunting dogs. 
    Deer dogs are allowed to run in the wooded areas, where permitted by the owner of the property, during deer hunting season, as established by federal and/or state laws and regulations. All hunting dogs shall bear tags containing the owner's name, address and phone number, and shall be vaccinated in accordance with state rabies vaccination regulations. All hunting dogs used in hunting game shall be properly supervised. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Secs. 14-15-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RABIES CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- Control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; inoculation of animals against rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6; rabies inoculation tags, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-6. 

Sec. 14-51. - Vaccination of animals. 
    Every owner of an animal three months or older that requires rabies vaccine shall cause such animal to be vaccinated against rabies. No person shall vaccinate any animal against rabies that is not a licensed veterinarian. The first vaccination using an attenuated vaccine, or kill vaccine, shall be administered and is good for 12 months only. Thereafter, a vaccination shall be required at least every three years when a live attenuated vaccine is used. If the health department's file copy of the certificate of vaccination is unattainable, the owner's or the veterinarian's copy of the certificate may be substituted. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-52. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Evidence of vaccination shall consist of a certificate of vaccination with each item answered, prepared in triplicate and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine. 
(b)  Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination and vaccination tags, providing one copy of the certificate to the animals' owner, one copy to the health department, and retaining one copy for his files. 
(c)  The certificates of vaccination furnished to the health department shall be maintained in an orderly indexed file for a period of not less than three years. 
(d)  Out-of-state visitors and noncounty residents with animals must comply with local animal control regulations while within this county. Current rabies vaccination certificates from other states or territories will be honored. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-53. - Vaccination tags. 
(a)  In addition to the issuance of the certificate of vaccination, the person authorized to issue the certificate shall also furnish to the owner of the vaccinated animal a serially numbered tag bearing the same number and year as the certificate. The tag shall be securely attached to the collar or harness worn by the vaccinated animal, which collar or harness shall be provided by the owner of the vaccinated animal. 
(b)  No person shall remove a vaccination tag from any animal's collar without the consent of the owner or custodian, nor shall any person attach a vaccination tag to any animal for which it was not issued. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-54. - Public clinics. 
(a)  The animal control officer, or other designee of the board of commissioners, may operate or cause to be operated county organized clinics for the vaccination of animals against rabies. 
(b)  The vaccination fee for such clinics, including the administering and cost of the vaccine, the issuance of certificates and tags, and other necessary expenses shall be predetermined 15 days in advance of a clinic. Public notice of the scheduled clinic shall include the day, hour, place and fees. 
(c)  In emergencies or during quarantine, 15 days' notice prior to the clinic shall not apply. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-55. - Quarantine. 
(a)  Where rabies has been found to exist in any warm-blooded animal, or where its existence is suspected, the health department may designate an area within which quarantine shall be maintained as provided by the terms of this article. Every such animal shall be immediately confined to the premises designated by the health department, whether or not the animal has been vaccinated against rabies. 
(b)  No animal shall be removed from or brought into a quarantined area without written permission of the health department. The application for such permission shall be in writing, filed with the health department, stating the reason for movement and the location at which the animal will be confined after movement. 
(c)  Where an animal has been suspected of having rabies or has rabies symptoms, the area or premises where such animals are kept shall be posted by the health department with signs to read as follows: "Rabies Suspected" or "Rabies, Keep From Animals." Such signs shall be conspicuously displayed on the premises, printed with type that is easily legible, and shall remain on the premises for the duration of the quarantine. 
(d)  Persons living within a quarantine area having in their possession an animal subject to rabies or to the terms of this article shall be given written notice of the quarantine, the animals subject to quarantine, and an order to confine their animals so subject to the premises of the owner, together with any other information the health department deems advisable. Such notice shall be signed by a duly authorized agent of the health department. 
(e)  The violation by any person of any quarantine order issued by the health officer shall be a violation of this article, and the person so violating shall be subject to all the penalties prescribed by law for a violation. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-56. - Examination of heads. 
    The heads of all domestic animals and of all wild animals suspected of having rabies before their death or having rabies at the time of death shall be submitted to the state laboratory for examination. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Secs. 14-57-14-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CRUELTY PROVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 

Sec. 14-81. - Abandonment. 
(a)  No person, owner or custodian of an animal shall release such animal on any property, public or private, with the intention of abandoning that animal. 
State Law reference- Abandoning dogs, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-3 et seq. 
(b)  No person, owner or custodian of an animal shall abandon a dead animal on any private property of another unless he shall have first obtained permission from the owner of the property on which the animal is to be left. 
State Law reference- Dumping dead dogs on another's property, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-1 et seq. 
(c)  No person, owner or custodian of an animal shall abandon a dead animal on any public property or public right-of-way unless the place is an approved sanitary landfill or other facility designed for receiving such and has been designated by the board of commissioners as a public facility for receiving trash or other refuse. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
State Law reference- Dumping dead dog on public property, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-2 et seq. 
Sec. 14-82. - Cruelty generally. 
    No person shall harm, maim or kill any animal or attempt to do so; except a person may: 
(1)  Defend his person or property or pets, or the person or property or pets of another, from injury or damage being caused by an animal; or 
(2)  Kill any animal causing injury or damage to livestock or poultry or pets. 
    The killing of animals under the above circumstances shall be done as quickly and humanely as possible. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
State Law reference- Performing cruel acts on dogs. O.C.G.A. § 4-8-5 et seq. 
Sec. 14-83. - Defense against vicious animals. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously kill; maim; disfigure; torture; beat with a stick, chain, club or other object; mutilate, burn or scald with any substance; drive over with any vehicle or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal; except reasonable force may be employed to drive off vicious animals. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-84. - Poison. 
    No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that such substance may be liable to be eaten by any animal. This section does not apply to persons exposing to his own property common rodent poison mixed only with a vegetable substance. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-85. - Shelter. 
    No owner, custodian or caretaker shall refuse to provide any animal in his charge or custody with proper food, drink, shade, shelter, space and care, or to carry any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner. Any animal habitually kept outside shall be provided with a structurally sound, weatherproof enclosure, large enough to accommodate the animal. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-86. - Diseased, crippled animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep or harbor any animal infected with any dangerous disease or any incurable, painfully crippling condition. The animal control officer may impound such diseased or painfully crippled animals, and all such animals impounded may be destroyed humanely as soon thereafter as possible. Upon the destruction of such animal, the animal control officer shall not be required to give any notice. This subsection shall not be construed to include veterinary hospitals or animals under veterinary care. 
(b)  No owner, or custodian of any animal shall fail to provide proper veterinary care to any animal when needed to prevent suffering. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-87. - Protective custody. 
    Whenever the animal control officer finds that any animal is or will be without proper care because of injury, illness, incarceration or other voluntary absence of the owner or person responsible for the care of such animal, the animal control officer may impound such animal for protective care; and in the event of injury or illness, the animal control officer may take such action as called for to prevent undue pain and suffering, including immediate euthanasia of the animal. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-88. - Duty of vehicle operator. 
    Any person operating a motor vehicle who strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; if the owner cannot be ascertained or located, the person shall report the accident to the police or animal control department. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Secs. 14-89-14-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 14-121. - Authorization. 
    Any animal, confined or otherwise, found in violation of this chapter shall be confiscated and impounded by the animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-122. - Animals running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any animal, other than a hunting dog during hunting season, to permit it to run at large in the county, or to stray from the premises of the owner or keeper, or go upon the premises of any other person. 
(b)  If any properly tagged hunting dog is taken into custody by the animal control unit, such dog shall be boarded for a minimum of five days by a licensed animal shelter at the boarding cost provided in this article. No penalties shall be charged. 
(c)  If an owner does not repossess his dog within five days of the dog's having been taken into the custody of the animal control unit, such dog shall be treated as abandoned. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to allow such animal to feed or to be loose on any part of the right-of-way of any public road of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-123. - Confinement of animals at large. 
    Unrestrained dogs, nuisance animals and animals found running at large shall be taken by the animal control officer and impounded in a licensed animal shelter and confined in a humane manner. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-124. - Pursuit of animals. 
    The animal control officer may pursue the animal onto private property, including the owner's or custodian's, but not into a human dwelling, to evoke capture of an animal subject to impoundment under this article. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-125. - Notice to owner if known. 
    If an animal impounded under the provisions of this article bears vaccination/identification tags, a reasonable effort to locate its owner shall be made. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-126. - Tranquilization. 
    Any animal that is found away from the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner will be classified as being unconfined; therefore, it may be shot with a tranquilizer gun by the animal control officer in an attempt to capture the animal. The animal control officer operating the tranquilizer gun and/or the county health department or the board of commissioners shall not be held liable for any injury or death to an animal that might occur from the use of the tranquilizer gun or equipment. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-127. - Biting animals. 
(a)  An animal, whether vaccinated against rabies or not, having bitten a human or other pet animal, shall be quarantined for a period of ten days, at the owner's property or in a place and manner approved by the animal control officer. 
(b)  Any animal under such quarantine that is not confined by the owner or is running at large shall be immediately impounded by the animal control officer and boarded at a licensed animal shelter until the ten-day period is over. 
(c)  At the time quarantine is ordered by the animal control officer, the animal owner or custodian shall sign a home quarantine agreement or submit the animal to a licensed animal shelter for the ten-day period and pay any fees required. All expenses incurred for boarding the animal for this period of time shall be paid by the owner or custodian of the biting animal, unless the bite was provoked, in which event the person provoking the bite shall be responsible for all expenses incurred. 
(d)  An unvaccinated animal bitten by a known rabid animal shall immediately be destroyed under the supervision of the animal control officer. Exceptions to this section are as noted by the state department of human resources. 
(e)  Any animal, the rabies vaccination of which is current as evidenced by the certificate of vaccination, which is bitten by a known rabid animal, must be revaccinated, confined in a manner approved by the environmental health rabies control officer, an employee of the health department, for a period of 45 days and then released only if no signs of rabies are evident. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-128. - Confinement area. 
    The area or facility used to confine any animal in compliance with the provisions of this article shall be subject to the approval of the animal control officer. The confinement area or facility may include a licensed animal shelter, kennel, animal hospital, or other place in the county that provides: 
(1)  Construction and management that will keep the animal dry and clean and will prevent its escape or exposure to the public. 
(2)  Assurance that the animal will have safe and adequate water and food. 
(3)  Adequate and clean space for the animal to exercise. 
(4)  Protection against excessive heat, cold and other inclement weather. 
(5)  Space, cages, pens and other necessary equipment to isolate the animal for its protection against injury and infectious disease. 
(6)  A method and procedure for the identification of the animal and the date of its admission to the area. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-129. - Report of bites. 
(a)  Any person bitten by an animal shall be required to immediately notify the animal control officer and/or health department. 
(b)  The owner or custodian of any animal having signs suggestive of rabies shall confine the animal and immediately notify the animal control officer and the rabies control officer of the state department of health, reporting any information regarding any person bitten or attacked by such animal. 
(c)  The health department or the animal control officer shall report all known cases of rabies in the county to the state department of human resources. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-130. - Period of impoundment for dogs and cats. 
    Impounded dogs and cats shall be kept for a period of time depending upon the physical condition of the animal. Abandoned or severely ill/injured animals may be destroyed immediately at the discretion of the authorized animal shelter and animal control officer. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-131. - Fees and charges. 
    Any owner of or person adopting an impounded animal shall pay such fees and charges as set forth by the authorized animal shelter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-132. - Deadline for payment of license taxes and fees after impoundment; adoption or euthanasia. 
    Any dog or cat impounded under this article whose owner, possessor or representative shall not come forward within five working days after the impoundment and pay the fees specified in this article shall be put up for adoption or euthanasia in some humane way. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Sec. 14-133. - Redemption. 
(a)  Any person reclaiming an animal impounded under this article must supply appropriate proof of proper rabies vaccination or pay a vaccination fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file at the authorized animal shelter or in the office of the county clerk. 
(b)  Any animal not reclaimed by an owner or custodian within five working days becomes property of the authorized animal shelter and may be placed for adoption or humanely euthanized at the discretion of the authorized animal shelter. 
(Ord. of 9-9-02, § 1) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Codes of technical regulations, § 2-406. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; cable communications, ch. 26; alarm systems, § 42-36 et seq.; environment, ch. 46; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; health and sanitation, ch. 58; historical preservation, ch. 62; preservation of historic buildings, § 62-36 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(12); adoption and continuation of state minimum standard codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-21; state-wide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq.; authority to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Mar. 7, 2011(2), §§ 1, 2, repealed art. I., §§ 18-1, 18-2, and enacted a new art. I as set out herein. The former art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Ord. of Aug. 11, 1981(3); Ord. of Sept. 3, 1981; Ord. of Aug. 20, 1985; Ord. of Oct. 13, 1986; Ord. of Dec. 22, 1986; and Ord. of May 22, 1995(1), § 1. 

Sec. 18-1. - Codes adopted. 
(a)  The City of St. Marys hereby adopts by reference and will enforce the following standard codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. The following appendices of these codes hereafter set forth are adopted for enforcement by reference as if the same were fully set forth herein, to-wit: 
(1)  International Building Code (IBC) - including Georgia Amendments and Appendix N in its entirety with Flood Elevation Option B and Minimum Wind Speed Option C in their entirety. 
(2)  International Residential Building Code - including Georgia Amendments and Appendix R in its entirety with Flood Elevation Option B and Minimum Wind Speed Option C in their entirety. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code-including Georgia Amendments. 
(4)  International Fuel Gas Code-including Georgia Amendments. 
(5)  International Plumbing Code-including Georgia Amendments. 
(6)  National Electrical Code NFPA 70-including Georgia Amendments. 
(7)  International Energy Conservation Code-including Georgia Amendments. 
(8)  International Property Maintenance Code-including Georgia Amendments. 
(a)  Weeds-All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or uncontrolled plant growth in excess of eight inches in height. 
(9)  International Fire Code-including Georgia Amendments. 
(10)  Life Safety Code NFPA 101-including Georgia Amendments. 
(11)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code-including Georgia Amendments. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Codes as heretofore adopted. Hereinafter all of the codes heretofore adopted shall be referred to as the "technical codes". 
(c)  These codes are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof which are public safety, health, and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. 
(d)  Federal and state authority. The provisions of these codes shall not be held to deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, or any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the adoption of these codes or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(e)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(f)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(g)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(h)  All codes listed above shall be enforced jointly and/or separately by the building department and/or the fire department, and/or the code enforcement officer in accordance with state and local law. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(2), § 2; Ord. No. 2014-012 , 4-7-14; Ord. No. 2015-020 , 6-1-15) 
Sec. 18-2. - Building department. 
    There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building director. The qualifications for the building director, building inspector and other code enforcement personnel shall be established by the mayor and council. 
(1)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee connected with the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system, or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any other work which is inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(2)  Records. The building director or designated staff, shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the building department. The records of the department shall be open to public inspection. Complete and accurate records shall be maintained regarding the date, time, and findings of each inspection or investigation. 
(3)  Liability. Any officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this article, acting for the applicable governing authority in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this article shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(4)  Reports. The building director or designated staff shall submit annually a report covering the work of the building department during the preceding year. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(2), § 2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Additions, alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work shall comply with all the requirements of the codes as listed herein for new construction. The building director and fire chief shall determine the extent to which any existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the listed codes for new construction. Such determination shall be made in writing. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. Subject to the written approval of the building director and fire chief, the change in use or occupancy of an existing structure shall be permitted provided that the change of use is a less hazardous use as solely determined by the building director and fire chief. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(2), § 2) 
Sec. 18-4. - Special historic buildings. 
    The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by the building director and fire chief to not constitute a distinct life safety hazard. 
(Ord. of 3-7-11(2), § 2) 
Secs. 18-5-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES 

Sec. 18-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Ord. of 4-10-95, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-22. - Residential restrictions. 
    On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992. 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure. 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush. 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(Ord. of 4-10-95, § 2) 
Sec. 18-23. - Commercial restrictions. 
    On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city or any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections 18-22(1) through (5). 
(Ord. of 4-10-95, § 3) 
Sec. 18-24. - Repairs, renovations. 
    The requirements of section 18-22 shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Ord. of 4-10-95, § 4) 
Sec. 18-25. - Exemptions; fee for inspection and issuance. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of sections 18-22, 18-23 and 18-24 when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing building; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Ord. of 4-10-95, § 5) 
Sec. 18-26. - Enforcement; penalty. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building official of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building official of the city. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 4-10-95, § 6) 
Secs. 18-27-18-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Mar. 7, 2011(2), § 1, repealed art. III, §§ 18-51-18-161, which pertained to "Building and Construction Code Administration and Enforcement" and derived from an Ord. of May 22, 1995, § 1. 

Secs. 18-51-18-161. - Reserved. 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Occupation and business taxes, § 5-103. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; cable communications, ch. 26; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; taxation, ch. 90; vehicles for hire, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Authorization of cities to levy and collect taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES 

Sec. 22-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use. 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Employee means any individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form 1099. 
    Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
    Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business and enacted by the local government as a revenue raising ordinance for the city. 
    Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging the payment of the occupation tax fee and any additional appropriate fees. 
    Occupation tax registration form means a document filed with the city planning and zoning director's office acknowledging the number of employees of a business for the purpose of assessing the amount of a business occupation tax due. See also Return. 
    Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 50 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation means those individuals listed in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) but does not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business if such business pays an occupation tax. Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations include: 
Lawyers; 
Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.; 
Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.; 
Chiropractors; 
Podiatrists; 
Dentists; 
Optometrists; 
Psychologists; 
Veterinarians; 
Landscape architects; 
Land surveyors; 
Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
Public accountants; 
Embalmers; 
Funeral directors; 
Civil, mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical engineers; 
Architects; 
Marriage and family therapists, social workers, and professional counselors; 
Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); 
Any other business, profession, or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
    Return means an occupation tax registration form or other type of document requesting information as to the number of employees which a business has to file with the city planning and zoning director's office. The form is used to assess the amount of occupation tax due. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 302) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-22. - Purpose and scope of article. 
    The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 401) 
Sec. 22-23. - Levied. 
    An occupation tax based upon the number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 402) 
Sec. 22-24. - Payment required for business dealings; certificate to be displayed. 
    For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, every business, practitioner and location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for the business, practitioner and location. Such current occupation tax certificate shall be displayed in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent business location in the city, a city occupation tax certificate or proof of payment of an occupation tax to another municipality or county in the state shall be shown to the planning and zoning director or their administrative assistant or the building official, or to any police officer of the city, upon request. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), art. 2) 
Sec. 22-25. - Administrative fee. 
    In addition to the occupation tax, a nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $60.00 is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal, or reopening of such accounts 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 404; Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 22-26. - Occupation tax schedule. 
(a)  The tax rate, as determined by the number of employees, for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as follows: 
Number of 
Employees Tax Liability 1-10 $27.50 per employee 11-50 $250.00 plus $22.00 per employee over 10 51-100 $1,155.00 plus $11.00 per employee over 50 101-250 $1,700.00 plus $5.50 per employee over 100 251 or more $2,500.00 plus $1.00 per employee over 250  
This fee may be developed and updated from time to time by the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  The tax rate is based on full-time employees working a minimum of 40 hours per week. Part-time employees who work less than 40 hours per week are to have the total number of hours worked each week added together and divided by 40 to establish the equivalent number of full-time employees. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 403; Ord. of 6-10-02) 
Sec. 22-27. - Filing registration form. 
(a)  On or before November 15 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this article shall file with the planning and zoning director's office, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the planning and zoning director's office or make available within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax. 
(c)  The occupation tax certificate provided for in this article shall be issued by the planning and zoning director and/or his administrative assistant. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 405) 
Sec. 22-28. - Restrictions on tax levy. 
(a)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(b)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(c)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 501(1)-(3)) 
Sec. 22-29. - Business subject to tax to display decal. 
    Each place of business subject to occupation tax imposed herein shall display a decal, which shall be provided by the city, on the front door of the main entrance of the building or in some other prominent and visible location on the front exterior of the business premises. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 501(4)) 
Sec. 22-30. - Dominant line of business to be identified on registration form. 
    The occupation tax registration form of each business operated in the city shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city. The dominant line of business shall be noted on the occupation tax certificate issued by the city which must be displayed by the business owner. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 502) 
Sec. 22-31. - Business operating at more than one location. 
(a)  Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(b)  Location or office shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 503) 
Sec. 22-32. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; display. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43 by the examining boards of the secretary of state's office shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 504) 
Sec. 22-33. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter, shall first, before the issuance of a city occupation tax certificate, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the occupation tax certificate is issued. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 505) 
Sec. 22-34. - Payment by newly established businesses. 
(a)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees, which are the basis of this occupation tax, will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the finance director. 
(b)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 of any year, the occupation tax fee for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee is not reduced. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 506) 
Sec. 22-35. - Businesses with office or location elsewhere in state. 
    A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and is claiming an exemption from the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and basis of such tax. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 507) 
Sec. 22-36. - Business or practitioner with no office or location in state. 
(a)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in this state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business' or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(b)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in this state shall only be required to pay an occupation tax to the local government in this state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 508(1), (2)) 
Sec. 22-37. - Business or practitioner subject to tax by more than one local government in the state. 
    A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local government. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 508(3)) 
Sec. 22-38. - Same employee working for business in more than one municipal corporation or county. 
    If the same employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 508(4)) 
Sec. 22-39. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) (see list under definitions) shall pay the occupation tax set forth in section 22-26 or shall pay an occupation tax of $200.00 per practitioner. On the tax return for 1996 or such later time as the practitioner first commences business in the city, the practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 509) 
Sec. 22-40. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 510) 
Sec. 22-41. - Exemption for business operated for charitable purpose. 
    No business on which an occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from the tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 511) 
Sec. 22-42. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
(a)  All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary occupation tax certificate for the business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain an occupation tax certificate. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this article before commencing the business; and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions, or occupations without first having so obtained such registration, shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(b)  All persons subject to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax. For failure to do so any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining [sic] such person or business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain an occupation tax certificate, make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 512) 
Sec. 22-43. - Returns confidential. 
    Information provided by a business or practitioner to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or levying or collecting the occupation tax is confidential and exempt from disclosure under O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70 et seq. Such information may be provided to the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting the occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay the occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 602) 
Sec. 22-44. - Inspections of books and records. 
    The city through is officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The planning and zoning director or his duly appointed designee shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the planning and zoning director such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the occupation tax certificate currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the planning and zoning director, at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under reporting, a penalty of ten percent of the tax due over 90 days as set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-2-40 through 48-2-43, 48-13-6, 48-13-21 will be assessed for the period delinquent. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 603) 
Sec. 22-45. - Due date for payment; penalty for delinquency; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Any occupation tax due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1 of each year. If any person commences business in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(c)  The occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the planning and zoning director or his administrative assistant and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain an occupation tax certificate shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation subject to this article without first having obtained such occupation tax certificate, such offenders shall, upon conviction by the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-12, for each violation. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 701) 
Sec. 22-46. - Certificate to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. 
    Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax which is delinquent; or upon failure to make any of the returns within the time required herein; or upon failure to make a true return; or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth; or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in section 22-44, then any occupation tax certificate granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of the business to transact business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new occupation tax certificate shall be issued by the city for the operation of a business, which has any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article either unpaid or declared delinquent at the time of filing of the business tax registration form; or to an individual, firm, or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the planning and zoning director or his designee in accordance with provisions found in section 22-44. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 702) 
Sec. 22-47. - Failure to comply with article; continuing in business after revocation of certificate. 
(a)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests or requires for determining the applicability or amount of occupation tax, or for levying or collecting such occupation tax shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business. Any persons, their managers, agents, or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees, or representatives of the city, request such inspection, during normal city hall business hours for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to pay any occupation tax charged pursuant to this article shall be subject to, upon conviction by the municipal court, a fine of up to $500.00 or by imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both, for each violation. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 703) 
Sec. 22-48. - Lien taken for delinquent tax. 
(a)  In addition to the other remedies provided for in this article for the collection of the occupation tax, the planning and zoning director or his designee or other official of the city shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40 or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the planning and zoning director or other appropriate official of the city upon property of the delinquent taxpayer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the Code and Charter of the city, and the laws of the state and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 704) 
Sec. 22-49. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Nonprofit, agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes otherwise allowed by law. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 801) 
Sec. 22-50. - Tax inapplicable in certain situations. 
    An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 802) 
Sec. 22-51. - Article subject to amendment or repeal. 
    This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city council to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 901) 
Sec. 22-52. - Application of article to prior ordinances. 
    To the extent that any occupation taxes are owed pursuant to an ordinance passed prior to the ordinance from which this article derives, such amounts remain due and owing and the provisions of that prior ordinance will remain in effect with respect to such unpaid occupation taxes until such time as they are paid in full. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 902) 
Sec. 22-53. - Article to remain in full force and effect until changed by city council. 
    This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 903) 
Sec. 22-54. - Public hearing required before tax rate is increased. 
    The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the rate of the occupation tax as set forth in this article. In addition, in any year in which revenues from occupation taxes for the city are greater than revenues from the occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city will be required to hold one or more public hearings to determine how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 1001) 
Sec. 22-55. - Option to establish exemptions or reductions for types of businesses. 
    The city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in the occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development of attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the governing authority or a plan. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 1002) 
Sec. 22-56. - Enforcement. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the planning and zoning director, his designees and the police department to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. It is hereby made the further duty of the planning and zoning director, the building official, other city officials as well as the members of the police department and their assistants to inspect all occupation tax certificates issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 601) 
Sec. 22-57. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction by the municipal court, be punished as provided in section 1-12 for each violation. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(1), § 513) 
Secs. 22-58-22-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 10, 1997(1), repealed former Art. III, §§ 22-76-22-86, of this chapter, which pertained to adult entertainment and derived from an ordinance adopted Dec. 6, 1979, §§ 1-11. The ordinance adopted March 10, 1997, furthermore, provided for the inclusion of the provisions of an ordinance adopted Nov. 11, 1996, as a new Art. III of this chapter. 
State Law reference- Prohibited conduct on licensed premises, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-40 et seq.; public indecency, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8; giving massages in places used for lewdness, prostitution, assignation or masturbation for hire, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-17; establishment, maintenance or use of building, structure or place for unlawful sexual purposes, O.C.G.A. § 41-3-1; use of rooms in roadhouses, public dance halls, etc., for immoral purposes, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-61; maintaining a disorderly house, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44; keeping a gambling place, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-23; keeping a place of prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-10; authority to demolish structures in which drug crimes are being committed, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7; restriction of adult bookstores and movie houses to certain areas, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3. 

Sec. 22-76. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses generally known as and defined herein as adult entertainment establishments. To that end this article has been enacted in the interests of: 
(1)  Promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the city; and 
(2)  Preserving the quality of life in residential and business areas of the city; and 
(3)  Promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining the stability of residential and commercial property values. This article is intended to reasonably regulate adult entertainment establishments and businesses in order to serve the legitimate governmental interests set out herein. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 1) 
Sec. 22-77. - Legislative findings of fact. 
    Based upon the results of an investigation and the attendant evidence produced, the council finds that: 
(1)  The outright prohibition of adult entertainment establishments improperly infringes upon protected forms of expression; but that reasonable regulation of such businesses so as to curtail and prevent pernicious secondary effects is both permissible and desirable. 
(2)  Adult entertainment establishments and businesses, if unregulated, are likely to lead to an increase in illegal sexual activities, drug and alcohol offenses, disorderly conduct and other criminal activity. 
(3)  Law enforcement resources available for responding to problems associated with or created by adult entertainment establishments and businesses are extremely limited due to the growth of the city and county and such resources are best conserved by regulating and licensing adult entertainment establishments. 
(4)  The public health, safety, welfare and convenience of the residents of the city require that adult entertainment businesses and establishments and their locations, operations, employees and owners be regulated and licensed in order to reduce the potential for harm and in order to preserve and protect the quality of life in the residential and business environs of the city. 
(5)  The location of adult entertainment establishments and businesses in close proximity to each other adversely affects the property values, causes an increase in crime, and encourages residents and other businesses in proximity to such adult entertainment establishments to move and locate elsewhere. 
(6)  There is presently in North Florida, and particularly in the Jacksonville area, and in Southeast Georgia an increasing trend toward nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment, and toward the utilization of nude and semi-nude employees engaged in other service-oriented activities and by adult entertainment establishments. 
(7)  The commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity consists of the use of nude and semi-nude entertainment in connection with or for the sale of goods or services, and the receipt of money by the person engaged in nude or semi-nude entertainment in exchange for or as consideration for a nude or semi-nude performance by such individual. Competitive commercial exploitation of nudity and semi-nudity is adverse to the public's interest in quality of life and commerce and the total community environment in the city and surrounding areas. 
(8)  The commercial exploitation of nude and semi-nude conduct, acts, exhibitions and entertainment frequently occurs in commercial establishments either selling or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(9)  There is a direct relationship between the consumption of alcoholic beverages concurrently with nude and seminude activities, conduct and entertainment and an increase in criminal activities, disturbances of the peace and good order of the city and the concurrency of these activities is hazardous to the health and safety of those persons in attendance and tends to depreciate the value of adjoining property and harm the economic welfare of the community as a whole. 
(10)  The combination of the sale and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages with the performance of nude and semi-nude entertainment is inimical and adverse to the public's interest in the quality of life and commerce and quality of the environment of the city. 
(11)  It is the duty and responsibility of the mayor and council for the city to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the city and its residents, the stability of the value and use of property within the city, and the character of its neighborhoods and developments. 
(12)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard and protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens, it is necessary and advisable to prohibit nude and semi-nude acts, exhibitions and entertainment in commercial establishments at which alcoholic beverages are available, sold, or consumed. 
(13)  In order to preserve the public peace and good order, and to safeguard and promote the health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens, therefore, it is necessary and advisable to regulate and restrict the conduct of owners, operators, agents, employees, contractors, entertainers, performers, patrons, spectators, clientele and persons on the premises of adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 2) 
Sec. 22-78. - Definitions. 
    As used herein, the following words or phrases shall have the following meanings: 
    Adult entertainment establishment: The premises on which the following defined establishments operate or on which the following defined activities occur shall constitute adult entertainment establishments: 
(1)  Adult business: 
a.  Any business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
b.  Any other business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  Adult bookstore: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals, and computer compatible storage and service or any other media which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(3)  Adult cabaret: Any place where alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises which features, uses, employs, or displays topless dancers, bottomless dancers or nude dancers; gogo dancers; exotic dancers; strippers; or similar entertainers or dancers. 
(4)  Adult hotel/motel: A business which rents lodging rooms to the public for the purpose of engaging in conduct or entertainment defined in subsection (1) above. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(6)  Adult mini-motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
(7)  Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(8)  Adult video store: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions and computer compatible storage and service media or any other media, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(9)  Erotic dance establishment: A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers where such performances are distinguished or characterized by the displaying or exposing of, or an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(10)  Escort bureaus; introduction services: Any business, agency or persons who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
(11)  Lingerie modeling studio: A business or establishment to which the public or any portion thereof is permitted whose primary business activity consists of persons exhibiting or modeling lingerie or similar undergarments and characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(12)  Massage parlor/bathhouse: Any establishment to which the public is permitted or invited and in which services offered include some form of physical contact between employee and patron and in which services offered are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Church: A building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship, or for propagating a particular form of religious belief. 
    Good moral character: A person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a drug-related or alcohol-related felony or sex-related crime or crime involving moral turpitude in the past five years. 
    Licensed day care center: A day care center licensed by the state and/or a local government that provides care, training, education custody, treatment or supervision for children under 14 years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to an owner or operator of the facility. 
    Minor: Any person under 21 years of age. 
    Operator: The manager or other person principally in charge of an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Owner(s): If a sole proprietorship, the proprietor; if a partnership, all partners (general and limited) if a corporation, all officers, directors and persons holding at least five percent of the outstanding shares. 
    Residential: Pertaining to the use of land, premises such as homes, town homes, patio homes, mobile homes, duplexes, condominiums or apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. 
    School: A public or private facility where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education including any playground, stadiums, or other structure. 
    Specified anatomical areas: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities: Means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral or anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerastia; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 3) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, §1-2. 
Sec. 22-79. - Adult entertainment establishment regulations. 
    Adult entertainment establishments shall comply with the following regulations concerning their operation, to wit: 
(1)  An adult entertainment establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m., Monday through Friday and from 8:00 a.m. Saturday through 12:00 a.m. on Sunday. 
(2)  No adult entertainment establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages or controlled substances upon its premises. 
(3)  All adult entertainment establishments shall conspicuously display the permit required by this article. 
(4)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment for any purpose or reason. 
(5)  Merchandise or activities of the establishment shall not be visible from any point outside the establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 4) 
Sec. 22-80. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
    In addition to the regulations set forth in section 22-79, erotic dance establishments shall be subject to and shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license or permit issued pursuant to this section. 
(2)  No later than the first day of February of each year an erotic dance establishment shall file a verified report with the city clerk showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(3)  An erotic dance establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(4)  No adult entertainment establishment permits shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 21 years of age or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(5)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose, which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(6)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(7)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(8)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(9)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(10)  All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot. 
(11)  If any portion or subparagraph of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 5) 
Sec. 22-81. - Certain activities prohibited. 
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, any specified anatomical area in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 6) 
Sec. 22-82. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a permit so to do. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 7) 
Sec. 22-83. - On premises operator required. 
    An adult entertainment establishment shall have a designated person(s) to serve as an on-premises operator. The operator(s) shall be principally in charge of the establishment and shall be located on the premises during all hours of operation. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 8) 
Sec. 22-84. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, escort bureau or adult business or erotic dance establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid license or permit, or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, which permit shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 9) 
Sec. 22-85. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person younger than 21 years of age to enter an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the establishment at all times during the establishment's operating hours. It shall be the duty of the attendants to not allow any person under the age of 21 years to enter the establishment. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of 21 years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A current, valid operator's, commercial operator's or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the Georgia Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is 21 years of age or older; or 
(3)  A current, valid military identification certifying that such person is 21 years of age or older. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 10) 
Sec. 22-86. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult bathhouse or massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 11) 
Sec. 22-87. - Location; building and signage restrictions. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment or use restricted hereunder shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes. 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, federal military installation, library, licensed day care facility, civic center, public park or playground is located. 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located. 
(5)  On less than one acre of land containing at least 400 feet of road frontage on a public right-of-way. 
(b)  A minimum of one parking space shall be provided for every 100 square feet of gross building area, or for every three customer seats, whichever is greater. 
(c)  Signage for such establishments shall be limited to one freestanding sign not to exceed 25 square feet of copy area (total of all sides), and one wall sign not to exceed 25 square feet. Maximum sign height shall not exceed ten feet from ground to highest point of the sign. Minimum sign setbacks shall be ten feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
(d)  Buildings and structures operated and maintained in connection with an adult entertainment establishment shall be set back at least 40 feet from any property line. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured along a straight line which describes the shortest distance between the property lines. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 12; Ord. No. 2015-007 , 2-2-15) 
Sec. 22-88. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city clerk of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city clerk and shall receive approval of such employment from the city clerk. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city clerk requires, including but not limited to, date of birth, social security number, current address, current telephone and pager numbers, two color photographs of the prospective employee at least two inches by two inches taken within the preceding six months, and a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city clerk for a hearing. The decision of the city clerk after hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $500.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city clerk evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license or permit. Violation of the provisions of this article, other ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or permittee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 13) 
Sec. 22-89. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee in the amount of $2,500.00, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city clerk at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishments. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 14) 
Sec. 22-90. - Application contents. 
    Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  If a person, acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(5)  If a person, the applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  If a person, two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the preceding six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions and the disposition of such violations; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and address of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the clerk of Camden County Superior Court. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of the subsection pertinent to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person shall complete and sign all application forms of an individual applicant under this section, but only one application fee shall be charged. If the applicant is a Georgia corporation, it shall attach to the application certified copy of its articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto and its most recent annual report. If the applicant is a foreign corporation, it shall attach a certified copy of its certificate of authority to transact business in the state, together with all amendments and its most recent annual report. If the applicant does or proposes to do business under a trade name, it shall attach a copy of the recorded trade name registration document to the application; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including the date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license or permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or any crime or ordinance violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city clerk shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(17)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(18)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(19)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(20)  An interior floor plan drawing showing the location of all interior walls and/or partitions, stages, platforms and/or dance floors. 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official; 
(22)  The written consent of the registered agent as required by section 22-110.1. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 15) 
Sec. 22-91. - Applicant to appear. 
    The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the City Hall of the city and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 16) 
Sec. 22-92. - Application; investigation. 
    The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the mayor and council may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officer or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offense or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other governmental entity located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with requirements contained in section 22-87 and with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards as evidenced by inspection reports prepared by city building official and state fire marshal's representatives; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the proposed premises complies with the distance requirements and limitations contained in section 22-87 and is not located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site of any other business restricted hereunder; 
(10)  That the grant of such permit will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state, or the United States; 
(11)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 17) 
Sec. 22-93. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
(a)  No permit provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. , 427 U.S. 50,81. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 18) 
Sec. 22-94. - Permit-Refusal; appeal. 
    If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within 45 days of the date of the application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 19) 
Sec. 22-95. - Same-Renewal. 
    Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 20) 
Sec. 22-96. - Same-Nontransferable. 
    No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 21) 
Sec. 22-97. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager and the planning director. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the City Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 22) 
Sec. 22-98. - Revocation. 
(a)  The city clerk shall be authorized to suspend or revoke an adult entertainment establishment permit or license under the conditions set forth in this section. In the event the city clerk seeks to suspend or revoke a permit, the city clerk shall give written notification to the permittee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violations. 
(b)  The city clerk may suspend or revoke a permit in the event of any of the following: 
(1)  A permittee gave false or misleading information in the application or renewal process; 
(2)  A permittee knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises, or the permittee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such occurrences; 
(3)  A permittee violated or knowingly allowed violation of any provision of this adult entertainment article, any other ordinance of the city, or any criminal law of the state to occur on the premises; or the permittee did not make a reasonable effort to prevent such violations; 
(4)  A permittee has been convicted of any drug-related, alcohol-related, or sex-related crime and/or a crime involving moral turpitude by the state or the city regarding any offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article; 
(5)  A permittee failed to pay any fee, application/permit fee, fine or other amount of money due to the city under this article or any other ordinance of the city; 
(6)  A permittee has, after the date of the original application and floor plan approval, made interior floor plan alterations, without first obtaining approval, and such alterations involve the addition of private viewing rooms, cubicles, booths or similar areas. 
(c)  In the event that the city clerk determines that a permit violation has occurred, such permit shall be suspended for 30 days for the first violation. For a second violation, the permit shall be suspended for 60 days. For a third and all subsequent violation(s), the permit shall be suspended for 90 days. Any permit that has been suspended three or more times in any consecutive twelve-month period, shall be revoked. In addition, any permittee found to be in violation of subsections 22-79(1), (2) and (4) shall be subject to immediate permit revocation. Provided however, that permittee shall be allowed to continue business operations until the date of the hearing scheduled in accordance with section 22-100 hereafter. No permittee or any other applicant may apply for a permit for the same premises during any period of suspension or revocation. 
(d)  In the event of permit suspension or revocation by the city clerk, the permittee may appeal the decision of the city clerk to the mayor and city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days from the effective date of written notice received by permittee in accordance with subsection (a) of this section. The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by a memorandum or other writing, setting out fully the grounds for such appeal and all arguments in support thereof. The city attorney may submit a memorandum in response to the memorandum filed by the permittee upon appeal to the mayor and city council. The city clerk's decision shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall stay the city clerk's decision until the appeal is heard or withdrawn. The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the mayor and city council, said meeting occurring not less than five, nor more than 30 days after receipt of appeal. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 23) 
Sec. 22-99. - Appeal-Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The city clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular meeting of the mayor and city council, said meeting occurring not less than five, nor more than 30 days after receipt of appeal. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 24) 
Sec. 22-100. - Same-Council determines procedure. 
    When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to mail written notice of hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for the hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city clerk shall assume responsibility for the mailing of notice of the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 25) 
Sec. 22-101. - City council hearing. 
    Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 26) 
Sec. 22-102. - Powers of hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 27) 
Sec. 22-103. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
    The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 28) 
Sec. 22-104. - Hearing officer-Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date of such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk, with additional copies furnished to the city manager and the chief of police. 
(b)  The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 29) 
Sec. 22-105. - Same-Action by council. 
    The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 30) 
Sec. 22-106. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the permit issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 31) 
Sec. 22-107. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of permit granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 32) 
Sec. 22-108. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
    Each licensed premises shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 33) 
Sec. 22-109. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
    The permittee of a licensed premises or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city building official. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 34) 
Sec. 22-110. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city building official on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city building official shall serve on the permittee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city building official may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city building official. The city building official shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 35) 
Sec. 22-110.1. - Abatement as a sanitary nuisance. 
    A licensed premises or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 36) 
Sec. 22-110.2. - Notices, registered agent, jurisdiction. 
(a)  All licensed establishments must have and continuously maintain in Camden County a registered agent upon whom any process, notice or demand required or permitted by law or under this article to be served upon the permittee, may be served. This person shall act as registered agent for the operator and each owner collectively. This person must be a resident of Camden County. The operator may be appointed as the registered agent if he or she is a resident of Camden County. The permittee shall file the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, with the city clerk as part of the permit application. By appointing such registered agent, and as a condition of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the terms of this article, the permittee agrees that any legal action brought by the city against the adult entertainment establishment or the permittee (which includes the operator or any owner) to enforce the provisions of this article, may be filed in any court of competent jurisdiction in Camden County. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the city clerk or any office, division, department or other agency under this article to any permittee, operator or owner of an adult entertainment establishment, may be given by either: 
(1)  Personal delivery; or 
(2)  By certified United States mail addressed to permittee's registered agent at the most recent address specified in the agent's written consent form received by the city clerk, or any notice of address change which has been received by the city clerk. If personally delivered, the notice's effective date shall be the date of delivery. If mailed, the notice's effective date shall be two days after the notice is placed in the mail. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 37) 
Sec. 22-110.3. - Conditions of adult entertainment establishment approval. 
(a)  All adult entertainment establishments shall be kept in a clean, sanitary condition, and shall be in full compliance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the city and the state. 
(b)  The county health department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable health rules and regulations and report any violations to the city building official. 
(c)  The city/county fire department shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments located within the city to determine compliance with all applicable fire regulations and report any violations to the city building official. 
(d)  The city building official or designee shall have the authority to regularly inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all applicable building and other technical codes of the city and county. 
(e)  The city police department shall have the authority to periodically inspect adult entertainment establishments to determine compliance with all provisions of this article or other applicable laws and report any violations to the city building official. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 38) 
Sec. 22-110.4. - Effect of article on other codes, regulations or statutes. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be deemed to permit or condone any activity whatsoever which is otherwise declared to be obscene or illegal by any applicable code, regulation, or statute which violates any jurisdictional prohibition upon nudity or sexual activity. Further, the activities and uses which are regulated and permitted by this article shall only be allowed if they are not obscene and not in violation of any other such prohibitions on nudity or sexual activity. This section shall supersede and limit all other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-11-96, § 39) 
ARTICLE IV. - GENERAL CONTRACTORS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Electrical contractors, plumbers, conditioned air contractors, low-voltage contractors, and utility contractors, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-111. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "The City of St. Marys General Contractors' License Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 1.1) 
Sec. 22-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alteration of building means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing wall, columns, or girdes); any addition or reduction to a building; or any relocation of a building from one location or position to another. 
    Board of appeals means the city zoning board of appeals, as created under the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended. 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building code means the Georgia State Plumbing Code, Georgia State Electrical Code, Georgia State Heating & Air Conditioning Code, Georgia State Building Code, and Georgia State Energy Code for Buildings, as enacted by the mayor and council, as subsequently amended. 
    Building official means the city building and zoning official. 
    Certificate of competency means a valid current certificate issued by the building official which shall give the named general contractor to which it is issued authority to engage in general contracting of the kind described therein. 
    General contracting means construction, alteration or repairing of any building in the city. 
    General contractor means any person, corporation or other legal entity which engages in the business of general contracting under express or implied contracts or which bids, offers to perform, purports to have the capacity to perform, or does perform general contracting services under express or implied contracts. The term "general contractor" shall not include a person who is an employee of a general contractor and who receives only a salary or hourly wage for performing general contracting work. 
    License means a valid and current certificate of registration issued by the building official which shall give the named person to whom it is issued authority to engage in the activity prescribed thereon. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 2.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 22-113. - Powers of building official. 
    In addition to any authority hereinafter provided by this article, the building official has the power to: 
(1)  Charge reasonable fees as established by the mayor and council for the administration of applications, examinations, registration, licensure and renewal licenses in respect to general contractors. 
(2)  Establish the policies for regulating the business of general contracting. 
(3)  Promulgate and adopt rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Examine all applicants for license to practice the business of general contracting. Examinations shall be prepared in such a manner as to test the knowledge, skill and efficiency of the applicants; and such examination shall be based on the applicable building codes. 
(5)  Investigate alleged violations of this article or the building code. 
(6)  After notice and hearing, have the power to reprimand or power to suspend, revoke or cancel the license or certificate of competency or refuse to grant, renew, or restore a license or certificate of competency to any person or licensee upon any one of the following grounds: 
a.  The commission of any false, fraudulent or deceitful act or use of any forged, false or fraudulent document in connection with the license requirements of this article, the building code or the rules and regulations of the city. 
b.  Failure at any time to comply with the requirements for a license under the provisions of this article. 
c.  Engaging in any dishonorable or unethical conduct likely to deceive, defraud, or harm the public. 
d.  Knowingly performing any act which in any way assists an unlicensed person to engage in the business of general contracting. 
e.  Violating, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting any violation of any provisions of this article, the building code or any rule or regulation of the city. 
f.  The performance of any faulty, inadequate, inefficient or unsafe general contracting likely to endanger life, health or property. The performance of any work that does not comply with the standards set by the building code shall be prima facie evidence of the faulty, inadequate, inefficient or unsafe character of such general contracting work; provided, however, that the building official, in his sole discretion, for good cause shown and under such conditions as he may prescribe, may restore a license to any person whose license has been suspended or revoked. 
(7)  Do all other things necessary and proper to exercise its powers and perform its duties in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 3.1) 
Sec. 22-114. - Prohibited activities. 
    No person shall engage in the general contracting business unless such person has a valid license from the city. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 4.1) 
Sec. 22-115. - Exemptions from examination. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, any general contractor holding a valid license immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall continue to be licensed in the same capacity without the necessity of passing an examination, provided such person pays or has paid the required fees and is not otherwise in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, within 90 days after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives, any individual, partnership, or corporation desiring to qualify as a general contractor shall make application to stand the examination herein provided for or, within the same period, shall furnish satisfactory evidence to the board that such individual, partnership or corporation has a partner, officer or regular employee who has successfully and efficiently engaged in the vocation for a period of at least three consecutive years prior to the time of application. Any individual, partnership or corporation so qualifying shall pay or shall have paid to the city the fee prescribed for applicants for examination for qualification. The decision of the building official as to the qualifications of applicants taking the required examination shall, in the absence of fraud, be conclusive. All individuals, partnerships or corporations desiring to engage in general contracting business after the expiration of 90 days after the adoption of the ordinance from which this section derives shall take the examination and qualify under this article before engaging in the business. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 4.2) 
Sec. 22-116. - Application. 
    All applicants for examination and licenses provided for by this article and applicants for renewal of licenses under the provisions of this article shall be required to fill out a form which shall be furnished by the city, which form shall show whether or not the applicant is an individual, partnership or corporation and, if a partnership or corporation, the names and addresses of all partners or the names and addresses of the officers, names and addresses of all persons owning more than ten percent of the stock in the case of corporations, when and where formed or incorporated, and such other information as the building official may require. All forms of applications for renewal of licenses shall also show whether or not the applicant, if it is a partnership or corporation, still has connected with it a duly qualified person holding a license issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 4.3) 
Sec. 22-117. - Display of license. 
    Every person holding a license issued by the city pursuant to this article shall display it in a conspicuous manner at his place of business. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 5.1) 
Sec. 22-118. - Transfer. 
    The license and certificate of competency under this article shall not be transferred by one company to another without the written approval of the building official. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 5.2) 
Sec. 22-119. - Period of license. 
    The license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be valid for a period of one year commencing January 1 and expiring on December 31 of a particular calendar year. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 5.3) 
Sec. 22-120. - Renewal of license. 
    All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be renewed on an annual basis without the necessity of taking another examination, provided the license holder continues to meet the qualifications set out in this article and renews his license within a period of 60 days subsequent to the expiration of previous license held by the applicant. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 5.4) 
Sec. 22-121. - Building permit. 
    No building permit shall be issued to any general contractor or owner of any building unless the contractor to perform the construction is licensed under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 5.5) 
Sec. 22-122. - Exempt activities. 
    This article shall not apply to the following construction activities: 
(1)  Contractors doing work on bridges, roads, streets, highways, railroads or utilities and services incidental thereto. 
(2)  A subcontractor or specialty contractor whose work is limited to a specific phase of construction and whose responsibility is likewise limited to that particular phase of the construction, provided he is licensed for that particular work. 
(3)  Employees of any person engaged in general contracting who are subordinates of a general contractor who is licensed to engage in such contracting provided the employees do not hold themselves out for hire or engage in contracting except as salaried employees. 
(4)  An authorized employee of the United States, the state, or any county, municipality, board of education, district or political subdivision of the state as long as the employee does not hold himself out for hire or otherwise engage in general contracting, except in accordance with his employment. 
(5)  Public utilities or construction, maintenance, and development work performed by their forces and incidental to their business. 
(6)  The sale or installation of any finished products, materials or articles or merchandise which are not actually fabricated into and do not become a permanent fixed part of the structure. 
(7)  Owners of property building or improving one- or two-family residences thereon for the occupancy of such owners and not offered for sale or rent. In all actions brought under this article, proof of the sale or offering for sale of more than one such structure by the owner-builder within one year after completion of the same shall be prima facie evidence that such structure was undertaken for the purpose of sale. 
(8)  Any construction, alteration, improvement, or repair carried on within the limits of any site, the title to which is in the United States, nor to any construction, alteration, improvement or repair on any project where federal law supersedes or preempts this article. 
(9)  Any work or operation of a casual, minor or inconsequential nature in which the aggregate contract price for labor, materials and all other items is less than $1,000.00, but this exemption shall not apply: 
a.  When the construction, repair, remodeling or improvement is a part of a larger or major operation whether undertaken by the same or a different contractor or in which a division of the operation is made in contracts of amounts less than $1,000.00 for the purpose of evading this article or otherwise. 
b.  To a person who advertises or exhibits by any manner or device which might indicate to the public that he is a contractor or otherwise represents that he is qualified to engage in general contracting. 
(10)  Any construction or operation incidental to the construction or repair or irrigation and drainage ditches or regular constituted irrigation districts, reclamation districts, or the clearing or other work on the land in rural areas for fire prevention purposes or otherwise. 
(11)  A registered architect, professional engineer, or residential designer acting in his professional capacity or any person otherwise exempted by law. 
(12)  Any person who furnishes materials or supplies only without fabricating them into or consuming them in the performance of the work of the contractor. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 6.1) 
Sec. 22-123. - Recognition of other registrations, certificates. 
    Any other provision of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the building official is hereby authorized to issue a license, without the necessity of an examination but upon the payment of the proper application fee, to any applicant who shall submit satisfactory evidence of registration or certification in another state or county of this state having a general contractors licensing act or ordinance, if the qualification prescribed at the time such license or certificate was issued by the other state or county were equal to or greater than the requirements prescribed by the building official at the time the application is made to the building official and provided such state or county affords similar reciprocity to license holders under this article. Such application shall be accompanied by such documentation and information as shall be prescribed by the city. The building official is further authorized to prescribe such rules, regulations, conditions or limitations on the issuance of such licenses as the city in its sole discretion shall deem appropriate or desirable. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 6.2) 
Sec. 22-124. - Injunction. 
    Whenever it shall appear to the building official that any person is or has been violating any provisions of this article or any of the lawful rules, ordinances, regulations or orders of the city, the building official may file for injunction or other appropriate proceeding in the proper superior court of this state against such person for the purpose of enjoining any such violation or seeking other relief. The right of injunction provided for in this section shall be in addition to any other legal remedy which the building official has and shall be in addition to any right of criminal prosecution provided by law. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 7.1) 
Sec. 22-125. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished for each offense according to section 1-12 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 7.2) 
Sec. 22-126. - Appeals. 
    Appeals to the zoning board of appeals may be taken by any person aggrieved by a decision of the board based on this article. Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the city, by filing with the building official a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. Appeals shall be submitted on application forms obtainable from the building official. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the zoning board of appeals by the building official. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 8.1) 
Sec. 22-127. - Action on appeals. 
    In reviewing an appeal the board of appeals may, in conformity with the provision of this article, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision of the building official. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 8.2) 
Sec. 22-128. - Public hearing. 
    The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to it, and give written notice to the party appealing and to the building official at least 15 days in advance. At such a hearing, any party may appear in person, or may be represented by an agent or by an attorney. 
(Ord. of 11-5-81, § 8.3) 
Secs. 22-129-22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PAWNBROKERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 22-151. - License issuance. 
    The city is authorized to issue a city license to a pawnbroker to operate such designated business within the legal limits of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-2-61, § I) 
Sec. 22-152. - Conditions of license. 
    A licensee, under the provisions of this article, shall agree as a condition precedent to receiving such license: 
(1)  That he will not knowingly accept any article or articles of property proposed to be pawned that such licensee knows to be stolen. 
(2)  That such licensee shall not engage in the business of making loans or lending money to any degree and that such business shall be confined to the strictest terms of accepting property to be pawned or pledged for a fair and reasonable sum of money. 
(3)  That the licensee shall report to the city police department a full description sufficient for identification or in possession of the licensee. 
(Ord. of 2-2-61, § III) 
Sec. 22-153. - Revocation of license. 
    Upon conviction for the violation of any of the terms or provisions of this article such license shall be revoked. 
(Ord. of 2-2-61, § IV) 
Secs. 22-154-22-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TEMPORARY SALES, SOLICITORS, MOBILE FOOD SERVICES AND VENDORS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted November 7, 2016, in effect, repealed art. VI, §§ 22-181-22-189 and enacted a new art. VI, §§ 22-181-22-194 as set out herein. Former art. VI pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an Ord. of Feb. 26, 2007(1); Ord. of Dec. 5, 2011; and an Ord. of Feb. 17, 2016 . 

Sec. 22-181. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent of this article to provide for the regulation of temporary sales, solicitors, mobile food services and vendors within the city. The purpose of this article is to protect, maintain and enhance public health, safety and general welfare by regulating temporary sales, solicitors, mobile food services and vendors within the city. The citizens of St. Marys are subject to unregulated temporary sales or solicitors and vendors by sometimes questionable organizations or individuals with illegitimate products or no intent to deliver. It is the purpose of this article to regulate temporary sales and solicitors and vendors to protect the public health, safety and welfare; to establish uniform regulations for the operation of mobile food service units; and to enhance street-level economic opportunities within the city. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-182. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Base of operation means a food service establishment, or any other permitted location in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged, stored, or placed in containers for subsequent transport, sale or service elsewhere. 
    Block means a parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets or highways, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or by a combination thereof. 
    Fixed food service establishment means a non-mobile public or private establishment which prepares and serves meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts, or other edible products directly to the consumer either for carry out or service within the establishment. The term includes restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which retail sandwiches or salads, soda fountains, and similar facilities by whatever name called. This term shall not apply to establishments offering food service incidental to their operations. 
    Food trailer includes ail movable carts that can be hitched to a truck for transport and are no larger than 20 × 10 feet, and no taller than 12 feet in height. Food trailers shall be required to move at the discretion of the community development director, code enforcement official or the city emergency service officers. 
    Food truck encompasses all mobile food service units with the exception of pushcarts and trailers. Food trucks shall be no larger than 30 × 10 feet and shall be required to move at the discretion of the community development director, code enforcement official or the city emergency service officers. 
    Locally grown produce means seasonal sales of products from Camden County or surrounding counties, harvested or produced during the growing season, as evidenced by an occupational tax license from the grower or producer. 
    Mobile food service and vending unit means a trailer, pushcart, vehicle or any other similar conveyance operating as an extension of and under the managerial authority of the permit holder of its permitted base of operation. The mobile food service unit and its permitted base of operation together make a mobile food service establishment. There shall be no fixed or permanent fixtures to a site, including, but not limited to, water, sewer, electricity, signage, fencing or decking. 
    Nonprofit organization means organizations established for purposes other than generating profit, including schools and community service organizations. Such organizations need not have obtained tax-exempt status from the IRS. 
    Pushcart means a human propelled, self-contained, enclosed vending or food service cart that operates at pre-determined locations as approved by the health authority and the city. Menu items will be reviewed by the permit review committee and approved by the community development director. Pushcarts shall be no larger than 5 feet wide × 10 feet long × 10 feet high. 
    Solicitor means any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for any goods, wares or merchandise, including books, periodicals, magazines, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or seeking information, money, donations or financial assistance for any purpose whatsoever, or soliciting or taking or attempting to take orders for services to be furnished or performed in the future. 
    Street vendor means any person who establishes a location within the area so designated to sell specific items as regulated by this article. This use may be reauthorized on a calendar year to year basis as approved by city council. 
    Temporary sales means any person who goes from house to house, from place to place, or from street to street, carrying or transporting goods, wares, or merchandise and offering or exposing the same for sale, or making sales and deliveries to purchasers, or giving or leaving leaflets, pamphlets or other items that promote or advertise the sale of goods or the provision of services for profit. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-183. - Temporary sales or solicitor permit requirement. 
    Without having first registered with the community development department, obtaining a permit and paying the appropriate fee, no temporary sales or solicitor or street vendor may undertake any activity as enumerated in this article. No temporary sales or solicitor shall call at residences, offices or businesses or leave at residences, offices or businesses coupons, cards, circulars, flyers, samples or other written or printed solicitations. The permit shall state the specific dates on which the temporary sales or solicitor is permitted to engage in business as a temporary sales or solicitor. Each temporary sales or solicitor must carry the permit at all times and must produce the permit for inspection on the request of a law enforcement officer or, when calling on a residence, office or business, or on the request of the occupant thereof. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-184. - Application for permit-Temporary sales or solicitor. 
(a)  Each person applying for a permit under this article shall complete a registration form giving complete identification, signature, employer name and proposed method of operation in the city, and such other identification or information as may be requested, including any county or state permits or requirements. Each such person shall, in advance, obtain an occupational tax license and pay the city a fee to be set annually by the city council and can be found in the city permit and license fee table located at the city clerk's office and made available on the city's website. Permits for on-site sale of products will be issued for property located within the C2 commercial district, not including any public property, with written permission from the property owner and the property must have the ability to allow vehicles to exit the street or roadway completely and shall not create a traffic hazard. The community development director or other designated public official shall have the final approval on whether a particular C2 property shall be permitted to be used for on-site temporary sales without creating a traffic hazard. Applicants must submit an approval letter from the property owner along with a diagram showing the location of the on-site temporary sales within the approved C2 commercial district. Moving to a location not approved voids the temporary sales permit and the applicant must reapply for a new permit. Failure to have a copy of the permit on-site for inspection voids the permit and the applicant must reapply. Any applicant may submit a current occupational tax license from anywhere else in Georgia as proof of paying an occupational tax but will still be required to pay the fee to obtain a city permit to solicit or have temporary sales of products within the city. 
(b)  Permits shall be issued on a yearly basis prorated for months to the end of the year detailing the product to be sold and the locations authorized to be utilized. 
(c)  Minimum information required to obtain a permit: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number. 
(2)  Copy of picture ID verifying identification. 
(3)  County or state required permits. 
(4)  Current Georgia occupational tax license. 
(5)  Owners permission to use C2 property. 
(6)  Site plan showing location of sales. 
(7)  List of products being sold. 
(8)  Description of vehicle being used with a copy of current vehicle insurance. 
(9)  Proof of applicant's lawful presence in the United States including submission of required affidavit and clearance through SAVE Program. 
(d)  No temporary sales applicant shall erect or construct a fixed or permanent structure, such as a fence, deck or sign as part of their unit, with the unit limited to ten-foot in width, 20-foot in length, and ten-foot in height. 
(e)  No temporary sales applicant shall be allowed to connect to any city utility, including, but not limited to, water, wastewater, or electrical services, except for a city sanctioned event. 
(f)  Temporary sales applicants may place one temporary sandwich board or feather sign for advertisement purposes no more than four feet from the main service window. All other signage shall be limited to the unit and is not allowed to extend beyond the unit by more than four feet. All signage permitting fees are included in the temporary sales permit fee. 
(g)  No temporary sales applicant will be approved for longer than 30 consecutive days. 
(h)  No temporary sales applicant will be allowed to sell prepared or packaged foods. 
(i)  Each lot will be limited to one temporary sales operation and no more than two may operate in one city block at one time. 
(j)  All temporary sales applicants shall be able to move their unit upon a twenty-four request of the city. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-185. - Application for permit and licensing-Mobile foods and vending 
(a)  In general. No person shall operate a mobile food service and vending unit within the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining the proper licenses and/or permits from the state, county, and City of St. Marys. Mobile food service and vending unit operators shall at all times comply with the provisions of this article and all other applicable local, state and federal laws, regulations or rules. All permits will be issued annually based on the calendar year. No permit issued under this article may be prorated, transferred, or assigned or used by any person other than the one to whom it is issued, or at any location other than the one for which it is issued. 
(b)  Specific requirements. Any person intending to operate a mobile food service and vending unit within the corporate limits of the city shall obtain, prior to commencing operation: 
(1)  All permits as may be required to operate a mobile food service unit by the state, including the department of public health, and Camden County, including the health department; 
(2)  A city mobile food service and vending unit permit, including: 
a.  Mobile food and vending location plan and agreement. 
b.  Mobile food and vending itinerary and operating schedule. 
c.  Mobile food restroom agreement; and 
(3)  A city occupational tax license. 
(c)  Mobile food service and vending unit permit application-Contents. Applicants seeking a mobile food service and vending unit permit shall submit, on an annual basis, an application for such permit to the community development director, or his/her designee. The application shall be furnished under oath on a form specified by the community development director, accompanied by a non-refundable application fee as set forth by the city council, in the city permit and license fee table, located at the city clerk's office and made available on the city's website: 
(1)  The name, address, telephone number, and email address of the mobile food service unit's owner(s) of record and the natural person(s) who will be operating the mobile food service and vending unit, if different from the owner(s). A permit shall be required for each mobile food service and vending unit, notwithstanding unity of ownership or operation. Where an owner(s) is a non-natural person whether or not formally organized, the application shall identify all partners, officers, directors and/or natural person with a financial interest in any such entity, including personal contact information for each; 
(2)  Information identifying the mobile food service and vending unit including, its make, model and license plate number, together with a photograph of the mobile food service and vending unit; 
(3)  The corporate and, where applicable, trade name of the base of operations associated with the mobile food service unit, together with a copy of the base of operation's city occupational tax license. Where the base of operation is located outside the city limits, the applicant shall provide evidence of licensing in the base of operation's home jurisdiction; 
(4)  A copy of the approved permit for the mobile food service and vending unit issued by the county public health department or state department of agriculture; 
(5)  A copy of the approved permit and inspection certificate for the base of operation issued by the county public health department or state department of agriculture; 
(6)  A mobile food and vending location plan and agreement, which includes proposed location of the unit and a signed lease or agreement with private property owner, or signed approval of community development director for public properties; 
(7)  A mobile food and vending itinerary and operating schedule, indicating intended dates and times of operation; 
(8)  Where temporary seating is allowed and provided, a scaled drawing for each site indicating where the seating will be located and number of seats to be furnished; no seating will be allowed on public properties, unless approved by the community development director in the mobile food and vending itinerary and operating schedule; 
(9)  A copy of the mobile food service unit's food and beverage menu; 
(10)  An itemized list of items to be sold. This list will be limited to the sale of the following items: 
a.  Tee shirts, caps and general merchandise. 
b.  Postcards, arts and crafts. 
c.  Fresh, packaged and prepared foods and snacks. 
d.  Non-alcoholic beverages. 
e.  Sun tan lotion, bug spray, sun glasses, and other outdoor protection products. 
(11)  Mobile food and vending service units will be limited to areas identified as pushcart vending zones and food truck zones on the St. Marys vending zone map, which can be found at the community development department and online at the St. Marys community development document center. 
(12)  Any license issued shall be for only one calendar year, excluding official city festival days: including, but not limited to Mardi Gras, Fourth of July, Rock Shrimp and Wounded Warriors Day and Community Market Days (for the downtown district only). Partial year permits shall be prorated by month, with no guaranteed future renewal of any license, or any guarantee of the continuance of this agreement beyond one calendar year. 
(13)  Any other information that the community development department director may, from time-to-time, deem material to the permitting of mobile food service units within the city limits; and 
(14)  Application for permit and yearly renewal shall be accompanied by such fee as established by city council and any renewal is subject to full review for adherence to the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-186. - Grant or denial of application. 
    Review and consideration of an application shall be conducted fairly and objectively by the permit review team, which includes the community development director, public works director, fire chief and building official, at their weekly meeting. Applications may be denied where an applicant fails to demonstrate that he or she meets the conditions and requirements of this article, or where an applicant fails to comply with applicable local, state or federal law. 
    Any false statements, material omissions or substantially misleading information provided in an application or furnished by an applicant in connection with an application constitute grounds for any one or combination of the following sanctions: permit denial; refusal to renew a permit; permit revocation; permit suspension; and imposition of penalties. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-187. - Operational requirements and provisions. 
(a)  Food trucks. The following operational requirements and conditions apply to food trucks: 
(1)  Food trucks shall not conduct business without all required permits, with the exception of special events recognized by the city for which the food truck has received pre-approval from the community development department director. 
(2)  Food trucks shall limit operations to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  Food trucks shall not operate on private property without the written consent of the property owner. 
(4)  Only three food trucks are permitted at one time in each of the downtown, midtown and westside zones, as identified on the vending zone map, unless they have an authorized assembly permit from the city manager. 
(5)  No operator or employee of a food truck may, at any time, utilize amplified sound devices to solicit patrons or otherwise advertise the truck's goods and services, except those identified in the mobile food and vending location plan and agreement. Food trucks shall comply with the city's noise control ordinance, as amended. 
(6)  The mobile food service unit permit, together with all applicable health certificates, including food inspection reports, pertaining to the unit, shall be firmly attached in a prominent location, which shall be plainly visible to the public at all times the food truck is conducting business. 
(7)  Food trucks may conduct business only within the food truck zone designated for such activity set forth by the St. Marys vending zone map, as amended, with the exception of ice cream trucks, selling only pre-packaged frozen products approved by the county health department. 
(8)  When conducting business, food trucks shall provide no less than ten feet of unobstructed pedestrian space, as measured from the main service window and shall locate its service window towards the sidewalk and not the street. 
(9)  Food trucks may not be left unattended or otherwise stored on sites at which they offer the sale of food and beverage to the public. 
(10)  Food trucks shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal health and safety laws, regulations and rules. 
(11)  Food trucks may place one temporary sandwich board or feather sign for advertisement purposes no more than four feet from the main service window. All other signage shall be limited to the vehicle and is not allowed to extend beyond the vehicle by more than four feet. All signage permitting fees are included in the mobile food service unit permit fee. 
(12)  Food trucks may not conduct business in a location that might block or impede either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(13)  Food trucks may not conduct business with any person while such person is situated in a motor vehicle. 
(14)  Food trucks may provide temporary seating for up to 12 customers; provided, however, that such seating does not impede any right-of-way or any other public space. A scaled drawing must be submitted with the application which indicates the proposed dimensions and layout of the proposed temporary seating area. 
(15)  Toilet facilities-See Georgia Department of Public Health Rule 511-6-l-.06(2)(h). 
(16)  Food trucks shall not erect or construct a fixed or permanent structure, such as a fence, deck or sign as part of their facility. 
(17)  Food trucks shall not be allowed to connect to any city utility, including, but not limited to, water, wastewater, or electrical services, without written agreement of the property owner and permission of the community development director, except for a city sanctioned event. 
(b)  Pushcarts. The following operational requirements and conditions apply to push carts: 
(1)  Pushcarts shall not conduct business without all required permits, with the exception of special events recognized by the city for which the pushcart has received pre-approval from the community development director. 
(2)  Pushcarts shall limit operations to the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(3)  Only three pushcarts are permitted at one time in the vending zone, as identified on the vending zone map, unless they have an authorized assembly permit from the city manager. 
(4)  No operator or employee of a pushcart may, at any time, utilize amplified sound devices to solicit patrons or otherwise advertise the pushcart's goods and services. Pushcarts shall comply with the city's noise control ordinance, as amended. 
(5)  The mobile food service and vending unit permit, together with all applicable health certificates, including food inspection reports, pertaining to the unit, shall be firmly attached in a prominent location, which shall be plainly visible to the public at all times the push cart is conducting business. 
(6)  Pushcarts may conduct business only within the vending zone designated for such activity set forth by the St. Marys vending zone map, as amended. 
(7)  When conducting business, pushcarts shall provide no less than six feet of unobstructed pedestrian space, as measured from the main service window. 
(8)  Pushcarts shall comply with all applicable local, state and federal health and safety laws, regulations and rules. 
(9)  Pushcarts may not display signage not affixed to the vehicle and shall never exceed 25 square feet of signage. 
(10)  Pushcarts may not conduct business in a location that might block or impede either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(11)  Pushcarts may not conduct business with any person while such person is situated in a motor vehicle. 
(12)  Pushcarts may not furnish temporary seating. 
(13)  Pushcarts shall not erect or construct a fixed or permanent structure, such as a fence, deck or sign as part of their facility. 
(14)  Pushcarts shall not be allowed to connect to any city utility, including, but not limited to, water, wastewater, or electrical services, without written permission of the community development director. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-188. - Litter. 
(a)  Each mobile food service unit shall provide a suitably-sized receptacle for litter, which shall be located within ten feet of the service window of the unit. It shall be maintained and regularly emptied. All waste generated by the mobile food service unit's operation, including that associated with its customers and staff, must be disposed of at the base of operation. 
(b)  The area within which a mobile food service unit operates shall, at all times, be kept clean and free from litter, garbage, rubble and debris. For purposes of this section, a mobile food service unit shall be responsible for maintaining in a safe and hygienic manner, the premises on which it is situated. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-189. - Fire safety. 
    To minimize the threat to public safety posed by fire, the following apply: 
(a)  Combustible gas detector. Prior to the operation of any combustible gas-fueled appliances, all visible connections shall be inspected for leakage utilizing a combustible gas detector. Detected leaks shall be repaired before any gas-fueled appliance is operated. 
(b)  Propane cylinders. No combustible gas fuel tank or cylinder may be connected while the mobile food service unit is traveling upon any street, road or highway. 
(c)  Portable fire extinguishers. All food trucks or pushcarts with a heating element shall be equipped with a readily accessible multipurpose dry chemical portable fire extinguisher with a minimum rating of 2A 10BC. All mobile food service units utilizing fats or cooking oils, including those that produce grease, grease laden vapors or oily byproducts, shall, in addition to the ABC fire extinguisher, be equipped with a readily accessible Class K portable fire extinguisher. All required fire extinguishers shall be maintained in compliance with National Fire Protection Association 10, as amended. 
(d)  Operations prior to set up. Mobile food service units are prohibited from igniting, starting or operating any appliances requiring heat, electricity or combustible gases while traveling upon any street, road or highway. 
(e)  Exhaust creating nuisance. Emission of exhaust gases or smoke shall not be handled in such a manner as to constitute a nuisance. 
(f)  Hood cleaning and maintenance. Mobile food service units shall be maintained and regularly cleaned to minimize the buildup of grease and other combustible residues. This includes all interior and exterior surfaces upon which grease can or may accumulate including, but not limited to, hold filter surfaces, plenums, ducts, exhaust fans and exterior cowling. 
(g)  Fire suppression system inspections. All mobile food service unit fire suppression systems shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with the applicable provisions of the National Fire Protection Association codes. The system shall be tagged in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state safety fire commissioner. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-190. - Special events. 
    The community development director may permit licensed mobile food service and vending units to operate at special events, including Rock Shrimp Festival, Fourth of July Festival, Mardi Gras Festival and Wounded Warriors day event. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-191. - Prohibitions, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor, as defined under section 22-184, to: 
(1)  Call at residences, offices or businesses clearly displaying a sign stating "no solicitors or temporary sales invited," "No solicitation," "no solicitation within a marked neighborhood," or using similar language. 
(2)  Engage in door-to-door soliciting on Sundays or between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday. 
(3)  Enter any private dwelling without the consent of the owner or occupant, or to remain there after being requested or directed to leave. 
(4)  Fail to register and carry or produce for inspection a permit when required under this article. 
(5)  Make any false or deceptive statement on any registration hereunder. 
(6)  Violation of any and all city, county or state ordinances or laws. 
(b)  To ensure the continued application of the intent and purpose of this article: 
(1)  The community development director shall all persons licensed under this article and, where applicable, the county health department, of all instances in which a citation is issued to a mobile food service unit. 
(2)  The community development director shall maintain a record of all code violation charges, founded accusations and convictions concerning mobile food service units. When a mobile food service unit owner or operator accumulates three code violations for a particular mobile service unit within a period of 12 consecutive months, regardless of corporate naming or structuring, the city shall revoke the mobile food service unit permit and reject all applications for a mobile food service unit permit by the concerned owner(s) and operator(s) for a period of 12 consecutive months following the date of revocation. 
(3)  If a mobile food service unit owner or operator has been cited for and found to be in violation of any zoning, health or life safety code provision, the owner or operator must demonstrate compliance with the applicable code prior to being eligible to continue operations under the current permit. 
(4)  Citations for code violations shall be heard by the city municipal court. 
(c)  Violations of this article are subject to the following sanctions, which may not be waived or reduced and which may be combined with any other legal remedy available to the city: 
(1)  First violation: $500.00. 
(2)  Second violation within the 12 months following the first violation: $750.00. 
(3)  Third violation within the 12 months following the first violation: $1,000.00 and revocation of the mobile food service unit permit. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall limit the city from enforcement of its code, state or federal law by any other legal remedy available to the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or supplant the power of any city inspector or other duly empowered officer under the city's ordinances, rules and regulations or the authority granted under state law, as amended, to take necessary action, consistent with the law, to protect the public from operation of a mobile food service unit as a nuisance, including abatement thereof by lawful means. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-192. - Reserved. 
Sec. 22-193. - Exemptions. 
(a)  With the exception of street vendors, any person who, without compensation, solicits or accepts money, donations, or financial assistance of any kind for any religious, chartable, educational, political, or nonprofit organization or sells merchandise for a fee or provides services on behalf of such an organization, or who leaves leaflets or flyers or other papers related to such an organization shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Any person who calls upon homes, offices or businesses at the request of, or with the express permission of the occupants is exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(c)  Any person who represents a business which has entered into a franchise agreement with the city for providing agreed upon services, and that business has registered under section 22-184 with the city for an annual fee of $300.00 and where all individuals soliciting information on behalf of the business have registered for a permit by providing the community development department all information required under section 22-184(c) and carry the permit at all times, as required under section 22-183 is exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(d)  Anyone under the age of 16 operating a booth or stand for a time not to exceed 48 hours and not impeding a sidewalk or right-of-way. 
(e)  Seasonal sales of locally grown produce, with written permission of the C-2 property owner or approval from community development for community markets or special events, provided the operator has a valid occupational tax license in the State of Georgia. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Sec. 22-194. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 and in this article. Each day of operating the prohibited activities under this article shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
( Ord. of 11-7-16 ) 
Secs. 22-195-22-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - ELECTRONIC GAME PROMOTIONS 

Sec. 22-211. - Legislative authorization. 
    This article is enacted in the interest of the public health, peace, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens and inhabitants of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. It is established to regulate the use of electronic means to effect giveaways through drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, and game promotions that do not otherwise violate Georgia law. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-212. - Area of enforcement. 
    The city council is acting herein as the governing body for the City of St. Marys, Georgia, and this article shall be effective within its boundaries. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-213 - Intent. 
    The intent of the council in adopting this chapter is to regulate the use of electronic means to effect giveaways through drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, and game promotions that do not otherwise violate Georgia law. This regulation includes, but is not limited to electronic equipment used to display the results of a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service or game promotion by simulating a game or games ordinarily played on a slot machine. It also is intended to regulate the use of electronic equipment to conduct drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service and game promotions, and to regulate all operators (as defined herein) who utilize electronic equipment for that purpose. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-214. - General prohibition. 
    Except as expressly regulated and permitted by this article no person, other than a de minimis activity facility as defined herein, shall conduct a drawing by chance, sweepstakes or game promotion, or any other game of chance on any electronic or mechanical device provided by an operator of the game of chance which displays the result by simulating a game or games ordinarily played on a slot machine. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-215. - Definitions. 
    Applicant means the operator for whom a permit application is submitted and in the name of whom, if the permit is granted, the drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, or game promotion shall be conducted. 
    Code enforcement officer means an city staff member delegated to enforce this article. 
    Convicted or conviction means a determination of guilt in a criminal case by a court of competent jurisdiction, regardless of whether the defendant pled guilty, no contest, or nolo contendere, was found guilty by a judge or jury, or had adjudication withheld. 
    De minimis activity facility means a facility operated by an organization exempt from federal taxation under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
    Electronic equipment means any electronic or mechanical device provided by, or on behalf of, the operator that is used or adapted for use to conduct and/or reveal the results of a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotions that display results by simulating a game or games ordinarily played on a slot machine. The electronic equipment shall not have, nor be operated by a random number generator. The sweepstakes or game promotion shall be from entries drawn from a pre-created finite static pool of entries with assigned values. 
    Minor means an individual under the age of 18 years. 
    Operator means any person in whose name a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes, or game promotion that utilizes electronic equipment is conducted. 
    Permit holder means the operator in whose name the city has issued a permit under this article. 
    Person means an individual, association, partnership, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, not-for-profit entity, or entity of any kind authorized to engage in business in Georgia. 
    Premises means the house, building, edifice, or location, along with its grounds, in or upon which the operator conducts drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotions using electronic equipment. 
    Rules means the restrictions and covenants governing the operation of the drawing by chance, sweepstakes, or game promotion. 
    Slot machine means any mechanical or electrical contrivance, terminal that may or may not be capable of downloading slot games from a central server system, machine, or other device that, upon insertion of a coin, bill, ticket, token, or similar object or upon payment of any monetary consideration whatsoever, including the use of any electronic payment system, is available to play or operate, the play or operation of which, including any element of chance, may deliver or entitle the person or persons playing or operating the contrivance, terminal, machine, or other device to receive cash, billets, tickets, tokens, or electronic credits to be exchanged for cash or to receive merchandise or anything of value whatsoever, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machine or manually. Slot machines may use spinning reels, video displays, cathode ray tubes, microprocessors or other similar technology, and have as their object, the presentation or lining up, arrangement, or juxtaposition of symbols, alpha-numeric signs, colors, or figures to determine a result or outcome. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-216. - Permitting and fees. 
(a)  Permit required. Every operator using electronic equipment to conduct a drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotion shall obtain a permit from the planning department's office. Each permit is valid only for the operator and the premises named in the permit. Each permit is valid for one year. 
(b)  Permits limited. The city shall limit the total number of permits issued pursuant to this section. After the permits authorized by this subsection (b) are issued, no permits for new businesses shall be issued unless the issuance of the permit will not cause the total number of permits issued to exceed three permits. All qualifying operators who receive an initial permit as provided for in this subsection (b) shall be entitled to renew their permit if they otherwise qualify and pay required fees. In the event that a permit becomes available, all applications for the permitting of a new business shall, in addition to all permitting requirements set forth herein, be subject to the following procedures: 
(1)  The planning department shall publish a notice in a newspaper of general circulation in a form prescribed by the planning department, regarding the availability of such permit and the prescribed time period of 14 calendar days from the date of such publication within which the city will accept applications, and the location and date of the public meeting at which the random selection of the application for permit shall take place. 
(2)  All applications shall be submitted within such provided timeframe. Any applications not submitted within such timeframe shall be automatically disqualified. Each applicant shall be allowed to submit only one application for each available permit. An applicant shall be deemed to be the same as another applicant and each of their applications shall be disqualified, if such applicant is the same person or consists of any variation of the same person as another applicant. 
(3)  Once the time period for submission of applications has expired, the city shall randomly select an application for consideration of the available permit at a meeting open to the public by the planning department in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place set forth in the notice. 
(4)  Once such application is selected, the applicant shall proceed with complying with all other requirements set forth herein. The city's random selection of an application as provided herein shall not constitute the city's acceptance or approval of the application, including for example, for purposes of determining the application's completeness. For purposes of all timelines and time periods set forth in this chapter, including but not limited to the duration of review within which the city or any of its departments or divisions are to conduct application reviews, such timelines and time periods shall be extended by the amount of time required to appropriately conduct the random selection of the application. 
(5)  The decision to deny a permit shall be considered nonfinal agency action subject to appellate review by the city council referenced. The decision of the city council shall constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Any appeal of a permitting decision shall be made within 30 calendar days of denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department. Failure to file written notice of appeal within the prescribed time period constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(c)  Application materials required for permit. 
(1)  Applicant shall file with the city the following materials: 
a.  A copy of a current City of St. Marys occupation tax receipt in the name of the applicant including the business address; 
b.  A copy of applicant's proposed rules governing the drawing by chance, sweepstakes or game promotion which includes the odds of winning and the prize table; 
c.  If the application is for a sweepstakes or game promotion over $5,000.00, a copy of applicant's certification of a bond or trust account provided to the City of St. Marys Finance Department, when required in subsection 22-219(g) herein; and 
d.  A complete list of all products and services offered and the prices charged therefore. In addition, for every principal, officer, shareholder and director of the operator, a fingerprint card and letter certifying the results of a criminal background check generated by the City of St. Marys Police Department. 
(2)  Applicant shall provide a sworn affidavit containing the following: 
a.  The identity of the applicant and if the applicant is: 
1.  An individual: His name, residence address, and date of birth; 
2.  An unincorporated organization: The names, dates of birth, and residence addresses of its principals; 
3.  A corporation: The corporate name, state of incorporation and the names, dates of birth, and residence addresses of its principal officers, directors, and shareholders; or 
4.  A limited liability company: The company name, state of incorporation and the names, dates of birth and residence addresses of its members and managers. 
b.  A description, including the number of pieces of the electronic equipment; 
c.  A statement of whether any of the individuals listed have, within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of the application, been arrested, charged, convicted or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a misdemeanor or felony under the laws of Georgia, the United States, or any other state, or had the record of any such event expunged and if any of the individuals listed has ever had a license similar to the one applied for or a license to operate any gambling device or establishment denied or revoked and, if so, the particular criminal act involved and the place of the conviction arrest, charge or plea; 
d.  The street address of the premises where the drawing by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotions are to be conducted; 
e.  If the applicant is a branch, chapter, lodge, or other local unit of a charitable organization or corporation, the name of the primary organization and the street address of its principal office; 
f.  The name and address of an individual physically residing within the City of St. Marys who is authorized to receive notices from the city on behalf of the proposed permit holder; 
g.  A statement certifying that all information on the application and any attachments thereto is true and that the applicant understands that any misstatement of material fact in the application will result in the denial of the permit or, if it has been issued, in the suspension or revocation of the permit; and 
h.  A certification that the computer software that is used by the operator to conduct a drawing by chance in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotion has been tested by an independent testing laboratory that has verified the manner that the software works properly. That verification of the manner that the software shall comply with all applicable state and local laws, including this article. The certification shall be by a certified independent regulatory compliance test laboratory that is authorized to test regulated gaming equipment by at least one state government gaming regulatory agency. 
(3)  Applicant shall file with the planning department the following: 
a.  A copy of the sworn affidavit described in subsection (2) above; 
b.  A complete list of all products and services offered and the prices charged therefore; 
c.  A verification that the prices charged for the products and/or services constitute a reasonable market value; 
d.  A copy of the certification report issued by an independent testing laboratory that describes and verifies the manner in which the software works. 
(d)  Application fee. Each applicant shall remit a nonrefundable application fee of $500.00. This fee shall pay for the time and expense of the City of St. Marys in enforcing the provisions herein, reviewing and ruling on the application, issuing the permit, and, if applicable, hearing any appeals. The cost for any and all reviews accomplished by agencies outside of the City of St. Marys shall be paid for by the applicant in addition to the application fee noted herein. 
(e)  Review of application. 
(1)  Duration of review. 
a.  By City of St. Marys for permit. Within 60 days of receipt of an applicant's completed permit application and criminal history, the City of St. Marys shall grant or deny the application unless the time for decision is extended by the city council. If any principal, officer, shareholder or director of the operator has a pending criminal case for any crime the city may delay its grant or denial of the permit until 60 days after the final judgment in the case. 
b.  By City of St. Marys Police Department for criminal history. Within 30 days of receipt from a principal, officer, shareholder or director of the operator of a legible copy of fingerprints, Social Security Number, full name, current address, sex, race, recent photograph, and date of birth, the City of St. Marys Police Department shall conduct a criminal history check, certify the results in writing, and provide a copy of the results to the applicant. If necessary, the City of St. Marys Police Department may solicit assistance from other agencies to complete the criminal history check. 
(2)  Eligibility of applicant. An applicant is ineligible for a permit if: 
a.  Within five years of the date of the application, applicant has been convicted of any felony under the laws of Georgia, the United States, or any other state unless said violation would not constitute a crime in Georgia, or has had adjudication for same withheld; 
b.  Within three years of the date of the application, has had a permit under this article revoked or been convicted for a violation of this article; 
c.  The prices to be charged for the product(s) or service(s) offered, as listed on the permit application, do not constitute a reasonable market value; or 
d.  The application materials are incomplete or untruthful. 
The city shall deny the permit for any of the above reasons. If an applicant satisfies all permit filing requirements and is not ineligible, the city shall approve the application. 
(f)  Denial of permit. An applicant whose permit application is denied may reapply at any time by completing all steps of the application procedure, including payment of a new application fee. The decision to deny a permit shall be considered nonfinal agency action subject to appellate review by city council. The decision of the city council shall constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Any appeal of a permitting decision shall be made within 15 calendar days of denial by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department. Failure to file written notice of appeal within the prescribed time period constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(g)  Permit fees. The eligible applicant, before receiving the permit, shall pay: 
(1)  An electronic drawing and game promotion fee of $2,000.00 for premises with six or more pieces of electronic equipment, or $200.00 for premises with five or fewer pieces of electronic equipment. The fee is for one year during which the permit is valid and shall be paid each time the permit is renewed. If an eligible applicant fails to pay this fee on or before the 30th day after approval, availability, and notice of the permit authorization, the application shall be deemed denied. 
(2)  An annual fee of $50.00 per piece of electronic equipment. If the eligible applicant fails to pay the fee on or before the 30th day after approval, availability, and notice of the permit authorization, the application shall be deemed denied. 
(h)  Duration of permit. A permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. 
(i)  Renewal of existing permit. Existing permits shall be renewed upon compliance with this article, notwithstanding the total number of permits issued. The permit holder shall apply for the renewal permit no later than 60 days and no sooner than 120 days before the expiration of the current permit. The renewal permit application shall include all the materials and the application fee required for the issuance of an original permit, and shall include evidence of current lawfully existing operations consistent with the requirements of this article. Renewal permit applications shall be processed using the same procedure and standards as required for review of an original permit application but shall be processed within 30 days. Upon approval, renewal permit applicants shall pay the same fees as set forth in subsection (h) above and said renewals shall be deemed denied if an eligible applicant fails to pay these fees on or before the 30th day after approval, availability, and notice of the permit authorization. 
(j)  Restrictions on transfers of permits. 
(1)  Transfer to another entity. Permits may be transferred no more than one time, to another entity, upon written notification and evidence of the conveyance to the planning department. Any change in a majority or controlling interest in any permit holder shall be deemed an impermissible transfer of the permit, except in the event of the one-time transfer, upon written notification and evidence of such transfer to the planning department, as provided herein. 
(2)  Transfer to another premises. Permits may be transferred to another premises upon application. The transferred location shall be approved within 15 days of submittal of a complete application (including all required supplemental information, including but not limited to any required certified maps depicting applicable locations and distances), if such use is a permitted use in an approved zoning district, otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(k)  Revocation of permit. The city may revoke a permit for violation of any provision of this chapter or due to a permit holder's cessation of the use of electronic equipment during its normal business hours for at least 14 consecutive days. Prior to revocation, the city shall provide to the permit holder, through their individual residing within the City of St. Marys authorized to accept notices from the city, the following: 
(1)  A written notice of intent to revoke the permit; 
(2)  A 14-calendar day opportunity to cure the alleged violation; and 
(3)  An opportunity to be heard prior to revocation. 
Revocation shall not take place before 21 days after a notice of revocation, opportunity to cure, and opportunity to be heard is delivered to the permit holder. The decision to revoke a permit shall be considered nonfinal agency action subject to appellate review by city council. The decision of the committee shall constitute final agency action subject to judicial review. Any appeal of a revocation decision shall be made within 15 calendar days of revocation by filing a written notice of appeal with the planning department. Failure to file written notice of appeal within the prescribed time period constitutes a waiver of the right to appeal. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-217. - Inspection of premises. 
    During business hours, the city code enforcement officer, or his appointed agent(s) may enter the premises for purposes of inspecting all areas of the premises otherwise accessible to the general public, to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any other ordinances within their authority, including but not limited to, the right to enter the premises and to select and remove any piece(s) of electronic equipment to inspect, test and/or have tested to determine compliance with this article and that the equipment meets the definition of electronic equipment in section 22-215. The City of St. Marys may issue to the permit holder a show cause order requiring the production on premises of documents or data relating to the game promotion. Production of the records or inventory shall only be for inspection and review to determine compliance with this article. Within three days of receipt of the show cause order the permit holder shall produce all requested records and inventory. Any tests required by this section shall be paid for by the permit holder. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-218. - Signage requirements. 
(a)  Exterior of premises. Exterior signage shall be limited to the advertisement of the consumer product and/or service sold on the premises, and that a sweepstakes held in connection with the sale of said consumer product and/or service is offered. No signs shall be posted on the exterior of the premises that suggest gambling takes place on the premises or displays any image commonly associated with slot machines. All signage shall be further subject to chapter 26, article IV (sign regulations). 
(b)  Interior of premises. The permit holder shall conspicuously post the name of the permit holder, a description of all products and services sold, and the complete rules for all drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotions at the premises' front or main counter. Rules for all game promotions shall include the following language in at least 26-point font: "State and local law prohibits this establishment from requiring an entry fee, payment, or proof of purchase as a condition of participating. No donation or contribution is required. You may obtain free entries upon request from any employee on the premises." The permit holder shall also post a sign which shall include the following language in at least 26-point type: "The video displays are for amusement and entertainment only. The video displays do not determine the result of your sweepstakes entries." The permit holder shall affix signage that shall include the following language in at least 10-point type on each piece of electronic equipment: "The video displays are for amusement and entertainment only. The video displays do not determine the result of your sweepstakes entries." A complete copy of the rules, prizes, and odds of winning shall be made available on request without cost. Any consumer product or service offered for sale shall be identified by description and price by conspicuous posting. A copy of the permit shall be posted conspicuously at the main counter or at the entrance. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-219. - Limitations on operation of business. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages. Permit holders shall not sell or permit any individual to consume or possess any alcoholic beverages on any premises unless in total compliance with chapter 10, the City of St. Marys Alcoholic Beverage Ordinance. 
(b)  Minors. Permit holders shall not permit minors (individuals under 18 years of age to enter the premises, operate the equipment or work in the premises. 
(c)  Conditions of alternative means of entry. Entries that are available without purchase or financial donations shall be made available on request. The permit holder shall not impose any condition on the provision of such entries other than proof of identity by government issued identification from any state. The permit holder shall not limit the number of such entries offered per day per individual to less than the equivalent amount of entries that permit holder provides to individuals who make a donation, or purchase of a product or service valued at least $1.00. 
(d)  Limitation on electronic equipment. Permit holders shall not operate more than 50 pieces of electronic equipment. Replacing an existing piece of electronic equipment due to a defect or upgrade shall not be deemed a reduction pursuant to this subsection, provided that such replacement occurs within 30 days. 
(e)  Zoning. Game promotions utilizing electronic equipment shall be permitted or permissible by special exception, as applicable, as set forth in chapter 110, zoning code, subject to all applicable requirements, restrictions and limitations set forth in the Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  Additional restrictions. No drawing by chance in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotion shall: 
(1)  Design, engage in, promote, or conduct a game wherein the winner may be predetermined or the game may be manipulated or rigged; 
(2)  Arbitrarily remove, disqualify, disallow, or reject any entry; 
(3)  Fail to award any prize offered; 
(4)  Print, publish, or circulate literature or advertising material which is false, deceptive, or misleading; or 
(5)  Require an entry fee, donation, payment, or proof of purchase as a condition of entering. 
(g)  Additional requirements. An operator conducting a drawing by chance in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service, sweepstakes or game promotion shall be required to: 
(1)  Maintain a list of the names and addresses of all persons who have won prizes which have a value of more than $25.00 for one year. 
(2)  Maintain a trust account or bond in favor of the city in an amount equal to the total announced value of the prizes offered or $50,000.00, whichever is less. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-220. - Safety and security requirements. 
    On-premises, the permit holder shall maintain the following security devices and standards: 
(1)  A security camera system operating during business hours and capable of recording and retrieving an identifiable image for a period of six months from the occurrence of any event; 
(2)  A drop safe or cash management device for restricted access to cash receipts where there are more than five pieces of electronic equipment on the premises; 
(3)  A conspicuous notice at all public entrances to premises stating cash register contains limited amount of cash; 
(4)  At exits to premises, height markers displaying height measures; 
(5)  A cash management policy limiting cash on hand; 
(6)  A silent alarm system capable of notifying law enforcement; and 
(7)  During nighttime hours when the premises is open for business and where there are more than five pieces of electronic equipment on the premises, at least one licensed, armed security guard. The fact that a licensed, armed security guard may not be required, is not intended to immunize or forgive a permit holder from any statutory or common law obligation to maintain reasonably safe premises at any time. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-221. - Zoning. 
    Zoning for any use under this section shall be a special use only in the C-2 highway commercial zone as defined in Code section 110, subsection 110-145(6), special permit uses. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-222. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, operator, manager, or permit holder to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Violations of different provisions of this article shall constitute separate offenses. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  A first violation of any of the provisions of this article constitutes a civil infraction punishable by up to a $300.00 fine. Any subsequent violation of any provision of this article shall be punishable by up to a $500.00 fine. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Sec. 22-223. - Severability. 
    If any portion of this article is determined to be invalid for any reason by a final nonappealable order of any court of competent jurisdiction, then it shall be severed from this act. All other provisions of this act shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 7-18-11(1)) 
Secs. 22-224-22-250. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of cable television service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; power to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, along with the subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way. 
(2)  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers. 
(3)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
    Core area means the city as the geographical boundaries existed on January 1, 1980. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal thereof issued by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate or operation of a cable system. 
    Franchising authority means the city. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
    Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station or cable system. 
(Ord. of 1-7-88, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Purpose. 
    The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide the terms and conditions under which the franchising authority shall grant cable television franchises; to provide for full and fair competitiveness between the various holders of franchises within the city; to eliminate and prevent any unfair advantage that a proposed franchisee might have over existing franchise holders; to recognize the contribution which existing franchise holders have made to the city; to provide stability and predictability to the rates which may be charged by the various franchise holders; to ensure market competitiveness and equality between the various franchise holders; to protect the various public rights-of-way and provide some control over their use; to provide the best possible cable service to the citizens of the city; and to protect the various interests which the citizens of the city have in the providing and operation of cable television service. 
(Ord. of 1-7-88, § 1) 
Sec. 26-3. - Procedure for franchise granting. 
(a)  No grant of any franchises for the construction of a cable system shall occur without first, at a duly noticed public hearing, considering: 
(1)  The economic and physical impact upon private property within the city. 
(2)  The public need, if any, for such franchise. 
(3)  The capacity of public rights-of-way to accommodate the proposed cable system. 
(4)  The present and future use of the public rights-of-way to be used by the proposed cable system. 
(5)  The potential disruption of existing users of the public rights-of-way to be used by the proposed cable system and the resultant inconvenience which may occur to the public. 
(6)  The financial background and ability of the franchise applicant to perform along with such applicant's reputation and experience in the cable television business. 
(7)  The economic impact and the effect such a grant could or would have on the rates of the existing franchise holder. 
(8)  Such other additional matters, both procedural and substantive, as the franchising authority may, in its sole discretion, determine to be relevant. 
(Ord. of 1-7-88, § 3) 
Sec. 26-4. - Franchise grants. 
(a)  In addition to any terms and conditions which the franchising authority may deem appropriate, no grants of franchises for the construction of any cable system shall occur unless: 
(1)  Such grant specifically contains the provisions that the proposed franchisee, before constructing or providing any such cable system in any noncore area, shall first construct and provide operating cable service to the core area. Such provision of service to the core area shall be at least to the extent as that provided to the core area by any existing franchise holders and any such proposed franchise shall specifically provide that construction shall begin on the providing of service to the core area within 60 days of the date of the grant of the proposed franchise and such construction and service to the core area shall be fully operational and completed within 180 days from the date of the beginning of such construction. 
(2)  The proper performance under the grant of any proposed franchise is guaranteed by a performance bond. The amount of the performance bond shall be determined by the franchising authority; however, in no event shall the amount be less than $100,000.00. The terms and conditions of this performance bond shall also provide for liquidated damages in a reasonable amount, as determined by the franchising authority, to ensure that the proposed franchisee adheres to the terms and conditions of the proposed franchise. The franchising authority may, in its sole discretion, provide that the bond is no longer necessary after the date of the full providing of cable service to the core area, as heretofore detailed, is accomplished. 
(3)  The proposed franchisee is required to provide at least comparable or greater cable service and video programming as is being provided by any existing franchisees which may exist at the time of such grant. 
(4)  Terms or conditions of such proposed franchise are not more favorable or less burdensome than those in any existing franchises within the city. 
(b)  Nothing contained within this section shall be construed as restricting the ability of the franchising authority from imposing, in addition to those required by this chapter, any such additional terms and conditions as the franchising authority shall, in its sole discretion, deem necessary or appropriate. 
(Ord. of 1-7-88, § 4) 
Sec. 26-5. - Basic service rates and charges. 
(a)  The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the basic service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise. 
(b)  In connection with such regulations, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(c)  The mayor, city manager, cable administrator, or his designee, is authorized to execute on behalf of the city and file with the FCC such certification forms or other instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations in order to enable the city to regulate basic service rates and charges. 
(Res. of 9-13-93, §§ 1-3) 
Secs. 26-6-26-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE AGREEMENT 

Sec. 26-36. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known, and may be cited as the "City of St. Marys Cable Television Franchise Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 1) 
Sec. 26-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service, along with the subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility of facilities uses any public right-of-way. 
(2)  A facility of a common carrier, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers. 
(3)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
    Company means the grantee of rights under this article. 
    Core area means the city as the geographical boundaries existed on January 1, 1980. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization or renewal thereof issued by a franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate or operation of a cable system. 
    Franchising authority means the city. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or governmental entity. 
    Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station or cable system. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-38. - Grant of authority. 
(a)  There is hereby granted by the city to the company the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain a cable television system for the reception, amplification and distribution of video and/or audio signals to subscribing members of the public for a fee, for a period of 30 years from and after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives with an option to renew the franchise for an additional 30 years. 
(b)  The company is hereby granted by the city the right and privilege to construct and maintain the cable television system in, upon, along, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the city. 
(c)  The right to use and occupy the streets, alleys, public ways and places for the purpose herein set forth shall not be exclusive and the city reserves the right to grant a similar use of such streets, alleys, public ways and places to any person at any time during the period of this franchise. 
(d)  In connection with the right and privilege herein granted, the council has examined and approved the legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the company, as well as the adequacy and feasibility of its construction arrangements, as part of a public proceeding affording due process. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 3) 
Sec. 26-39. - Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. 
(a)  The company shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be subject to all lawful exercises or police power of the city. 
(b)  The company agrees to comply with all valid local, state and federal regulations, including the rules and regulations of the FCC; the rules of the FCC being incorporated into this article for all purposes. 
(c)  Any amendments or modifications by this reference of the rules of the FCC shall be incorporated into this franchise within one year of the adoption of such modification or at the time of the renewal of this franchise, whichever occurs first; the company herein agrees to notify the city of any such changes upon receipt of same from the FCC. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 4) 
Sec. 26-40. - Indemnification. 
    The company shall indemnify, protect and save the city harmless from and against any and all losses, costs or expenses resulting from damage to any property or bodily injury or death to any person, including payments made under any worker's compensation law, which arise out of or occur by reason of the exercise by the company of the rights granted in this article. The company shall carry insurance to protect itself and the city from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The insurance policy shall specifically provide that the city shall be a named insured. The amounts of such insurance against liability due to physical damage to property shall be not less than $50,000.00 as to any one claim and not less than $200,000.00 as to all such claims arising from any one accident. The company shall also carry such insurance as it deems necessary to protect it and the city from any and all claims under the worker's compensation laws in effect that may applicable to the company. All insurance required by this section shall be and remain in full force and effect for the entire period of the franchise. The policies of insurance, or a certified copy or copies thereof, shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 5) 
Sec. 26-41. - Performance bond. 
    The company shall provide a performance bond in favor of the franchising authority in the amount of $100,000.00. In addition to the usual terms and conditions of a performance bond, this performance bond shall also provide for liquidated damages in the amount of the actual damages which may be sustained by the city by reason of the company's failure to perform under the terms of this article. The franchising authority may, in its sole discretion, provide that this performance bond is no longer necessary after the date of providing full service to the core area. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 6) 
Sec. 26-42. - Construction, construction standards. 
(a)  The company shall initiate construction to the core area within 60 days from the date of the grant of the franchise and such construction service to the core area shall be fully operational and completed within 180 days from the date of the beginning of such construction. The franchising authority shall grant extensions of time of this 180-day construction period within 30 days of its expiration upon the showing by the company of a good faith effort to comply with the spirit and intent of this franchise and the franchising authority further agrees that the extensions of time will not be unreasonably withheld. 
(b)  Prior to constructing or providing any cable service and/or cable system in any noncore area, the company shall first construct and provide operating service to the core area with the service being at least to the extent as that provided to the core area by any existing franchise holder. 
(c)  With regard to the company's construction, operation and maintenance of this cable television system, the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  The construction, maintenance and use of the company's cable television system shall comply with the standards for materials and engineering and all other provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code. 
(2)  The city shall have the right to supervise all construction and installation work performed subject to the provisions of this article and to make such inspections as it shall find necessary to ensure compliance with governing ordinances. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 7) 
Sec. 26-43. - Street vacation or abandonment. 
    If any street, alley public highway or utility easement, or any portion thereof, used by the company shall be vacated by the city or the use thereof discontinued by the company during the term of the franchise, the company shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless specifically permitted to leave them there, and upon the removal thereof, restore, repair or reconstruct the street area where such removal has occurred in such condition as may be required by the city. In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of the company, after 30 days' notice by the city council to repair, improve or maintain such street proportions, the city may do such work or cause it to be done, and the cost thereof as found and declared by the city shall be paid by the company, and collection may be by court action or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 8) 
Sec. 26-44. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(a)  Use. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the company within the city shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of all streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or other public ways and places. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the city, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed to as good condition as before said work was commenced, and shall maintain the restoration in an approved condition for a period of three years. 
(c)  Relocation. If at any time during the period of the franchise the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade or width of any street, alley or other public way, the company, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other system fixtures at its own expense. 
(d)  Temporary removal of wire for building moving. The company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The company shall be given not less than 120 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(e)  Trimming of trees. The company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging any street, alley or other public way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its wires, cables or other equipment. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 9) 
Sec. 26-45. - Pole use. 
(a)  The company shall, whenever possible and practicable, use the poles owned and maintained by the city and/or the utility company/companies which serve the city. When the use of such poles is not practicable or satisfactory and rental agreements cannot be entered into with the parties, the company shall have the right to erect and maintain its own poles, as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance of the television distribution system provided. 
(b)  In all sections of the city where the cables, wires or other like facilities of public utilities are presently placed underground or are required to be so placed underground at any time in the future, the company shall place its cables, wires or other like facilities underground to the maximum extent that existing technology reasonably permits the company to do so. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 10) 
Sec. 26-46. - Employment practices. 
    The company will establish and adhere to the following policies and procedures: 
(1)  Equal opportunity in employment shall be afforded all qualified persons by the company and no person shall be discriminated against because of race, color, religion, national origin or sex. 
(2)  An equal opportunity notice will be posted in the office of the company which states as follows: 
"Equal Opportunity Employer-Discrimination because of sex, race, color, religion, or national origin is prohibited and you may notify the Equal Opportunity Commission or the Federal Communications Commission if you believe you have been discriminated against." 
(3)  The policy set forth in subsection (2) of this section will be set forth on the employment application forms of the company in red ink. 
(4)  Those in positions to hire will be specifically instructed to examine all hiring policies to make certain that the same comply with the foregoing declarations. 
(5)  Each employee of the company will be advised of the foregoing equal opportunity policy. 
(6)  No selection techniques or tests that may have the effect of discriminating against minority groups or females will be used. 
(7)  Whenever recruiting is done through schools, schools with significant minority group enrollments will be given equal consideration. 
(8)  Contact with leadership in minority and human relations organizations will be maintained to encourage referral of qualified minority and/or female applicants. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 11) 
Sec. 26-47. - Reserved channel. 
    The company shall reserve one channel for use by public and parochial elementary, secondary and college level students. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 12) 
Sec. 26-48. - Regulation of service. 
(a)  The company shall, while operating under this franchise, maintain efficient cable television service in the city. However, the company shall not be liable for loss or damage caused by interruption or failure of service due to accident or breakdown to lines or equipment, strike, riot, act of God, or the public enemy, or such other causes as are beyond its control, or due to shutdowns for reasonable periods to make repairs to equipment; but the company shall in such cases exercise proper diligence in repairing such equipment and resume operation of same without unnecessary delay. 
(b)  The franchise shall not in any way be construed as a license or permit to the company to engage in the sale or service of radio or television sets or equipment. As part of the consideration for the granting of the franchise, the company shall not engage in the sale or service of TV sets, appliances or parts. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 13) 
Sec. 26-49. - Rates. 
    The rates or charges which the company assesses its subscribers for cable television services shall be at all times fair and reasonable. A copy of the company's schedule of charges for installation and furnishing of service shall be filed with the city clerk not less than 60 days prior to the effective date of such charges. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 14) 
Sec. 26-50. - Payment to city. 
(a)  The company shall pay to the city, for and in consideration of the right and privilege to conduct cable television operations pursuant to the franchise, an annual fee in an amount equal to three percent of its gross subscriber revenues (as defined pursuant to the rules of the FCC) derived from its cable television operations in the city, with each year's fee due and payable to the city clerk by January 31 for the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  In the event of revocation or termination of the franchise, the final annual fee payment shall be prorated from the immediately preceding January 1 to the date of termination of service. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 15) 
Sec. 26-50.1. - Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise; authorized designee. 
(a)  The city hereby requires a franchise fee of ____________ percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The city hereby authorizes the city clerk, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the Secretary of State and each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the ____________ percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Ord. of 3-10-08, § 1) 
Sec. 26-51. - Assignment, transfer, lease or merger. 
    The franchise shall not be assigned without the prior approval of the council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 16) 
Sec. 26-52. - Forfeiture of franchise. 
(a)  The city may declare a forfeiture of the franchise and revoke the same if the company: 
(1)  Substantially violates any provision of this article, where such violation remains uncured for a period of 30 days subsequent to the receipt by the company of a written notice of such violation, except where such violation is not the fault of the company or is due to excusable neglect. 
(2)  Practices any fraud or deceit upon the city. 
(b)  Such forfeiture shall be declared by an ordinance of the council duly adopted after 20 days' notice to the company, and shall in no way affect any of the city's rights under the franchise or any provision of law; provided, however, that before the franchise may be terminated and cancelled under this section, except for nonpayment of monies due to the city from the company, the company shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard at a public hearing before the council upon ten days' written notice to the company of the time and place of the public hearing; provided that the notice shall affirmatively cite the reasons alleged to constitute a cause for revocation; and provided, further, that notice of the public hearing shall be published in a local newspaper of general circulation at least five days before the hearing. 
(c)  The company has adopted, and the council has approved, procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints regarding its cable television operations. Notice of the procedures for reporting and resolving complaints shall be given to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable television system operated by the company. Further, the company shall have a local business office or agent in the city for the purpose of receiving notice of, investigating and seeing that proper steps are taken to effect the resolution of any problems relating to service or other aspects of its cable television operations. The local company representative shall have primary responsibility for the continuing administration of the franchise, and for the implementation of the procedures of this subsection. 
(d)  The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of the company's plans, contracts, and engineering, accounting, financial, statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the operation of the company and to all other records required to be kept thereunder. 
(e)  A copy of any and all rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted by the company for the conduct of its business shall be filed with the city clerk; and a copy shall also be available for public inspection at the office of the company. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 17) 
Sec. 26-53. - Waiver. 
    Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms or conditions of this article shall not constitute a general waiver or relinquishment of any such terms or conditions, but the same shall be and remain at all times in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 3-23-89, § 18) 
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted Jan. 23, 2012, amended ch. 30 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 30, §§ 30-1-30-4, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. of May 22, 1995(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. of Jan. 12, 2004, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of Nov. 13, 2006, § 1; Ord. of Apr. 14, 2008(1), §§ 1, 2; and Ord. of Oct. 11, 2010, § 1. 
Cross reference- See Article IV of the Charter, Part II Related Laws for "Oak Grove Cemetery Authority" provisions enacted by H.B. 1188/Res. No. 2012-R002. 
State Law reference- Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; permit for disturbing burial place in land development, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; preservation and protection of abandoned or unmaintained cemeteries, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6.1. 

Sec. 30-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose for which the cemetery was created and is maintained is to provide a place dedicated and set apart for the burial of the dead and consecrated to a public and sacred use. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12) 
Sec. 30-2. - Ownership of lots. 
    Ownership of the underlying land of the cemetery and any occupied or unoccupied lots rests solely with the city. Purchasers of lots within the cemetery are purchasing a license for the perpetual use of the lot for burial interment only. 
(1)  Lots in the original section of Oak Grove Cemetery, first known as the St. Marys City Cemetery or the Old Burying Ground, laid out by the city founders in 1788, are no longer subject to purchase from the city. They may be purchased from present lot owners if the lot owner can provide a recorded deed showing his legitimate ownership. It is the responsibility of the new owner to report the transfer of ownership to the city, pay a transfer fee in the amount as set by council and required by the city, and to have the new deed recorded at the courthouse at the owner's expense within one year of purchase. Unrecorded deeds will not create any responsibility on the part of the city to honor said unrecorded deed. Those with deeds to lots in the old section will be allowed to use them subject to the regulations in this article as long as they have a written and recorded deed. Should the plot have been in the possession of owners who have held possession for over 50 years and no deed is available, it is up to the family of the deceased to prove their relation to the family buried in that plot and to prove that the current family members, if any still living, approve the burial in the family plot, and that the lot is empty of a vault/casket, no matter its condition, or evidence of a previous burial. During the excavation by the funeral director, should the plot be shown to have been used previously for a burial, work will cease immediately, and the party handling the family's arrangements will be required to choose another plot in the new section of the cemetery. The new section is the portion of the cemetery located west of the main entrance road into the cemetery. 
(2)  Lots in the new section, west of the main entrance road into the cemetery, which have never been purchased or are proved to be empty with no recorded owner are available for sale. 
    All regulations in the previous two paragraphs in regard to reporting and recording deeds and deed transfers and transfer fees apply. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12) 
Sec. 30-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words shall be defined as indicated. Where a word is not defined, the New American Dictionary, latest edition, shall be the source of the definition: 
    Cemetery: Any cemetery within the legal jurisdiction of the City of St. Marys. This definition shall not include private cemeteries or mausoleums. 
    City: Shall refer to the City of St. Marys. 
    City council: Shall refer to the elected body of the City of St. Marys and shall include all rights and privileges afforded to the city council by city Charter and applicable state and federal law. 
    Columbarium: A portion of a cemetery specifically intended for the placement of urns containing cremated remains. This shall include any structure, wall or other facility of its type within any cemetery. 
    Coping: Any material that outlines the perimeter of the grave site(s). Coping shall be defined, but not limited to, concrete or cut stone blocks, brick, decorative rocks, mulch, mini-nuggets, or other similar materials. Centipede grass is acceptable. 
    Equipment: Shall refer to city-owned maintenance equipment as well as equipment owned by funeral directors, monument companies, florists or contractors providing a service to the city on cemetery property. 
    Family: Shall refer to any known and identifiable relative of the individual interred in any lot that is responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of any grave site or lot within the cemetery. 
    Fencing: Any brick, concrete, wood, iron, plastic, aluminum or wire materials designed and intended for the enclosure of any plot(s), from one inch above the finish grade to any height. Existing fencing in historic plots is permitted to remain as long as fencing is well maintained. 
    Oak Grove Cemetery authority ("cemetery authority"): The instrumentality of the State of Georgia created by Georgia House Bill 1188 (April 11, 2012) to oversee the care and preservation of Oak Grove Cemetery, to establish a trust fund for such purpose, and to raise funds and accept donations for that trust fund. 
    Scattering field: A portion of a cemetery specifically intended for the scattering of cremated remains. 
    Utilities: Shall refer to water, sewer, electric or gas lines and security systems. 
    Vehicle: Shall refer to automobiles, golf carts, trucks, riding lawnmowers, lifting equipment, tree removal equipment, tractors, bicycles, motor-driven scooters, recreational or all-terrain vehicles or any motorized or non-motorized, two-wheeled and above machines. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2017-3-6-001 , 3-6-17) 
Sec. 30-4. - Status of cemeteries. 
(a)  The only publicly owned cemetery within the city available for interment is Oak Grove Cemetery. 
(b)  All other publicly owned cemeteries located within the city limits are closed to any burial and related work. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12) 
Sec. 30-5. - Administrative structure of the cemetery. 
(a)  The administration of all publicly owned cemeteries shall be under the administrative jurisdiction of the community development director or his designated staff. 
(b)  The director, assigned staff, working with finance, public works and the cemetery authority, shall be responsible for the following major work areas: 
(1)  Recording sales of lots; 
(2)  Creating and maintaining drawings showing location of lots; 
(3)  Recording payments for the lots; 
(4)  Preparing a deed for any sold lot with the lot purchaser being responsible for the recording of the deed at the Camden County Courthouse; 
(5)  Maintaining a membership in a cemetery association dedicated to the furtherance of cemetery use, maintenance and history; 
(6)  Providing full-time cemetery maintenance within the limits of the city budget to be accomplished between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (weekend and/or evening work will be considered overtime); 
(7)  Performing other work within the cemetery. 
(c)  The cemetery authority shall be responsible for the following major work areas: 
(1)  Meeting with citizens requesting to purchase lots; 
(2)  Arranging for the sale of lots; 
(3)  Locating any lot in the field for the purpose of interment with a fee as determined by council; 
(4)  Locating any gravestone location for the purpose of installation of a stone with a fee as determined by council; 
(5)  Overseeing maintenance of the cemetery grounds. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2017-3-6-001 , 3-6-17) 
Sec. 30-6. - Hours of operation. 
    The Oak Grove Cemetery shall be open to the public on a daily basis from the hours of sunrise until sunset. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than city personnel or cemetery authority members conducting or performing city business therein, to be present in the cemetery at any time when the cemetery is not open to the public. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2017-3-6-001 , 3-6-17) 
Sec. 30-7. - Special events. 
    Special events are allowed only during the cemetery's operation hours. No special event shall be conducted within the cemetery walls without the prior approval by city council. This approval will only be given during a regularly scheduled city council meeting after staff review of the proposed event. Application for use of the cemetery for special events shall be made to the community development director at least 30 days in advance of the event outlining the nature of the event, the duration of the event, and any special needs for the event that will require special services from city staff. A fee for use of the cemetery shall be assessed at the rate the city charges for other facilities, plus any city services required for the special event shall be paid for by the event sponsor at a rate of 1.1 times the actual cost of the services. There shall be no special event authorized that negatively affects the decorum or sanctity of the cemetery or the families of those buried within the cemetery. There shall be no temporary or permanent-type facilities constructed or provided as part of the special event, and no vehicles of any type in any cemetery area except on the main drive through the cemetery. Special events shall be limited to a maximum of 30 persons due to the fragile nature of the monuments and grounds. All prohibited and unlawful activities as defined in section 30-8, shall be enforced for any special event. Funeral services for recently deceased citizens are not considered special events under this section. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2017-3-6-001 , 3-6-17) 
Sec. 30-8. - Prohibited and unlawful activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, group, organization, or corporation using the Oak Grove Cemetery or adjacent grounds to either perform or permit to be performed any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, disturb, injure, lean on, sit on, or tamper with any: 
a.  Building; 
b.  Bench; 
c.  Water line; 
d.  Public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof; 
e.  Grave stones or grave markers or burial sites; 
f.  Vaults and vault covers of any material and their support; 
g.  Monument; 
h.  Grave buildings; 
i.  Corner markers; 
j.  Enclosing walls to any group of gravestones; 
k.  Enclosing walls; 
l.  Fixed statuary; 
m.  Ground elevation; 
n.  American and/or Confederate flags, honorary markers and their metallic holders; 
o.  Cemetery equipment of any type; 
p.  Trees and shrubs whether planted by the city or by prior relatives of the interred; 
q.  All trees and shrubs are the property of the city and shall not be cut, defaced, carved on, nailed on, or removed without tree board and HPC review and approval; or 
r.  Facilities or property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(2)  Disturb the peace and dignity of the cemetery grounds or use or display any profane, obscene, blasphemous, or inflammatory language or symbols which are or may be reasonably construed to be inconsistent with or disruptive of the purpose for which the cemetery was created and is maintained, to wit: a place dedicated and set apart for the burial of the dead and consecrated to a public and sacred use. 
(3)  Carry, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or illegal drug. 
(4)  Interfere with the rights of family members of deceased persons interred in the cemetery. 
(5)  Organize or conduct any church or religious observance, assembly, service, or congregational activity inside the cemetery boundaries unless such church or religious observance involves a burial, interment, re-interment, or memorial service conducted at the express request, direction, and authorization of the family or legal representative of the deceased person. 
(6)  Conduct assemblies or other gatherings organized by local civic organizations, churches or tourism organizations, except as approved by city council as special events as noted under section 30-7, inside cemetery walls. Such assemblies shall be held only outside the walls of the cemetery in order to respect the peace and dignity of those buried within and of their families. 
(7)  Drive any private vehicle or golf cart outside of the marked limits of the access road to the cemetery. Cemetery maintenance and funeral home equipment are exempt from this clause to the extent that no damage is made to the grounds and features of the cemetery. 
(8)  Leave behind any item not related to the honoring of the dead, including, but not limited to, hoses, rakes, bins, trash, refuse, leaf and stick piles, stones, or other debris. 
(9)  Permit dogs or any other type of pet or domesticated animal within the boundaries of the cemetery. Dogs and other pets or domesticated animals are not permitted at any time, even if they are restrained on a leash. Service dogs are permitted when under the full control of the citizen that requires the use of same. Dogs, and/or any other type of pet or domesticated animal, are permitted when fully confined within the owner's vehicle. 
(10)  Pressure washing or scrubbing with cleaning utensils such as wire brushes or other abrasive utensils, cleaning stones with bleach, soap, or any other harsh chemicals. 
(11)  Rubbing of stone inscriptions with chalk or other substances. Such rubbings are prohibited due to damages caused by these substances except in the instance of contractors needing to replicate the size and fonts for match on existing or new monuments. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2017-3-6-001 , 3-6-17) 
Sec. 30-9. - Oak Grove Cemetery rules and regulations. 
    The following shall constitute the rules and regulations of the Oak Grove Cemetery: 
(1)  The size of each burial lot is normally five feet by ten feet, although there are varying sized lots that may be slightly smaller or larger. Infant or child-sized lots and lots for cremations are smaller. Columbarium niches for urns containing ashes or a cemetery section devoted to the scattering of ashes are to be in specific locations as determined by city council. The price of lots, niches, or for scattering shall be set by the city council. A filing fee for the deed shall be added to the cost of the burial lot and each deed shall be recorded by the purchaser of the burial lot. 
(2)  No burial will be placed on top of another burial for any reason. 
(3)  No person shall dig any grave or bury, attempt to bury, exhume or remove any corpse in the city's cemetery without notice to and permission of the cemetery authority. All fees shall be paid prior to interment. 
(4)  No grave shall be opened for the purpose of interments or dis-interments in the city's cemetery except by licensed funeral directors or contractors working for funeral directors. 
(5)  The cemetery authority shall mark all burial lots prior to burials and all corner markers, headstones, and monuments prior to being set. A fee for this service shall be set by the city council. 
(6)  Burial lot corner markers are permitted; however, such markers shall not extend more than one inch above ground level. 
(7)  Any monument, gravestone, or slab erected within the city cemetery must have a firm foundation of brick, stone, mortar, and/or concrete, or reinforcing sufficient to prevent the same from failing, sinking, leaning or collapsing. 
(8)  Burial vaults are required for each interment and shall be below ground level. Slabs to cover graves are permitted and must be at ground level. 
(9)  The planting of trees and shrubbery is prohibited without the written approval of the cemetery authority. Grass is the only permitted foliage that may be planted within the cemetery. Grass may only be planted on the lot owner's parcel. Mowing of grass on any parcel shall be the responsibility of the cemetery landscaping staff. 
(10)  Coping or fencing by non-authorized personnel is prohibited, except that traditional stone coping is permitted when installed with the top set at one inch above the level of the surrounding ground. 
(11)  No one may enter the cemetery between sunset and sunrise except city or cemetery authority personnel, or emergency personnel. 
(12)  No one may injure or deface any trees, flowers, shrubbery, graves, tombstones, monuments, seats, buildings or structures of any kind in the cemetery. Carving on or nailing items into trees is specifically prohibited as is puncturing of tree bark for any reason. 
(13)  No one may commit a nuisance or deposit trash or refuse matter in the cemetery. 
(14)  Unless the cemetery authority establishes perpetual care for individual lots, each family using the cemetery is required to keep their burial lots clean and free of all faded artificial flowers, broken pots, dead flowers, toys, or other debris. 
(15)  No vaults or other materials may be stored outside the cemetery walls or within the city cemetery area. 
(16)  The community planning director, designated staff or cemetery authority must be contacted for disposal of any excess dirt. 
(17)  Any firm conducting business within the city cemetery is responsible for maintaining the cleanliness of the area in which they work and reporting any damage caused to the cemetery authority representative or community development director's office. 
(18)  Canopies shall be removed within seven days of the burial date and shall not be erected more than two days prior to the burial date. 
(19)  Donations will be accepted and used by the Oak Grove Cemetery authority for the benefit of the cemetery. 
(20)  Each grave will be marked with a permanent marker. Acceptable markers are a concrete slab, headstone, or minimum 12-inch by 24-inch head or foot stone marker with name and dates. 
(21)  Public restrooms are not available within the cemetery. 
(22)  The maximum allowable size for any tractor digging, closing or preparing burial sites within the Oak Grove Cemetery shall be 140 inches in length, 65 inches in width and a maximum wheelbase of 75 inches. Only the minimum size boom or crane truck will be permitted to install burial vaults, head stones or slabs. Any vehicle damaging property within the cemetery will be banned from the cemetery and the company operating the equipment will be held liable for any damages. No vehicle may drive over any slab, monument, or any other burial lot identification structure located within the Oak Grove Cemetery. 
(23)  Water hose used for cleaning or irrigation must be supplied by lot owner and each hose must be removed from the cemetery as owner departs the cemetery. Failure to remove a hose will result in the city removing and disposing of the water hose. The plot owner will not be reimbursed for any disposed of item. 
(24)  Any garden tools or other items needed to maintain a lot must be supplied by lot owner and removed from the cemetery as owner departs the cemetery. Any tools left will be removed and disposed of by the city. The plot owner will not be reimbursed for any disposed of item. 
(25)  No lights may be installed within the cemetery except those installed by the city. 
(26)  Any plant, decoration or other object not located on a slab, monument or within legal lot lines will be removed and disposed of by the city or the cemetery authority. Items used during a funeral service must be removed or located totally within the owners legal lot lines, seven days following the funeral service. The plot owner will not be reimbursed for any disposed of item. 
(27)  Benches must be placed within a lot owner's legal lot lines. 
(28)  Any dilapidated bench, pot or other decoration will be removed immediately either by cemetery staff or by the plot owner and relocated by plot name to the cemetery maintenance structure. If after 30 days the plot owner does not replace or claim the item(s), the city will dispose of the item(s). The plot owner will not be reimbursed for any disposed of item. 
(29)  Lot owners are not permitted to plant trees on their lots without permission of the cemetery authority. 
(30)  No one is permitted to install rock mulch or other permanent mulch on any lot in Oak Grove Cemetery to prevent damage from stones thrown from cemetery equipment onto adjacent gravestones and to prevent injury to bystanders. 
(31)  Containers, which do not provide proper drainage, are not permitted. Glass containers, glass ornaments or glass decoration of any type is not permitted. 
(32)  Any exception to the above regulations must be approved by the cemetery authority. Before making an exception, the cemetery authority must determine that all the following conditions are met: (a) the exception is necessary for the use of a cemetery lot in the same as other cemetery lots; (b) the exception would not materially be detrimental to the purposes of this chapter, or to other lots or property in the cemetery or adjacent property, or otherwise conflict with any objective of the city or cemetery authority; (c) the exception requested is the minimum exception which would alleviate the need; and (d) the need for an exception is not the result of the action of the owner or previous owner. 
(33)  A grid map of the cemetery's lots is kept in the office of the community development director and by the Oak Grove Cemetery authority and can be changed at any time to meet future burial needs and earlier burials as long as no burials are disturbed. 
(34)  The cemetery authority, under proper notification of city manager or community development director, may be required to suspend these rules and regulations for a stated time period during a declared emergency event. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2017-3-6-001 , 3-6-17) 
Sec. 30-10. - Fee schedule. 
(a)  The City of St. Marys, by separate fee ordinance, does hereby adopt the cemetery fee schedule with the price of lots or niches, and the fee for scattering of ashes. 
(1)  A copy of the fee ordinance was adopted and approved by city council is on file at the city clerk's office and in the office of the community development department. 
(2)  A portion amounting to at least one-half of the income from each lot sale shall be set aside in a trust fund account administered by the cemetery authority in an account maintained by the city finance department for the maintenance and preservation of the cemetery. 
(b)  All payments shall be made to the City of St. Marys, 418 Osborne Street, St. Marys, Georgia, 31558. 
(c)  A filing fee for the deed shall be added to the cost of the burial lot and each deed shall be recorded at the Camden County Courthouse by the burial lot purchaser at the sole expense and timing of the purchaser with copy of recorded deed returned to the city for reference. Unrecorded deeds will not be honored by the city. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12; Ord. No. 2017-3-6-001 , 3-6-17) 
Sec. 30-11. - Insurance requirement for vendors working within the cemetery. 
(a)  Prior to any funeral director or monument company opening a lot for burial, or setting a head stone, corner stone, slabs, bases or any other placement of monument ornamentals, a certificate of insurance naming the City of St. Marys and Oak Grove Cemetery as additional insured ATIMA, shall be provided by all vendors and funeral directors prior to being allowed to enter the cemetery for any and all work related purposes. 
(b)  Insurance must be provided by A-rated carriers with limits of liability no less than shown below: 
$2,000,000.00 General Aggregate $1,000,000.00 Products Completed 
Operations $1,000,000.00 Each Occurrence $5,000.00 Medical Expenses  
(c)  Vendors and funeral directors must also provide a Georgia Cemetery and Funeral Services Act Bond (Merchandise Dealers Bond) in an amount no less than $25,000.00. 
(d)  Proof of insurance to the City of St. Marys must be updated annually with new certificates of insurance. Deliver by U.S. Mail or by hand to the planning and building department. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12) 
Sec. 30-12. - Indigent citizens. 
    A burial lot shall be made available for the interment of indigent individuals, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-12-1 et seq., who are bona fide residents of the City of St. Marys or patients of facilities located in the City of St. Marys at the time of death, and the city manager shall make application to the Camden County Board of Commissioners, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-12-5, for reimbursement for the cost of the burial lot. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12) 
Sec. 30-13. - Penalty for violation of chapter. 
    Violation of these rules, regulations and prohibitions, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 1-23-12) 
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Plans for dealing with contingencies involving emergencies or disasters resulting from manmade or natural causes are contained in the City of St. Marys Emergency Management Manual. In addition, the Camden County Emergency Operations Plan dated March 1985 contains provisions relating to emergency management operations for the city. An official copy of both documents is on file in the city clerk's office. 
Cross reference- Emergency services, ch. 42; alarm systems, § 42-36 et seq.; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-2 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

Chapter 38 - COURTS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Following is a partial list of citations to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated which extend jurisdiction of municipal courts or otherwise allow for enactment of local laws notwithstanding the limitations on special legislation as set forth in art. 3, sec. 4, par. 4 of the Georgia Constitution and the limitations on home rule powers as provided in O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2)(A): 
O.C.G.A. § Subject 16-6-24, 16-11-36 Loitering or prowling, procuring others to engage in sexual acts for hire. 16-7-25 Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions. 16-7-48 Litter control. 16-11-34 Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings or processions. 16-11-41 Public drunkenness. 16-12-2 Smoking in public places. 16-12-120 Certain acts in public transit buses. 36-32-6 Possession of one ounce or less of marijuana. 36-32-7 Operating motor vehicle without effective insurance. 36-32-8 Operating motor vehicle without certificate of emission inspection. 36-32-9 Shoplifting of $100.00 or less. 36-32-10 Furnishing alcoholic beverages to and purchase and possession by persons under 21 years of age. 40-2-8 Operation of unregistered vehicle or vehicle without current license plate, etc. See O.C.G.A. § 40-13-22. 40-6-252 Parking, standing or driving vehicle in private parking area after request not to do so. 40-6-371 Powers of local authorities with respect to motor vehicles and traffic. 40-13-21 General powers and jurisdiction of probate and municipal courts with respect to traffic offenses.  
Charter reference- Municipal court, § 6-101 et seq. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; personnel, ch. 74; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. 6, sec. 1, par. 1; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 38-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    The provisions contained in the ordinance adopted February 5, 1981, and the amendments thereto adopted July 16, 1982, January 5, 1989, August 24, 1989, relating to the city court, referred to now as the municipal court, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city. 
Sec. 38-2. - Associate judge of municipal court; office created, compensation, appointment. 
(a)  The office of associate judge of the municipal court of the city is hereby created and established. 
(b)  The compensation for such position shall be the sum of $1,000.00 per court session in which he is required to preside over and that the city shall also bear the reasonable expense of the associate judge's actual expenses in meeting the mandatory training and certification requirements imposed by the Institute for Continuing Judicial Education in Georgia. 
(c)  The appointment of such judge shall be made by separate ordinance enacted by the mayor and council based upon the recommendation of the judge of said court. 
(Ord. of 8-12-91; Ord. of 12-13-04, §§ 1-3; Ord. of 7-28-08(1), § 1; Ord. No. 2018-7-16-001 , 7-16-18) 
Sec. 38-3. - Monthly sessions. 
    The municipal court shall convene and be held on the first and third Fridays of each month commencing at 9:00 a.m. and shall continue until such time as all business before the court shall be completed or until the presiding judge shall adjourn such session. 
(Ord. of 4-25-94, § 1) 
Chapter 40 - DRONE OPERATIONS 

Sec. 40-1. - Unmanned aircraft systems. 
(a)  For purposes of this section: 
    Civil UAS shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system operated by any person for any purposes other than strictly hobby or recreational purposes, including, but not limited to, commercial purposes or in furtherance of, or incidental to, any business or media service or agency. 
    Model aircraft shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system operated by any person strictly for hobby or recreational purposes. 
    Public UAS shall mean an unmanned aircraft or unmanned aircraft system operated by any public agency for government related purposes. 
    Military land use notification area shall mean the 3,000-foot buffer area measured from the property boundary of the Kings Bay Submarine Base, as shown on Exhibit A. 
    Unmanned aircraft shall mean an aircraft, including, but not limited to, an aircraft commonly known as a drone, that is operated without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft. 
    Unmanned aircraft system shall mean an unmanned aircraft and associated elements, including, but not limited to, any communication links and components that control the unmanned aircraft. 
(b)  The following shall apply to the operation of any model aircraft within the city: 
(1)  No person shall operate any model aircraft within the military land use notification area surrounding Kings Bay Submarine Base. 
(2)  No person shall operate any model aircraft within the city in a manner that interferes with manned aircraft, and shall always give way to any manned aircraft. 
(3)  No person shall operate any model aircraft within the city beyond the visual line of sight of the person operating the model aircraft. The operator must use his or her own natural vision (which includes vision corrected by standard eyeglasses or contact lenses) to observe the model aircraft. People other than the operator may not be used in lieu of the operator for maintaining visual line of sight. Visual line of sight means that the operator has an unobstructed view of the model aircraft. The use of vision-enhancing devices, such as binoculars, night vision goggles, powered vision magnifying devices, and goggles or other devices designed to provide a "first-person view" from the model, do not constitute the visual line of sight of the person operating the model aircraft. 
(4)  No person shall operate any model aircraft within the city other than during daylight hours defined as between official sunrise and official sunset for local time. 
(5)  No person shall operate any model aircraft within the city more than 400 feet above the earth's surface. 
(6)  Excluding takeoff and landing, no person shall operate any model aircraft within the city over unprotected persons or moving vehicles, closer than 25 feet away from individuals and vulnerable property, except the operator or the operator's helper(s). 
(7)  No person shall operate any model aircraft within the city under the influence of drugs or alcohol. 
(8)  No person shall operate a model aircraft weighing over 55 pounds within the city. 
(9)  No person shall operate a model aircraft that has not been registered with the FAA. As of December 21, 2015, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requires all owners of small unmanned aircraft, or drones, between .55 pounds and 55 pounds, be registered with the FAA. The aircraft being flown will be clearly marked with the owners FAA registration number. 
(c)  The following shall apply to the operation of any model aircraft or civil UAS within the city: 
(1)  No person shall operate any model aircraft or civil UAS within the city in a manner that is prohibited by any federal statute or regulation governing aeronautics. 
(2)  No person shall operate any model aircraft or civil UAS within the city in violation of any temporary flight restriction (TFR) or notice to airmen (NOTAM) issued by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(3)  No person shall operate any model aircraft or civil UAS within the city in a careless or reckless manner so as to endanger the life or property of another. The standard for what constitutes careless and reckless operation under this section shall be the same as the standard set forth in any federal statutes or regulations governing aeronautics including but not limited to Federal Aviation Rule 91.13. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with this section. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of section 1-12-General penalty of this Code. 
(e)  This section shall not apply to any public UAS operated pursuant to, and in compliance with, the terms and conditions of any current and enforceable authorization granted by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
( Ord. of 12- 5-16 ) 

Exhibit A: Military Land Use Notification Area (July 2016)
Chapter 42 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; floods, ch. 54; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide emergency rescue services, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(3). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 34. 
State Law reference- No person shall engage in alarm system, general system, or telecommunication system low voltage contracting unless such person has a license from the state division of low-voltage contracting, O.C.G.A. § 43-14-8.1(b). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm contractor means any person or vendor who installs, maintains, repairs, alters, monitors or services alarm systems for compensation. 
    Alarm protocol means a confidential systematic program, as determined by the police department, to verify or otherwise confirm the validity of an alarm signal at a banking or other financial institution or any other business or service facility where deemed appropriate by the chief of police or his designated representative. 
    Alarm signal means the audible sound or a transmission of a signal or a message as the result of the activation of an alarm system or an audible alarm. 
    Alarm system means any mechanical or electrical or radio-controlled device which is designed to be used for the detection of smoke, fire or of any unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others of the possible commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both, which emits a sound or transmits a signal and/or message when activated. Alarm systems include direct dial telephone devices; audible, silent, fire and panic alarms; contractor monitored alarm systems; and proprietor alarms. Excluded from the definition of alarms systems are devices which are not designed or used to register alarms that are audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility; auxiliary devices installed by municipal utilities or telephone companies to protect utility systems from damage or disruption of services; or audible alarms that are affixed to motor vehicles. If an alarm system is designed to activate an audible alarm, the alarm system shall be designed so as to automatically deactivate the audible alarm after no more than 30 minutes of operation. 
    Audible alarm means a device designed for the detection of fire or smoke or of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound when it is activated. 
    Code enforcement officer means an officer employed by the City of St. Marys to ensure compliance with its Code of Ordinances or any St. Marys police officer detailed to perform duties under this article by the St. Marys Police Chief or his designee. 
    Commercial premises means any structure or area which is not defined as a residential premises. 
    False alarm means an alarm signal which is responded to by public safety personnel and, which is caused by other than an emergency situation, or which is not caused by the activation of either an alarm system or audible alarm as the result of fire or smoke, a burglary, robbery, assault, forced entry or attempted forced entry into the premises protected by such alarm. An alarm will not be deemed to be a false alarm when there is a substantial likelihood that the alarm is the result of inclement weather, or due to some other similar uncontrollable "act of God." An alarm will be deemed to be a false alarm when there is no substantial physical evidence which would clearly indicate that smoke, fire or a criminal act was the sole reason for activation of the alarm signal or when the alarm system was intentionally activated by an individual under circumstances where there was no articulable and reasonable basis to believe that a fire, crime or other emergency, warranting immediate response by the appropriate authorities, had occurred or was occurring, or was about to occur. The failure to abide by the established, current alarm protocol by those responsible on the premises will be considered a separate false alarm under this definition. 
    Notice means written notice, given either by mail or by personal service upon the addressee. 
    Residential premises means any structure or combination of structures which serve as dwelling units, including single-family as well as multifamily units. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 2; Ord. of 3-21-11(2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 

Sec. 42-37. - Deactivation; 30-minute cutoff. 
(a)  It is unlawful to maintain on any commercial or residential premises an alarm or audible alarm unless current information is on file with the police department of the telephone numbers of at least two persons who can be reached at all times, including information of an alarm company contractor's central office or a representative that can be notified at all times who are authorized to enter the premises and deactivate the alarm system, or who can contact a person who can deactivate the system if the alarm company contractor has no means of access to the premises. If any such person or representative shall fail to appear to turn off an alarm within 30 minutes after being notified by the police department or their designated representative to do so, then the alarm contractor and/or owner or manager of the premises shall be in violation of this article and shall be punishable as provided by this article. 
(b)  All alarm systems shall have a 30-minute cutoff switch installed. Failure to install a cutoff switch shall constitute a false alarm and, furthermore, a violation of this article and may result in revocation of privileges, or criminal prosecution. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 4) 
Sec. 42-38. - Requirements for alarm contractors. 
(a)  An alarm contractor shall possess a current and appropriate occupational license from the city and county, and an alarm contractor's registration certificate issued by the city. Alarm contractors shall meet the requirements for an alarm system contractor pursuant to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(b)  Alarm contractors shall maintain a 24-hour emergency telephone number and shall be capable of responding to an emergency service call within four hours. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 2; Ord. No. 3-21-11(2)) 
Secs. 42-39-42-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FALSE ALARMS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Mar. 21, 2011 repealed the former div. 2, §§ 42-61-42-66, and renumbering div. 3 as div. 2 as set out herein. The former div. 2, entitled "Registration" derived from an ordinance adopted May, 10, 1993 § 3. 

Sec. 42-91. - Required reports. 
    Responsibility for all false alarms under this division shall be borne by the person occupying or controlling the premises. For each response by public safety personnel to any false alarm, the person owning or maintaining such alarm system shall submit such reports as are set forth in this division or be in violation of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 5; Ord. of 3-21-11(2)) 
Sec. 42-92. - Official notification, failure of owner to answer. 
    Within 15 working days after a false alarm violation has occurred, the code enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the alarm system, from which such false alarm emanated, that the false alarm violation has occurred and the steps necessary to answer such notice or charge. Any person who fails to appear to answer such charge, or to pay a fine levied by the municipal court concerning such charge, is subject to further legal action against them. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 5(e); Ord. of 3-21-11(2)) 
Sec. 42-93. - Effect of code enforcement officer for failure to serve notice. 
    Failure of the code enforcement officer to mail or serve the notice provided for in this division, shall preclude the assessment of a false alarm violation for the purpose of calculating the number of false alarm violations necessary to warrant punishment for subsequent violations. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 5(f); Ord. of 3-21-11(2)) 
Sec. 42-94. - Violations of division; penalties. 
(a)  For any of the first six responses recorded by public safety personnel during any 12-month period to a premises where a false alarm has occurred, no violation of this article shall be deemed to exist; however, the responding public safety officer shall complete a written report of the incident. All false alarm reports shall be forwarded to the code enforcement officer for tracking purposes and for potential enforcement of this section. 
(b)  Each and every false alarm over six and up to 12 which requires a response to a premises during any 12-month period, where there have already occurred six responses during that same period, shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this article and shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $50.00. 
(c)  False alarm violations numbering 13 or more within a 12-month period shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this article and shall be punishable by a minimum fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. of 5-10-93, § 5(a)-(c); Ord. of 3-21-11(2)) 
Chapter 46 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 54; health and sanitation, ch. 58; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 46-1-46-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 46-36. - Conditions enumerated. 
    The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on premises. 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon premises which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(3)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city. 
(4)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto. 
(5)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl. 
(6)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit. 
(7)  Loud or unusual noises emanating from private or public property which are detrimental or annoying to a person of normal sensitivities who are neighbors or other members of the public, including, without limitation, unusual, loud or long duration noises or other disturbances in or around residential areas, churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other or activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas. 
(8)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property. 
(9)  Any businesses or buildings where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities. 
(10)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks thereof are removed. 
(11)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city. 
(12)  Motor vehicles which have been dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof where such motor vehicles are in such a condition that they constitute a health hazard or unsightly appearance, notwithstanding the fact that such motor vehicles may be located on private property and are not located within the premises of any junkyard complying with the laws of this state related to the licensing and regulating of motor vehicle junkyards. 
(13)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 1-1-1; Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 3-3-14) 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14. 
Sec. 46-37. - Jurisdiction to try and abate. 
    The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, in case of conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 46-40 of this Code. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 1-1-2) 
Sec. 46-38. - Complaint; service of notice; hearing. 
(a)  For the purposes of the service provisions of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Parties in interest means persons in possession of the property and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have interest of record in the county where the property is located in a dwelling, building, or structure, including executors, administrators, guardians and trustees, tenants, and rental agents. 
(b)  Any city official or inhabitant of the city may lodge a complaint of nuisance by the filing of such complaint with the city building official by means of a nuisance complaint form. Upon receipt of such complaint, the building official shall conduct a preliminary investigation to determine if a reasonable basis exists for such complaint. If the preliminary investigation discloses a reasonable basis for the complaint, the building official shall file the complaint with the clerk of the municipal court. In addition to the foregoing process, any inhabitant of the city may make a complaint to the St. Marys Police Department which shall conduct a preliminary investigation to determine if a reasonable basis exists for such complaint. If the preliminary investigation discloses a reasonable basis for the complaint, a citation shall be issued by the police officer conducting the preliminary investigation and served personally upon the person creating or allowing the alleged nuisance and/or upon the person owning or operating the property upon which the nuisance exists or is being conducted or allowed directing the defendant to appear in the Municipal Court of St. Marys to answer said charge. 
(c)  Upon receipt and filing of the complaint the clerk of the municipal court shall cause the complaint and a hearing notice to be issued and served upon the owner of and any parties in interest in the property, dwelling, building or structure which is involved in or is the subject of the complaint. Such hearing shall be held before the judge of the municipal court not less than ten days nor more than 30 days after service of the complaint has been perfected as provided herein. 
(d)  Complaints or orders issued by the municipal court pursuant to the provisions of this section shall, in all cases, be served upon each person in possession of such property, each owner, and each party in interest; and the return of service signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, other than the resident initiating the complaint; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party was served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or order at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(e)  If any of the owners and parties in interest shall reside out of the city, service shall be perfected by causing a copy of such complaint or orders to be served upon such property by the sheriff or any lawful deputy of the county of the residence of such party or such service may be made by any citizen; and the return of service signed by the public officer or his agent or an affidavit of service executed by any citizen of this state, other than the resident initiating the complaint; and the return of such sheriff or lawful deputy or the affidavit of such citizen that such party was served either personally or by leaving a copy of the complaint or order at the residence shall be conclusive as to such service. 
(f)  Nonresidents of this state shall be served by posting a copy of such complaint or orders in a conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or orders. Where the address of such nonresidents is known, as copy of such complaint or orders shall be mailed to them by registered or certified mail. 
(g)  If either the owner or any party in interest is a minor or an insane person or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian of other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside the county or municipality or is a nonresident he shall be served as provided for in subsection (f) of this section or this subsection in such cases. If such guardian or personal representative or if such minor or insane person lives outside the city or is a nonresident, service by leaving a copy at the place of his residence which shall be sufficient evidence as to the service of such person; in the case of other persons who live outside of the city or are nonresidents, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of the county wherein such property is located who shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor or insane person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
(h)  If the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the building official in the exercise of reasonable diligence and the building official shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint or order upon such persons shall be made in the same manner as provided in subsection (f) of this section or service may be perfected upon any person, firm, or corporation holding itself out as an agent for the property involved. 
(i)  A copy of such complaint or orders shall also be filed in the proper office for the filing of lis pendens notice in the county in which the dwelling, building, or structure is located and such filing of the complaint or orders shall have the same force and effect that appropriate lis pendens notice may contain a statement to the effect that a lien may arise against the described property and that an itemized statement of such lien is maintained on a lien docket maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 1-1-3; Ord. of 8-23-93, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-008 , 3-3-14) 
Sec. 46-39. - Failure of owner to abate; abatement by city. 
(a)  In any case where the owner, agent or tenant fails to abate the nuisance in the time specified, or where the nature of the nuisance is such, as may be determined by the judge that it must be immediately abated, the judge may issue an order to the chief of police in such case, shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner, agent or tenant for collection as for city revenues. 
(b)  Other city departments shall assist the chief of police as is necessary in abating nuisances hereunder. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 1-1-4) 
Sec. 46-40. - Urgent cases; summary abatement. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prevent the mayor from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating the nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 1-1-5) 
Sec. 46-41. - Offense; penalty. 
    It is hereby declared to be an offense for any owner, agent or tenant to maintain or allow a nuisance to exist. Each day a nuisance is continued shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 7-2-85, § 1-1-6; Ord. of 10-24-88) 
Secs. 46-42-46-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - NOISE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-022, adopted July 1, 2013, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 46-66-46-84, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Sept. 25, 1958, §§ 8-301-8-306; Ord. of June 23, 1997, § 2; Ord. of Apr. 26, 1999, § 1; Ord. of May 14, 2007, § 1; and Ord. of May 14, 2007(2), §§ 1, 2. 

Sec. 46-66. - Title. 
(a)  The ordinance codified in this division is adopted by the City Council of St. Marys, Georgia, pursuant to Article IX, Section II, Paragraph I of the Constitution of Georgia (1983), and shall be referred to as the "St. Marys Noise Control Ordinance." 
(b)  The St. Marys City Council has determined that noise is a major source of environmental pollution which represents a threat to the serenity and quality of life in the City of St. Marys and that noise exposure may be a cause of adverse physiological and psychological effects as well as economic loss. It is the intention of this division to limit noise in housing areas and other noise sensitive urban areas. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-67. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    A-weighted sound level shall mean the sound pressure level as measured in decibels (dB) on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. This level is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    City shall mean the City of St. Marys, its elected and appointed officials and staff. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, for or on public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Decibel (dB) means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing the relative loudness or level of sound. 
    Demolition. Any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private rights-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency work is work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which endangers or injures the welfare, safety or health of human beings, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property. 
    Noise-sensitive activities means any activities which should be conducted under conditions of exceptional quiet, including but not limited to: operation of schools and day care centers; libraries; cemeteries; nursing and convalescent homes; hospitals and medical clinics; and churches. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, operative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivisions of this state, any interstate body, or any other legal entity. 
    Plainly audible shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth herein which can be heard from the locations set forth herein, using the following sound measurement standards: measurement shall be either by sound meter; or by the auditory senses of a person standing at a distance no less than the required minimum distance from the source of the sound. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernible. For music and other noise, bass reverberations are included. 
    Plainly audible within an adjoining residential dwelling shall mean any sound emanating from the specific sound-producing sources set forth herein which can be heard inside a residential dwelling at the locations set forth herein, using the following sound measurement standards: measurement shall be by sound meter; or the auditory senses of a person standing within any living area of a residential dwelling at a distance of at least five feet from the exterior wall of the residential dwelling with all exterior doors and windows closed. For music and other noise, words and phrases need not be discernible. For music and other noise, bass and mega-bass reverberations are included. 
    Powered model vehicle. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne model plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, highway, lane or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property including any structure thereon which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Real property boundary. An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates real property owned or occupied by one person from that owned or occupied by another person, including walls, ceilings and floors which separate the units in a multi-occupancy building. 
    Receiving land use means the use or occupancy of the real property which receives the transmission of sound. 
    Sound level means the quantity in decibels measured with an instrument that measures sound in decibels (dB). 
    Times means Eastern Standard Time or daylight saving time as observed in the state. 
    Zoning districts shall mean those districts established by Zoning Ordinance No. 110 of the City of St. Marys. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-68. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Emission of sound for the purpose of alerting people to the existence of danger; 
(2)  Emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; 
(3)  Rail and air transportation and/or public transportation vehicles; 
(4)  Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes; 
(5)  Agricultural activities limited to the raising of crops but exclusive of those involving the ownership or possession of animals or birds as stated in section 46-74; 
(6)  Fireworks or fireworks displays for which a permit has been issued by the city; 
(7)  Alarms, as defined in the alarm control ordinance of the city, which are properly maintained in accordance with that ordinance; 
(8)  Sound volumes produced by radio, tape player, or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within a moving motor vehicle on a street or highway, which sound is controlled by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14. O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14 makes it unlawful for any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle on a street or highway to operate or amplify the sound produced by a mechanical sound-making device from within the motor vehicle so that the sound is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from any parked motor vehicle; 
(9)  The emission of sound in the discharge of weapons at a firing range issued a permit by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-69. - Noise disturbance prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance or noise in excess of the limits for such noise established in this section. 
(b)  With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized by this division, Table One sets forth the maximum permissible sound levels allowed at or within the real property boundary of a receiving land use. Any activity or use that produces a sound in excess of such noise levels for the receiving land use shall be deemed a "noise disturbance" and in violation of this division. 
(c)  The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter in dB. The measurement of all sound levels shall be made as close to the property line of the receiving land as is practical. The measurement period shall not be less than five minutes, and the sound level measured shall not exceed the sound levels set forth in the included table more than ten percent of the time during any measurement period. The chief of police shall formulate, in accordance with recognized sound testing standards, rules and regulations describing how measurement of sound levels will be made. 
TABLE ONE 
Zoning Category of
Receiving Land Use Time Sound Level Limit dBA Residential  7:00 a.m. - 9:00 p.m. 65 at or as near as possible to the receiving property line  9:00 p.m. - 7:00 a.m. 50 at or as near as possible to the receiving property line Nonresidential 11:30 p.m. - 6:30 a.m. 65 at or as near as possible to the receiving property line  
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the operation of the following domestic power tools or equipment between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.: 
(1)  Electrical power tools; 
(2)  Motor-powered, muffler-equipped lawn, garden and tree trimming equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-70. - Specific activities prohibited. 
(a)  Sales by hawking or barking. No person shall offer for sale or sell anything by shouting or outcry within any residential area. 
(b)  Loading and unloading. No person shall load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building material, refuse, garbage cans, dumpsters, motor vehicles, or similar objects between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary line. 
(c)  Vehicle or motor boat repair and testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(d)  Power model vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of a powered model vehicle in a public or private space out-of-doors in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone or within 150 feet of a residential real property boundary or during the hours from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(e)  Musical instruments and similar devices. No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any drum, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound in a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, subject to other provisions of this division. 
(f)  Recreational motorized vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of any recreational motorized vehicle, motorcycle, moped, dune buggy or any other type of motorized vehicle that exceeds the limits set forth in Table One of this division off the public right-of-way in any residential or noise sensitive area. This section shall apply to all motorized vehicles noted above, whether or not duly licensed and registered. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-71. - Regulation of sound equipment and sound amplifying equipment. 
(a)  Except as hereafter provided, no person shall use, operate or cause to be used or operated, the following devices including, but not limited to, any radio, record player, tape deck or player, loud speaker, amplifier, sound track or other device for producing, reproducing, or amplifying sounds, hereinafter referred to as "sound equipment", upon the public streets or in any building or upon any premises, public or private, so as to produce a noise disturbance. Provided, however; the following activities, when authorized by the city in writing, may use sound equipment which produces a sound not to exceed 90 dBA's when measured at a distance of 50 feet from such equipment: 
(1)  Public health and safety purposes. 
(2)  Fairs, carnivals, permitted assemblies and similar activities. 
(3)  Parades, processions, excursions and associated festivities. 
(4)  Outdoor concerts and theatrical performances. 
(5)  Outdoor neighborhood functions such as lawn and pool parties, street dances and similar activities. 
(6)  Civic and religious celebrations. 
(7)  Recreational and athletic activities. 
(b)  Where the receiving land is residential such equipment may be used only from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 
(c)  Except for activities for which a permit has been issued by the city under this section, no person shall so operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, tape player, compact disc player or phonograph or similar device so as to: 
(1)  Create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary line. Bars, taverns, lounges, nightclubs, dance halls, game rooms and similar activities which produce a noise that is plainly audible beyond the premises shall be deemed a noise disturbance in violation of this division. 
(2)  Create a noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from a private motor vehicle, when such device is operated in or on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(3)  Create a noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in or on any public space. 
(d)  Sound equipment permitted. Except as hereafter provided, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be used or operated any radio, record player, tape deck or player, loudspeaker, amplifier, sound track or other device for producing, reproducing or amplifying sounds, hereinafter referred to as "sound equipment" upon the public streets or upon any private or public premises so as to produce a noise disturbance. However, noise emanating from activities upon public property from which the city has issued any necessary permit or in which the city is a sponsor shall be exempt. 
(e)  Commercial advertising, sound equipment prohibited. No sound equipment shall be permitted to be used on public streets or public places, or in any building or upon any premises if the sound therefrom may be plainly audible from any public street or public place when any such use is for commercial advertising purposes or for any purpose of attracting attention of the public to any structure or building for monetary gain. 
(f)  Party noise. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons in charge of a party or other social event that occurs on any private property to allow that party or social event to produce noise in such a manner that such noise is plainly audible at a distance of 100 feet or more from the source of the noises or sounds between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-72. - Construction work. 
    No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment in construction, demolition or maintenance work: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive area. 
(2)  Any noise disturbance which creates a noise across a real property boundary, for the purpose of this subsection, a sound level at or across the real property boundary in excess of 85 dBA shall be deemed a noise disturbance. 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
a.  Emergency work or repair work performed by or for governmental entities or public service utilities. 
b.  The use of domestic power tools or equipment as set forth above. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-73. - Motorized vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall operate the engine providing motive power, or an auxiliary engine, of a motor vehicle with a manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 1,000 pounds or more for a consecutive period longer than 20 minutes while such vehicle is standing and located within 150 feet of property zoned and used for residential purposes except where such vehicle is standing within a completely enclosed structure. This section shall not apply to delivery or pickup vehicles that require the operation of the engine to unload or load their vending loads. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move or cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved, a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles at any time in such a manner as to exceed the noise limits in Table Two for the category or motor vehicle shown below. Noise shall be measured at a distance of at least 25 feet from the near side of the nearest land(s) being monitored and at a height of at least four feet above the immediate surrounding surface. 
TABLE TWO 
Vehicle Type Speed Limit 35 mph or less Speed Limit Over 35 mph Motor vehicles with a manufacturer's gross weight rating (GWR) or gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of 1,000 lb. or more. Any combination towed by such motor vehicle except those operated by an Interstate Motor Carrier. 85 dBA 90 dBA Any other motor vehicle or any combination towed by any motor vehicle. 65 dBA 75 dBA  
(c)  This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle or combination of vehicles and shall not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other provisions of this chapter relating to motor vehicle mufflers for noise control. 
(d)  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle unless the exhaust system of such vehicle is: 
(1)  Free from defects which affect sound reduction. 
(2)  Equipped with a muffler or other noise dissipation device. 
(3)  Not equipped with any cut-out, by-pass or similar device. 
(4)  Not equipped with after sale equipment designed to modify (increase) the sound over that of the factory installed equipment. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-74. - Animal and bird noise. 
(a)  No person shall own, possess or harbor any animal or bird which howls, barks, or emits audible sounds that are unreasonably loud or disturbing and which are of such character, intensity, and duration as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" for the purposes of this division, if at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the dog is situated or close proximity thereto, or for any other cause which teased or provoked the dog. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-75. - Variances. 
    Variance permit. A variance permit to cause or create a noise at sound levels which would otherwise be in violation of this division may be granted by the city council upon recommendation by the chief of police if: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply with the provisions of this division; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this division; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-76. - Conditions for permits. 
(a)  Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain therein all conditions placed upon the holder of the permit as conditions to the permit being granted, including but not limited to, the effective date, time of day, location, sound level limit or equipment limitation. Application for such a permit shall be made in writing in such form as is acceptable to the city through the city manager's office. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this division concerning mechanical sound-making devices, the chief of police has the discretion to grant written permission authorizing the use of mechanical sound-making devices at such a volume and in such a manner so as to create, or cause to be created, noises or sounds which are plainly audible at a distance of 1,000 feet from the source of the noise or sound between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Such written authorization may be given for the following: 
(1)  Public health and safety purposes; 
(2)  Fairs, carnivals and similar activities; 
(3)  Parades, processions, excursions and associated festivities; 
(4)  Outdoor concerts and theatrical performances; 
(5)  Outdoor neighborhood functions such as lawn and pool parties, street dances and similar activities; 
(6)  Civic and religious celebrations; 
(7)  Recreational and athletic activities. In determining whether to grant such permission, the chief of police should consider the following factors: 
a.  Level or volume, duration, and types of the proposed noises or sounds; 
b.  Source or nature of the noise or sounds (i.e., musical instruments, amplified music, etc.); 
c.  Level and intensity of any background noise; 
d.  Proximity of sleeping facilities or quiet zones (i.e., hospitals and hotels); 
e.  Zoning classification of the area; 
f.  Population density of the area; 
g.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and 
h.  Whether the applicant or location has previously violated the ordinance codified in this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-77. - Administration, appeals and penalties. 
(a)  The chief of police shall implement, administer and enforce the provisions of this division and shall issue orders requiring the abatement of all violations and the revocation of permits issued. 
(b)  Each and every day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. Each and every violation of this division, including separate violations on the same day, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any person in violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a warning for the first offense and thereafter punishable by a fine of at least $500.00, but not to exceed $1,500.00; or by imprisonment of at least 24 hours, not to exceed 60 days, or both. Any person who violates this division may be subject to immediate arrest. The imposition of a penalty under the provisions of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Sec. 46-78. - Provisions of this division declared to be minimum requirements. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this division shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this division are at variance with the requirements of the lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances of the City of St. Marys, Camden County, State of Georgia, and the United States of America, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(b)  The city shall not approve any request for any subdivision, special use, variance, building permit or other permit/license request that is not in compliance with this division, in opposition to any currently effective, legally adopted deed restriction and/or covenants which apply to the property for which the request is made. 
(c)  The city is not required to enforce and will not enforce any deed restrictions, covenants or similar private legal agreements concerning the use of land in the city. 
(d)  In the event any portion of this division shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the city council of the city that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this division which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, or phrase were not originally a part of the division. 
(Ord. No. 2013-022 , 7-1-13) 
Secs. 46-79-46-91. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Apr. 4, 2011, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 46-92-46-99.2, was entitled "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control" and derived from: Ordinances of Dec. 11, 1989; Sept. 11, 1995; Jan. 8, 2001; and June 14, 2004, §§ 1, 2. 
State Law reference- Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-92. - Title. 
    This article will be known as "City of St. Marys Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-93. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
    Board: The board of natural resources. 
    Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
    CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
    Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: Engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control, Inc. 
    Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
    District: The Satilla River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 46-95(c) of this article. 
    Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: Planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 46-94(5). 
    Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
    NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
    NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Phase or phased: Subparts or segments of construction projects where the subpart or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Properly designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Satilla River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
    State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
    Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia". 
    Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 46-94. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 46-95(c)(15) and (c)(16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1) through (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-95. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in this subsection (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this section the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)15 and (c)16 of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream: That under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-96. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of St. Marys without first obtaining a permit from the planning department to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the planning department and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 46-95(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9), (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 46-95(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) below, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof, of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 46-95(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 46-95(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-97. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The public works department and/or the planning department will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The public works department and/or the planning department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The district or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-98. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 46-96(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article, shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-99. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said statute. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-99.1. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city council within 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Camden County. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
Sec. 46-99.2. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 2nd day of May, 2011. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 4-4-11) 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCE ABATEMENT CODE 

Sec. 46-100. - Title, scope and definitions. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be entitled "City of St. Marys Nuisance Abatement Code". 
(b)  Authority and scope. This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7-41-2-17, as amended, and is referenced herein as the "statute". O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this article. All powers and authorities granted to public officers and public authorities by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-101. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words, terms and definitions shall apply: 
    Director. The director of inspections or any "public officer" as defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(9) delegated with authority by the city manager to enforce this article. The city manager (or his designee) shall be the public officer who shall exercise the primary responsibilities prescribed by this article and shall be the "public officer" defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(7). 
    Hearing officer. The person designated by the city manager to conduct hearings required by this article. 
    Parties in interest. The persons defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(7). 
    Person. Any natural person, corporation, partnership (general or limited), estate, trust or other entity or artificial person, or combination thereof. 
    Public authority. Such agency or official(s) as defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(8). 
    To the extent not stated above, the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-102. - Inspection and notice of hearing. 
(a)  Inspection and notices. Whenever a written request for inspection is filed with the city by a public authority, by at least five residents of the city, or by the director charging that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation; or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use; or is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in conjunction with the commission of drug crimes; or whenever it otherwise appears to the director that any dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation; or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use; or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in conjunction with the commission of drug crimes; or there is present on the property an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the director take shall the action specified in subsection (b). 
(b)  The complaint. The director shall, if preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charge(s), issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest of such dwelling, building or structure unfit for human habitation; or unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use; or vacant, dilapidated and being use in conjunction with the commission of drug crimes, a compliant stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer (or the hearing officer). The complaint shall state the conditions which exist and specify the violations of this article or any other article or provision of the Code of the City of St. Marys, including but not limited to, its building code, housing code, and other provisions pertaining to the conditions of buildings, dwellings and structures, and shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the hearing officer pursuant to section 46-103 of this article. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-103. - Hearing. 
(a)  Time and place. The hearing will be held at a place within the city as designated in the complaint on a day and time certain which shall not be less than ten days nor more than 30 days after the service of the notice. The owner and any party in interest known to the director shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint with the director and to appear in person or otherwise to give testimony at the hearing at the place and time specified in the notice. 
(b)  The proceedings. The hearing officer shall preside at the hearing. The person conducting the hearing shall have authority to administer oaths or affirmations, examine witnesses and receive evidence at the hearing. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in the hearing. The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded or taken down or made by such other procedure as may be undertaken either in a verbatim or summary form so as to be reasonably accurate. 
(c)  The records. The director shall be the supervisor and custodian of the records on each property against which a complaint is issued and any hearing held. Such records shall be public records and made available to any party in interest and copies thereof provided upon the payment of such reasonable cost as may be incurred in duplicating or otherwise providing them. The records shall be preserved for not less than four years after the proceedings and action, if any, regarding the property are concluded. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-104. - Orders for corrective action. 
(a)  Decision. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines that the dwelling, building or structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation; or it is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use; or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, the hearing officer shall state in writing the findings of fact in support of such determination and a conclusion. Absent such a finding, the complaint shall be dismissed. 
(b)  Order. If warranted by the hearing officer's decision, the director shall make a determination that such building, dwelling or structure is unfit for human habitation or its current commercial, industrial or business use, or is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, in the form of an order which shall contain: 
(1)  A determination that the dwelling, building or structure can be repaired, improved or altered either at a cost of one-half or less of the value of the dwelling, building or structure exclusive of foundation and lot after the improvements have been made, or at a cost of more than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of the foundation and lot after improvements have been made. If the cost to repair, improve or alter such structure is more than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of foundation and lot after the improvements have been made, the order may find that such structure be vacated and removed or demolished within a specified time frame. If the dwelling, building or structure can be repaired, altered or improved at a cost that is less than one-half of the value of such structure exclusive of foundation and lot after improvements have been made, the order may find either that the structure be rendered fit for human habitation or current commercial, industrial or business use within a specified time or shall be vacated and closed and secured against entry. 
(2)  An enumeration of conditions which render the dwelling, building or structure unfit for human habitation or other uses and an enumeration of remedial action necessary to correct each of the conditions. 
(3)  Provisions that if the owner and/or parties in interest elect to undertake the necessary remedial action, the director shall establish: 
a.  A specific period of time, reasonably established in relationship to the remedial action, during which such action must be commenced, including if necessary separate commencement dates as to separate defects or work; and 
b.  A specific period of time after the required commencement date of such remedial action, reasonably established in relationship to the necessary undertakings, within which such action shall be completed, including if necessary separate reasonable deadlines as to separate defects or work. 
(4)  Provisions that if the owner and/or the parties in interest do not notify the director of the intent to comply within 15 days of service (or publication) of the order for corrective action for a building, dwelling or structure which can be repaired at one-half or less of its value, the director shall subsequently commence and complete the vacating and closing of the dwelling, building or structure; or in the case of a building or dwelling which cannot be repaired at one-half or less of the value, to commence and complete the vacating and removal or demolition of the building, dwelling or structure. 
(5)  A statement that failure to comply with the order within the required time above set forth is in violation of this article and shall subject the parties and property to the remedies of this article. 
    Where a condition exists regarding any property which constitutes an immediate danger to persons or adjacent property, the director may shorten the time periods specified in this section. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-105. - Placarding. 
    When the owner and/or the parties in interest fail to comply with an order to vacate and close the dwelling, building or structure and the director causes such dwelling, building or structure and premises to be vacated and closed, the director shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling, building or structure to be closed a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial or other use. The use or occupation of this building for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or other use is prohibited and unlawful." 
    The placard shall bear the date posted, street number of the building involved and the signature of the director. It shall thereafter be unlawful for such placard to be mutilated or removed or for such building to be occupied until the required corrective action is taken. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-106. - Failure to comply with order. 
    Should the owner and/or the parties in interest fail to comply with an order to remove or demolish or vacate a dwelling, building or structure, the director shall cause such dwelling, building or structure to be vacated, demolished, removed or repaired; however, that duty shall not be exercised until the mayor and council, by ordinance containing an appropriate legal description, has ordered the director to effectuate the purpose of this article with respect to a particular property. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-107. - Demolition. 
    No person shall begin demolition until a city demolition permit for demolition has been obtained and all utilities have been cut off and capped at the street. The person who has secured the permit shall remove from the property all debris, trash, litter, rubbish, rubble and foundation exposed above the ground level; fill any excavation or other depressions to existing grade with clean dirt containing no more than 25 percent stone or masonry; and adequately slope and drain all filled areas. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-108. - Lien on property. 
    The cost of vacating, removing, closing and/or demolition by the city shall be a lien for such amount against the real property upon which the cost was incurred. The lien shall attach to the real property upon the payment of all costs of action against the property by the city and the filing by the city of a notice of lien as in the O.C.G.A § 41-2-12(f) in the real property records maintained by the office of the clerk of the county superior court. If the dwelling or building is demolished under a contract which results in payment by a contractor to the city, the proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the demolition and any balance remaining shall be deposited by the director in the superior court of the county and shall be secured and disbursed in such manner as may be ordered by such court. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-109. - Procedure for collection of amount due on lien. 
    The city shall enforce the collection of any amount due on a lien arising under this article in the following manner: 
(1)  Amount. The amount of the lien shall be established as follows: the costs of administration to be assessed against properties and service shall be established by ordinance. 
The cost of vacating, removal, closing or demolition shall be the cost paid or incurred by the city in effecting action against any property. 
(2)  Notice of lien. The owner and/or parties, if they possess a recorded interest in the property, shall be served with a copy of the lien and shall be allowed to satisfy the amount due on such lien by paying to the city, within the 30 days after the perfection of such lien, a sum of money not less than twenty-five 25 percent of the total due on such lien, and by further paying the remaining balance due, together with interest at the rate of seven percent per annum, in three equal annual payments, each of which shall become due and payable on the anniversary date of the initial payment made as hereinabove prescribed. 
(3)  Transfer of property. Should such property be sold, transferred or conveyed by the owner and/or parties in interest at any time prior to the termination of the three-year payment period, the entire balance due on such lien, with earnest interest, shall be due and payable to the city. 
(4)  Nonsatisfaction. Should the amount due on the lien, or any portion thereof, be unpaid after it is due, or upon the occurrence of the situation provided for in subsection (2) above, the city may enforce the collection of any amount due on such lien in the same manner as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358 and other applicable statutes, which shall be subject to the right of redemption by any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon the property; all as provided by O.C.G.A. § 4804040. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-110. - Service of notice and orders. 
    Service of complaints shall be effected as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
(1)  Costs. The costs of service pursuant to this section shall be included in the sums otherwise due under this article. 
(2)  Service. Police officers of the city shall be authorized to perform the service of all documents pursuant to this article in the manner usually performed by sheriffs provided they follow the procedures established by statute for those officials, and a fee may be assessed against the property so long as it does not exceed the fee currently imposed by the sheriff of the county for that activity. Any notice pursuant to section 46-102, any order issued pursuant to section 46-104, or any other post-hearing action affecting property may be served upon the owner and parties in interest by certified mail (return receipt requested) to the address specified in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12, as applicable, and to the address of the property, if it is occupied on the date of inspection, care of "occupant". If any party has specified to the director prior to or at the hearing an address for notice, that address shall be used for notices. 
(3)  Failure to answer complaint. If the owner and the parties in interest neither file an answer to the complaint nor appear at the hearing, and a decision is rendered which affects the property, an advertisement shall be published in the newspaper utilized for city marshal tax sales for two consecutive weekdays that a hearing was conducted, a summary of the general findings of the hearing, the action required as pertaining to the property, and the consequences which may result from noncompliance with the code or notice. A notice may identify more than one property which was the subject of a hearing. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-111. - Superior court injunctions against order to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
    Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be held by the court on petitions within 20 days. The court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under O.C.G.A. § 41-2-13. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-112. - Eminent domain. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the state, or to permit any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. Procedures under this article shall not constitute exercise of the power of eminent domain by the city. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-113. - Right to enter and inspect. 
    The director, any person authorized to enforce this article, and any uniformed officer of the police department shall be empowered to enter any property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the condition or work being performed thereon or therein. If such entry is refused, such official may obtain an order ex parte from a judge of the municipal court of the city pursuant to an affidavit setting forth the (i) name(s) and address(es) of the property owner(s) and any party in interest, and the person refusing entry, (ii) the date and time entry was attempted, (iii) the reason why entry was not effected, (iv) the means by which and by whom entry is proposed, (v) the reason why entry is necessary, and (vi) the predicate creating probable cause that entry and inspection is necessary. The order shall specify a date and time for a hearing before the court to determine whether entry shall be immediate entry and inspection, whereupon such authority may then be granted. The order with a copy of the affidavit shall be served pursuant to the provisions applicable to service of subpoenas issued from the court. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-114. - Construction. 
    This article shall be cumulative of other ordinances and code provisions applicable to property and improvements in the city and shall not repeal other ordinances and code provisions pertaining to similar subjects and procedures. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Sec. 46-115. - Code of Georgia. 
    Any reference to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated or O.C.G.A. shall include any amendment to a cited section as subsequently adopted. 
(Ord. of 5-22-01, § 1(A)) 
Secs. 46-116-46-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED, STOLEN OR RECOVERED PROPERTY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 10, 1997(1), provided that the provisions of an ordinance adopted July 8, 1991, be added to the Code as a new Art. IV of Ch. 46. Subsequently, an ordinance adopted May 22, 2001, redesignated former Art. IV as Art. V. 

Sec. 46-121. - Authority of police to seize. 
    The police department of the city is hereby authorized and directed to seize and reduce to the possession of the police department any personal property, with the exception of firearms, automobiles, boats, and other personalty titled and registered by the state, whether stolen or otherwise abandoned, which may be found upon any of the public streets and highways of the city, or upon any public ground or in any public building in the city. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 1) 
Sec. 46-122. - Authority to sell. 
    All abandoned, stolen or recovered personal property, with the exception of firearms, automobiles, or personalty titled by the state, which shall remain unclaimed with the police department of the city for a period of at least 60 days, without being claiming or reclaimed by the owner, whether known or not, may be sold and disposed of at public auction as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 2) 
Sec. 46-123. - Notice to owner, redemption by owner. 
(a)  If, after the expiration of the 60-day period provided for in the preceding section, the said abandoned, stolen or recovered property has not been claimed, the chief of the police department, or his designated representative, shall prepare a written description of such property, including serial numbers if available, along with the date of such property's seizure and deliver such written description to the city clerk and finance director. 
(b)  After receipt of the written description of such property form the police chief, the city clerk shall, for a period of 30 days, make every effort to notify the owner of any such property and permit the owner to regain possession thereof upon proof of ownership and upon payment of any storage charges and costs connected with the seizure and storage thereof. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 3) 
Sec. 46-124. - Notice of sale. 
    If, after the expiration of the 30-day period provided for above, the city clerk has been unable to locate and notify the owner of any such property, the city clerk shall publish in the legal organ for the city and post at the city hall a description of such property, together with the date of seizure or taking possession thereof, and shall give notice that if such property be not claimed by the rightful owner thereof, and shall give notice that if such property be not claimed by the rightful owner thereof within 30 days from the date of the publication or posting, such property shall be sold at public auction as provided herein. The said publication shall also describe the date, time and location of the auction. The notice shall be published or posted for two consecutive weeks, two publications being sufficient. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 4) 
Sec. 46-125. - Method of sale. 
    All property sold under this article shall be offered for sale at public auction, to the highest bidder, separately or assembled in lots, whichever, in the discretion of the city finance director, shall offer the best price obtainable. Such public auction shall be conducted by the finance director at the place and hour designated in the notice given pursuant to section 46-124, and all sales shall be for cash. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 5) 
Sec. 46-126. - Report and record of sale. 
    The finance director shall keep an accurate record of each item of personal property sold under this article and the price bid and paid therefor, and shall make a complete report in writing to the city manager of the time, place and manner of conducting the sale. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 6) 
Sec. 46-127. - Disposition of proceeds of sale; time limitation for redeeming. 
(a)  The proceeds of any sale so made shall, after deducting the costs of storage, advertising, selling and other expenses, incident to the selling of such property, be turned over to the finance director and shall be retained in a special fund for a period of 60 days during which time the rightful owner, upon satisfactory proof of ownership, shall be entitled to receive any surplus proceeds from the sale of such owner's property. 
(b)  After the expiration of the period of 60 days any sums arising from the sales of property in accordance with the provisions of this article which are unclaimed by the owner of such property shall be deposited in the city treasury. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 7) 
Sec. 46-128. - Disposal of worthless property. 
    Any property which has been listed and offered for sale under this article and for which no price or sum has been offered, if deemed in the opinion of the finance director to be worthless and without value, shall be disposed of in such manner as the finance director shall prescribe. The description of all property destroyed or disposed of by the finance director as worthless or without value shall be reported to the city manager, together with the date and manner of disposal. 
(Ord. of 7-8-91, § 8) 
Secs. 46-129-46-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SIGN REGULATIONS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6; Signage restrictions for adult entertainment establishments, § 22-87; positing signs on utility poles, § 70-4. 

Sec. 46-135. - Enactment, title and purpose. 
(a)  Enactment. Be it and it is hereby ordained by the mayor and council of St. Marys, Georgia, under authority of article IX, section II, paragraphs I and IV of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and the amendments thereto, that the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia is hereby amended by addition an article VI to chapter 46, which article shall be entitled "Sign Regulations" and which shall contain provisions numbered section 46-135 through 46-142, the same being attached hereto and by such reference made a part hereof. 
(b)  Title. This article shall be known as the "St. Marys Sign Ordinance" and shall be an ordinance regulating, within the city limits of St. Marys, the condition, height, size, placement, and illumination of signs, defining certain terms used herein, providing for methods of administration, enforcement, and amendment, defining powers and duties of the City of St. Marys Planning Commission. 
(c)  Purpose. The purposes of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development, growth and tourism; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property and on tourists visiting historic St. Marys; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations. This article provides fair and comprehensive regulations that will promote safety by eliminating confusing, distracting and unsafe signs and assuring the opportunity for businesses to advertise in an efficient and cost-effective manner. 
    Sign regulations within the City of St. Marys are necessary to: 
(1)  Promote traffic safety and protect the general public from damage and injury caused, or partially attributable to, the distractions or obstructions impairing motorists' ability to see pedestrians, other vehicles, obstacles or traffic signs which are caused by improperly designed or situated signs. 
(2)  Promote and aid in the tourist industry. 
(3)  Allow signs appropriate to the planned character of each zoning district. 
(4)  Protect property values within the city. 
(5)  Create a favorable physical image. 
(6)  Improve the legibility and effectiveness of commercial and governmental signs. 
(7)  Afford the business community equal and fair opportunity to advertise and promote its products and services without discrimination. 
(8)  Create and maintain high quality commercial districts. 
(9)  Eliminate the clutter of excess signage. 
(10)  Protect our natural scenic beauty. 
(11)  Protect and enhance the unique aesthetic, cultural and historic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business. 
(12)  Regulate the construction, erection, maintenance and size of outdoor signs that may constitute a direct danger to pedestrians and property, especially during periods of high winds. 
(13)  Preserve and promote the public health, safety and welfare in St. Marys. 
(14)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth and tourism. 
    This sign ordinance is adopted under the zoning authority of the city in furtherance of the more general purposes set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  Validity and severability. Should any section or provision of this article be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the article as a whole, or any part thereof than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(e)  Repeal of conflicting ordinances. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 
(f)  Effective date. This article shall take effect and be enforced as of October 13, 2003. Enacted and ordained by the St. Marys City Council, St. Marys, Georgia. 
Signed: Attest: Mayor   City Clerk    
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-136. - Objectives. 
    These are the objectives, findings and conclusions of the city council considered in the formulation of the sign ordinance. 
(1)  Provide a reasonable balance between the right of an individual to identify his or her business and the right of the public to be protected against the visual discord resulting from the unrestricted proliferation of signs and similar devices. 
(2)  Permit the reasonable dissemination of all forms of speech. 
(3)  To guard against an excess of large, ugly, intense signs which cause visual blight on the appearance of the city. Visual blight adversely affects the aesthetic quality of life and traffic safety in the city for residents, businesses, pedestrians, and persons in vehicles. 
(4)  Protect the public health, safety and general welfare while protecting the rights of sign owners to expression and identification. 
(5)  Promote economic development. 
(6)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs. 
(7)  Insure that signs are compatible with adjacent land uses and with the total visual environment of the community. 
(8)  Encourage signs that are well designed and compatible with their surroundings and with the buildings to which they are appurtenant, and encourage signs that are integrated with and harmonious to the buildings and sites they occupy. 
(9)  Eliminate excessive and confusing sign displays. 
(10)  Recognize that the size of signs that provide adequate identification in pedestrian-oriented business areas differs from those that are necessary in vehicular-oriented areas where traffic is heavy, travel speeds are greater, and required setbacks are greater than in pedestrian areas. 
(11)  Preserve and improve the appearance of the city as a place in which to live and to work and as an attraction to nonresidents who come to visit or trade. 
(12)  Encourage creative and well-designed signs that contribute in a positive way to the city's visual environment, express local character, and help develop a distinctive image for the city, and to discourage mediocre and poorly designed signs. 
(13)  Encourage new and replacement signage that is appropriately sized in its context so as to be easily readable. 
(14)  Encourage the construction, alteration, and repair of signs according to accepted and approved standards. 
(15)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(16)  Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan. 
(17)  Further the attraction to St. Marys by tourists and light industry and maintain the historic and natural beauty of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-136. - Authority, adoption, and scope. 
    This article is adopted to serve substantial governmental interests of correcting and avoiding multiple problems that would occur without the regulation of signs. The regulations contained herein are no more extensive than necessary to serve the substantial governmental interests identified in this article. It is not the intent of this article to apply regulation to signs based upon the message that they convey. It is not the intent of this article to foreclose important and distinct mediums of expression for political, religious or personal messages. Furthermore, it is not the intent of the city, nor any of its boards, commissions, or agents, to regulate, in any manner, the message content of signs, except to the extent of obscenity or other messages prohibited by local, state or federal law. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-137. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, certain terms and words are hereby defined. As used in this article, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words and terms shall have the following meaning ascribed to them: 
    Abandoned sign: A sign shall be considered abandoned when the business activity or firm that such sign advertises is no longer in operation, does not have a current occupation tax certificate in effect, or within 30 days of the closure of the business. 
    Advertise: To inform, to notify, to announce, and to attract public attention by emphasizing desirable qualities in order to arouse a desire to purchase or invest. 
    Animated sign: A sign with action, motion, sound, or changing colors. This includes signs that blink, flash or fluctuate lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color; provided however, that this definition does not include automated changeable copy signs as defined by this article. 
    Area of sign: The area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure of similar character together with any frame, other material, open space, or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such writing, representation, emblem or any figure of similar character from the background against which it is placed. For double-faced signs, only the largest display face shall be measured in computing the sign area. 
    Automated changeable copy sign: A sign, usually freestanding, containing copy that changes at intervals. 
    Awning: A structure projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of rigid or non-rigid materials such as cloth, plastic or metal. 
    Banner: A sign with or without characters, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation applied to cloth, paper, or fabric of any kind with only such material for a backing. For purposes of this article, a banner is a sign. 
    Billboard: A sign that draws attention to or communicates information about a business, service, commodity or event that exists or is conducted, sold, offered, maintained or provided at a location other than the premises where the sign is located. A sign where the message, business, event etc. is changeable from time to time. 
    Canopy: A nonretractable structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other material, with frames attached to the building and/or carried by a frame supported by the ground. 
    Commercial message: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service or other commercial activity. 
    Deteriorating sign: Signs with peeling paint or faded paint. Signs not properly attached or causing a public safety hazard. Where a conflict exists in determining if a sign is deteriorating, the planning director will make the final decision. 
    Double-faced sign: A sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
    Expression sign: A type of sign, not otherwise specifically defined and permitted in this article, which involves the expression of any idea that could be characterized as free speech, and which is not related to a particular use of land. 
    Flag: A piece of cloth varying in size, color, and/or design used as a symbol, standard, signal or emblem. 
    Flashing sign: Any sign, except those defined by this article as a "changeable copy" sign, which is not kept constant in intensity of illumination at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
    Freestanding sign: See pylon sign. 
    Frontage, building: The width in linear feet of the front exterior wall of a particular establishment. 
    Frontage, road: The width in linear feet of each lot where it abuts the right-of-way of any public street. 
    Ground sign: A permanently affixed sign that is wholly independent of a building for support (i.e., freestanding). 
    Handbill: A printed sheet to be distributed by hand. 
    Height of sign: The distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign face. 
    Holiday decoration: Temporary decoration for any special religious day/period, local celebration, state celebration or national celebration. 
    Illuminated sign, direct: A sign illuminated by an internal light source that is viewed through a translucent panel. 
    Illuminated sign, indirect: A sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
    Inflatable sign: An inflatable balloon, blimp, or object used for advertising. 
    Lot: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separately owned, used, developed, or built upon. 
    Mansard sign: A sign attached to the mansard section of a roof that is the lower, mostly vertical portion of a roof with two pitches, including a flat roof with a mansard portion. 
    Marquee: A roofed structure and attached to and supported by a building and projecting over private sidewalks or private pedestrian travel ways. 
    Marquee or canopy sign: A sign painted on, attached to or hung from a marquee or canopy. For purposes of this article marquee signs shall be considered wall signs. 
    Monument sign: A freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is on the ground. The width of the sign structure can be no more than 120 percent of the width of the base. 
    Nonconforming sign: Any sign that lawfully existed on the effective date of this article but which does not conform to the provisions of this article. 
    Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    Permittee: A person and/or entity erecting a sign on the property of an owner and/or permittee. 
    Planned center, office, commercial, or industrial: A group of retail stores, service establishments, offices, industries, or any other businesses, institutions or activities planned to serve the public, which is in common ownership or condominium ownership. 
    Portable sign: A sign which is not permanently affixed, including but not limited to signs mounted or painted on vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of a sign. 
    Projecting sign: A sign projecting more than 13 inches from the outside wall or walls of any building upon which it is located. 
    Pylon sign: A freestanding sign that rests upon a pylon or pole(s). 
    Roof sign: A sign projecting above the coping of a flat roof, above the ridge of a gable, hip or gamble roof, or otherwise located more than 12 inches above the front building wall and supported by or attached to said roof. 
    Shopping center sign: A sign that identifies the names of businesses, offices, professionals, industries or other entities located within a planned center. 
    Sidewalk sign: A movable sign not secured or attached to the ground or surface upon which it is located. 
    Sign: A lettered, numbered, symbolic, pictorial, or illuminated visual display, device, or communication designed or used for the purpose of identifying, announcing, directing, informing, or bringing to the attention of others the subject thereon, that is visible from the public right-of-way of a county, city, or state road. 
    Sign face: That part of a sign that is or can be used for communicating a message. 
    Temporary sign: A sign of a nonpermanent nature. A sign of limited time frame, necessity and not permanently mounted following guidelines in 46-142. 
    Time, place, and manner restriction: Regulations to protect governmental interests unrelated to speech, such as size, shape, location, appearance, and number. Time, place, and manner restrictions on signs have a content neutral effect on speech. 
    Trailer sign: Any sign mounted on wheels and that may be moved from one location to another. 
    Wall sign: A sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface of which does not project more than six inches from the outside wall of such building or structure. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign. 
    Window sign : A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. For purposes of this article, the area of any window sign shall be measured on the basis of the proportion of area within each individual window frame, not the total window area of a building window visible from a public street. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-139. - Jurisdiction. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all signs erected within St. Marys or specifically exempted from compliance with this article. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-140. - Exemptions. 
    The following types of signs are specifically exempted from compliance with this article. 
(1)  Official flags. Official flags shall be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States for the Stars and Stripes, as applicable. 
(2)  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs installed within the right-of-way of a public street, and traffic safety and traffic directional signs along private streets driveways, and in off-street parking lots that are installed per the requirements of the city engineer or per city, state, or federal ordinance. 
(3)  Street address numbers attached to buildings (maximum letter height 12 inches). 
(4)  Any sign not visible from a public street. 
(5)  Signs pertaining to the time a business, activity, or establishment is open, and conditions under which patrons may receive service, including credit card identification signs or stickers up to one square feet in area per lot. 
(6)  Holiday decorations that do not convey a commercial message. 
(7)  Historical markers, monuments or signs as recognized by local, state or federal authorities. 
(8)  Paintings or works of art that do not convey a commercial message. 
(9)  Real estate, development, or contractor signs less than six square feet in area and related to the specific property upon which they are located. 
(10)  Political signs when the sign area is 16 square feet or less. Signs must be placed on private property and are prohibited from the public right-of-way by state law. Such signs shall not be erected within the city right-of-way. 
(11)  Grave markers, headstones, memorial statues or similar non-commercial remembrances. 
(12)  In commercial C-1 and C-2, one banner not exceeding 24 square feet in area mounted flat against the building that is removed at the end of the promotion and will not exceed 30 days. 
(13)  Signs located on the inside of windows intended for the purpose of disseminating information about special sales or promotional campaigns, provided that such signs are of a temporary nature and are constructed of such materials that clearly indicates that they are temporary. 
(14)  Signs shall be allowed on gasoline pumps so as to provide required information to the public. 
(15)  Home security service signs shall not exceed two square feet in area. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03; Ord. of 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 46-141. - Permits. 
(a)  Sign permit required. Except as specifically excluded from the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a sign permit. For purposes of this article, application for a sign permit and a building permit may be made simultaneously. 
(b)  Sign permit application. Applications for sign permits shall be filed, by the sign owner of his agent, in the planning and building department upon forms furnished by said office. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The type and purpose of the sign as defined in this article. 
(2)  A design of the sign that shows the height of the sign, the area of the face of the sign, and the structural supports of the sign. 
(3)  The street address of the property upon which subject sign is to be located. 
(4)  A site drawing of the property, on which the sign will be located. The site drawing shall include the proposed sign location and the distance from the proposed sign to property lines, structures, paved street surface, existing signs, and right-of-way. 
(5)  The square foot area per sign and the aggregate square foot area if there is more than one sign face. 
(6)  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located, and consent of the owner, or his agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of subject sign, which shall include a copy of the lease or other document from the owner of the sign which authorized the erection thereof and signed written consent. 
(7)  The director of planning or building department may require additional information, such as a print or sketch to insure compliance with this article. 
(8)  Name, address, phone number and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(c)  Building permit required. For any monument sign or any sign connected to electrical power, it shall be a violation of this article to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without first having obtained a building permit, except for those signs specifically exempted in section 46-140. The applicant for a building permit shall submit application materials as specified by the building inspector, including a sketch or print drawn to scale showing pertinent information such as wind pressure requirements and display materials in accordance with the Standard Building Code. The modification of a sign with existing electrical power will not require a building permit if the applicant is a member of a listed testing agency and has included this information in their sign permit. 
(d)  Signs permitted per zoning district. 
(1)  Residential. One non-illuminated professional or business nameplate for a permitted home occupation and not to exceed two square feet. 
(2)  Manufactured home. All signs permitted in residential zones. One illuminated or non-illuminated sign not to exceed 25 square feet per manufactured home park. 
(3)  Historic district. All signs intended to be located within the St. Marys Historic District are regulated by the Historic Preservation Ordinance No. 62. 
(4)  Commercial. All signs permitted in residential and historic district zones. 
a.  A maximum of four signs per lot. Of these four, two may be freestanding. The total area of all four signs is 300 square feet with a maximum of 125 square feet for a freestanding sign. The total area of a wall sign on the exterior front surface of a building shall not exceed 20 percent of the front surface of the building. The total area of signs on the side and rear of a building shall not exceed 50 percent of the exterior side or rear surface of the building. Wall signs exceeding 40 square feet in area shall be constructed of metal or other approved noncombustible materials per Section H111 of the International Building Code. 
b.  Projecting signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or other noncombustible material and securely attached to a building or structure by metal supports such as bolts, anchors, supports, chains, guys or steel rods. Staples or nails shall not be used per Section H112 of the International Building Code. 
c.  Building mounted signs may be placed flat against a building or on canopies, marquees or mansard portions of roofs. Regardless of where such signs are located, they shall be counted toward the maximum building mounted sign surface area. 
d.  Window signs may be permitted but may not occupy more than 20 percent of the window area. 
e.  Each sign structure shall be no less than ten feet from the property line or right-of-way line. 
f.  Maximum height for C-1 and C-2 is 35 feet. Commercial property signs within the corporate limits of St. Marys adjacent to an interstate have a maximum height of 80 feet. State and DOT regulations and policies determine sign height requirements on the property they regulate. 
g.  New billboards specifications: 
1.  Permissible locations: New billboards shall only be allowed adjacent to the following major highway corridors: 
i.  St. Marys Road between St. Marys Railroad main line and its terminus at Georgia Spur 40. 
ii.  State Route 40 between Kings Bay Road and Dark Entry Creek. 
iii.  Kings Bay Road. 
iv.  Georgia Spur 40 between 2nd Street and Kings bay Road. 
2.  New billboards construction requirements. These requirements also apply to replacing a billboard. 
i.  Billboards shall be not larger than 378 square feet. 
ii.  Existing billboards of 550 square feet or greater may be replaced with a sign no greater than 378 square feet in area. 
iii.  Existing billboards of 240 to 550 square feet may be replaced with a sign no greater than 247 square feet in area. 
iv.  Side-by-side or stacked billboards are prohibited. 
v.  All billboards shall be a minimum of 1,000 feet radially from any existing billboard. 
vi.  Maximum height of any billboard shall be 45 feet. 
vii.  The entire billboard structure shall be no less than ten feet from any property or right-of-way line. 
viii.  Embellishments or cutouts not to exceed ten percent of the permitted sign shall be allowed. 
h.  No more than one roof sign per structure may be erected and shall not extend more than five feet above the roof. Roof signs shall be constructed entirely of metal or approved noncombustible material per Section H110 of the International Building Code. The planning commission shall approve roof signs. 
i.  All signs for which a building permit is required shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the International Building Code and ICC Electrical Code. Plans for freestanding signs 30 feet or higher or greater than 150 square feet, shall be certified as to conformance with all structural and wind-load resistive standards of the International Building Code Chapter 16. All freestanding signage requires a foundation inspection. All signage including an electrical connection must have a disconnect switch located at the signage. 
j.  Combustible materials used in sign construction shall conform to the International Building Code Manual Appendix H107. 
k.  Establishments licensed under article I of chapter 10 of the Code shall comply with the following signage requirements: 
1.  Signs for adult entertainment establishments shall be limited to one freestanding sign not to exceed 25 square feet of copy area (total of all sides), and one wall sign not to exceed 25 square feet. Maximum sign height shall not exceed ten feet from ground to the highest point of the sign. Minimum sign setbacks shall be ten feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. 
2.  All adult entertainment establishments, as defined in the city's Adult Entertainment Ordinance, in addition to meeting the requirements and regulations contained herein, shall further comply with the specific regulations contained in such ordinance. In the event of a conflict between the regulations contained herein and the regulations set forth in the Adult Entertainment Ordinance, the latter shall prevail. 
l.  Establishments licensed under article I of chapter 10 Alcoholic Beverages, of the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia, shall comply with the requirements for signage contained in O.C.G.A. § 3-4-26(2014) for distilled spirits and/or O.C.G.A. § 3-6-25.1(2014) for wine. 
(5)  Industrial. All signs permitted in commercially zoned districts. 
(6)  Maximum height of signs. The maximum height of any ground sign regulated by this article shall be 35 feet per the International Building Code Appendix H109. No attached wall sign, except those exempted by this article, shall exceed the height of the tallest building on the lot. Commercial lots fronting interstate highways have an 80-foot height restriction 
No attached wall sign, except those exempted by this article, shall exceed the height of the tallest building on the lot. Commercial lots within the corporate limits of St. Marys fronting interstate highways have an 80-foot height restriction. State and DOT regulations shall determine sign height restrictions within property controlled by the state. 
(e)  Process for issuance of sign permits. The director of planning or building shall be authorized to issue sign permits in accordance with the provisions of this article. The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of both a completed sign permit application and a sign permit fee. For purposes of this section only, the term "process" shall mean to make a decision on sign permit applications that can be administratively approved. In no event, except with permission of the applicant, may the director of planning or building delay acting upon a sign permit application. Any delay in excess of 45 days shall result in an automatic appeal to the planning commission. 
    The director of planning or building shall reject any application containing any false material statements or omissions. Any rejected application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of original submission. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, the director of planning or building shall revoke said application and the subject sign shall be removed. A revocation pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to this article. 
(f)  Sign permit expiration date. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within 12 months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for a permit after the permit is issued. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application for the sign must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(g)  Sign permit fees. No sign permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the director of the department of planning or building and fees have been paid as adopted from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03; Ord. of 8-22-05, §§ 1, 5, 6; Ord. No. 2014-020 , 6-2-14; Ord. No. 2014-046 , 10-20-14) 
Sec. 46-142. - Temporary signs. 
    One temporary sign per street frontage lot or parcel may be located on the lot or parcel which is not occupied by a shopping center or multiple occupancy structure in C-1 or C-2 zoning districts. Except for those signs that are exempted in section 46-102, there shall be no temporary signs within shopping centers or similar multiple occupancy structures. A temporary sign may be located on the property 45 days per year. Days may run consecutive or randomly. The setbacks and height requirements for permanent signs shall apply to temporary signs. Temporary signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. Temporary signs shall not be placed in public parking spaces and shall not be an obstruction for sight distance. 
    Only one temporary sign permit per lot per month. No temporary sign may be erected in a residential zoned district. 
    The planning or building director may remove any temporary sign not removed upon expiration and the removal charged to the individual or enterprise responsible. 
(1)  Temporary signs permitted. 
a.  Sign devices allowed for up to ten days. The following types of signs shall be permitted only by issue of a sign permit, and a building permit and electrical permit if required, allowing usage of this type sign for a period not exceeding ten consecutive days, except as more specifically provided in this section. No such permit shall be issued for the same lot at less than four-month intervals. All signs must be set back at least ten feet from the right-of-way. A fee as may be established from time to time by resolution of the St. Marys City Council shall be charged and must be paid for each sign permit and any required building and electrical permits. 
1.  Air- or gas-filled balloons or other devices. 
2.  Two streamers or two pennants, per lot. 
3.  Flags or banners, not specifically exempted from compliance with this article, each with a maximum size of 32 square feet, not to exceed three on any given lot. 
b.  Weekend signs. Weekend signs shall be allowed without the necessity of obtaining a permit, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Such signs shall be allowed only on Fridays from 12:00 p.m. through Sundays until 6:00 p.m. 
2.  No more than one weekend sign shall be allowed on any given lot. 
3.  No such sign shall be located on any public right-of-way, and it must be on private property with the consent of the property owner. 
4.  Signs shall not exceed a maximum area of six square feet each. 
5.  For identification purposes the owner of said sign shall stamp or write legibly its name, on the backside or in a corner of the sign. 
6.  Such signs shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-143. - Administration. 
(a)  City occupation taxes, public liability insurance required. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the city, unless and until such entity shall have paid a city occupational tax or furnished proof of payment of an occupation tax to another municipality or county, reference section 22-24 of the St. Marys Code of Ordinances, and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the person or entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance. 
(b)  Termination of sign permit and/or city occupation license. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating the sign permit granted by the city to the owner and/or the occupation tax certificate of the person or entity erecting the sign. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no permit and/or occupation tax certificate shall be suspended, revoked or canceled except for cause as hereinafter defined, and the permittee is granted a public hearing before the planning commission. The permittee will be given ten days' written notice, by certified mail and return receipt requested, of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the suspension, revocation or canceling of such permit and/or certificate. "Cause" is the willful and/or continued violation of the provisions of this article. The termination of the permit and/or license does not in any way preclude the person or persons alleged to have violated the provisions of this article from being tried under the enforcement provisions of this article. 
(c)  Removal of abandoned signs. It is the intent of this section to establish reasonable time periods for the removal of abandoned signs. For purposes of this section, all signs pertaining to a business, service, institution, industry, or other activity that ceases operations shall be deemed to be abandoned signs. For purposes of this section, "ceases operations" shall be interpreted literally and to include cases where there is substantial evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds; provided, further, that this section shall not apply to any case where a business or activity is temporarily suspended and there is evidence that the business or activity will resume operations within a specifically designated period. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, the operator of a business or activity discontinuing a lease if any, and the leasehold manager if any, ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section and each owner, operator, or manager shall be considered individually responsible for compliance with this section. Property owners will be given written notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, of the appropriate procedures necessary for abandoned signs. 
(1)  All abandoned signs that meet the definition of a window sign, wall sign, off-premises directional sign, marquee or canopy sign, temporary sign requiring a permit, or temporary sign shall be removed within ten days from the date of discontinuance. The director of planning or building may permit an extension of this removal period only in cases where special equipment is needed to remove the sign and removal of the structure cannot reasonably be arranged by the sign owner within the ten-day time period. 
(2)  All abandoned signs that meet the definition of a pylon sign shall be removed within 60 days from the date of discontinuance. The director of planning or building may permit one 30-day extension of this removal period only in cases where special equipment is needed to remove the sign or sign structures, and removal of the structure cannot reasonably be arranged by the sign owner within the 60-day time period. 
(3)  This section shall not apply to the structure of a monument sign, provided that it might reasonably be used by a future tenant or property owner, complies with the provisions of this article, and is maintained in good condition; provided further, that the following shall be met: 
a.  If an abandoned monument sign contains a message panel that is removable from the monument structure without disassembling the monument, then within 30 days of the date of discontinuance said panel shall be removed and the portion of the monument structure that previously held the message panel shall be covered with durable cloth or canvas to avoid the appearance of blight, until such time as a new sign permit is applied for and granted and an approved sign panel is installed in said monument. 
b.  If an abandoned monument sign contains a sign copy area that is not removable without disassembling the monument, then said sign copy area shall be modified (e.g., painted over) or covered with durable cloth or canvas so that the sign copy pertaining to the business or activity discontinued is no longer visible, until such time as a new sign permit is applied for and granted and approved sign copy is affixed on the sign copy area of said monument. 
(d)  Removal of signs not maintained. All signs shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The director of the department of planning or building may remove or cause to be removed after notice any sign that shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or in the opinion of the chief building inspector poses a threat to public safety. The director of the department of planning or building or his designee will give the owner 45 days' written notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign or signs, except signs that pose a threat to public safety which shall be removed in accord with this section. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the director of the department of planning or building or his designee will have the sign removed at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03; Ord. of 8-22-05, § 2) 
Sec. 46-144. - Enforcement. 
    This article shall be administered and enforced by the director of the department of planning or building or his or her designee. In case any sign that is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted, or used in violation of any provision of this article, the director of the department of planning or building may, in addition to other remedies, and after notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of the city ordinance thereby requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court; institute the filing of a petition for an injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation. Additionally, the director of the department of planning or building may have the sign removed at the expense of the owner and may issue a citation for violation of the city ordinance to the agent that placed the sign, as well as those parties responsible for directing the agent, including the person or business owner whose name, message, and/or address, and/or telephone number appears on the sign. The city without warning or notice to the sign owner may remove any sign located within a public street right-of-way immediately. 
(1)  Penalty for violation. Any person violating any provision of this article, permitting condition, or stop-work order shall be subject to a fine up to $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-145. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs that met all legal requirements when erected may stay in place until the deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a threat to public safety, and no repairs have been effected within five days of receipt of registered or certified notice, return receipt requested, from the director of planning or building directing that immediate repairs are necessary to protect public safety. Any sign removed in accord with this section, or section 46-139, shall not be replaced except in accord with the current requirements of this article. 
(b)  Any nonconforming sign shall either be eliminated or made to conform with the requirements of this article when any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than 50 percent of the lesser of the original value or replacement value of the sign. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-146. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided by this section: 
(1)  Animated signs, not part of a permanent sign. 
(2)  Automated changeable copy signs, not part of a permanent sign. 
(3)  Flashing signs, not part of a permanent sign. 
(4)  Any air- or gas-filled balloons not permitted by this article. 
(5)  Portable signs not permitted per this article. 
(6)  Pylon signs not permitted per this article. 
(7)  Roof signs not permitted per this article. 
(8)  Sidewalk signs not permitted per this article. 
(9)  Streamers and pennants, except as specifically approved by special permit in accordance with this article. 
(10)  Signs that imitate an official traffic sign or signal. This includes signs that use colored lights used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(11)  Signs within the right-of-way, including those attached to traffic signs or telephone poles. 
(12)  Signs attached to trees, other natural features and utility poles. 
(13)  Signs attached to courtesy benches, trashcans, and similar devices, with the exception of signage related to the ownership of such items. 
(14)  Trailer signs. 
(15)  Banners except banners may be used as temporary signs. 
(16)  Any sign or outdoor advertising display that depicts any material which is obscene as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(17)  Any sign or outdoor advertising display that shows nudity as defined in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 
(18)  Signs illuminated in such a way that they cast intense light onto any residential premises or public roadways, or motorist vision. 
(19)  Reserved. 
(20)  Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, any window, door or opening used as a means of egress. 
(21)  All portable signs except as specifically approved by this article. 
(22)  State law prohibits the placement of any sign on city right-of-ways, including political signs. 
(23)  All signs prohibited by the Official Code of Georgia. 
(24)  Consistent with the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 Rev. Rule 585-89(7)(b), a private club should not advertise its facilities for nonmember patronage since this would be prima facie evidence it was engaging in business. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03; Ord. of 8-22-05, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 2014-046 , 10-20-14) 
Sec. 46-147. - Appeals. 
    Upon failure of the sign owner, lessee, or property owner to comply with this article, the planning and zoning director shall give written notice of intent to obtain a removal order, by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, to the sign owner, lessee, or property owner. Among other items, provided to the sign owner will be a written notice, certified and return receipt requested, to be and appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission to show cause why said sign should not be subject to a removal order. At such meeting the following will transpire: 
(1)  The planning and zoning director will provide the reasons why the sign should be removed and the sign owner will be awarded the opportunity to explain why the sign should remain. 
(2)  Afterwards, members of the general public may be granted the opportunity to speak at the discretion of the planning commission chairman. Thereafter, any member of the planning commission may make a motion to take action. 
(3)  Upon the motion being seconded, discussion will follow customary meeting procedures. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-148. - Amendments. 
    The city council may amend the regulations, restrictions, or any provision of this article. No amendment shall become effective until it is first submitted to and approval or disapproval recommended by the planning commission. 
(1)  Initiation of amendments. The city council or planning commission may initiate an amendment by introduction of a resolution, or by any official, board or other person by presentation of a petition to the planning commission. 
(2)  Application for amendments. The proper form on which to file an application for any amendment shall be obtained from the planning and zoning director. The completed application shall be filed with the planning and zoning director at least 32 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the request will be heard. Any recommendation purporting to be an application for amendment shall be regarded as mere notice of intention to seek an amendment until such time as it is made in the form required. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Sec. 46-149. - Public hearing procedures. 
(a)  All public hearings on sign variances shall be chaired by either the chairman of the planning commission or the mayor of St. Marys or their designees. 
(b)  A secretary shall record the proceedings of the public hearing. If requested by any party, transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. 
(c)  The record of the public hearing and all evidence submitted at the public hearing shall be recorded as such and become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
(d)  The chairman of the planning commission or his or her designee shall preside at the public hearing and shall identify speakers, maintain order, and conduct the public hearing. 
(e)  The process to be followed in conducting these hearings shall be as follows: 
(1)  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific sign ordinance amendment or variance being considered at the public hearing. 
(2)  When there are a large number of individuals wishing to testify at a hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limits on individual speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to all speakers. 
(3)  The presiding officer shall recognize the individual parties wishing to testify on present evidence and allow them to present this information. 
(4)  Once all parties have concluded their testimony, the presiding officer shall adjourn the public hearing. 
(Ord. of 10-13-03) 
Secs. 46-150-46-179. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 46-180. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provisions of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. of 10-25-04, § 1) 
Sec. 46-181. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article the following words and phrases shall be the meanings given in this section: 
    Hazardous waste or material: Any water or material which because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitation reversible illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
    Sanitary landfill: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, is disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
    Wellhead: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 10-25-04, § 1) 
Sec. 46-182. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
    There is hereby established a use district known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 100 feet. 
(Ord. of 10-25-04, § 1) 
Sec. 46-183. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection areas: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 10-25-04, § 1) 
Sec. 46-184. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 46-183: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street and driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 46-183; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(f)  Storm water infiltration basins; 
(g)  Underground storage tanks; 
(h)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. of 10-25-04, § 1) 
Sec. 46-185. - Administration. 
    The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to non-conforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 10-25-04, § 1) 
Secs. 46-186-46-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - WETLANDS PROTECTION 

Sec. 46-200. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Title: This article will be known as Wetlands Protection ordinance of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(b)  Purpose: The wetlands in the City of St. Marys are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion, and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; erosion control; natural resource education; scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. Nationally, a considerable number of these important resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Piecemeal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare of our community. 
    This article is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-201. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Generalized wetlands map : Means the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for City of St. Marys, Camden County, Georgia. 
    Jurisdictional wetland : An area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Jurisdictional wetland determination : A delineation of jurisdictional wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
    Regulated activity : Means any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredge or fill material into waters of the United States excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetland : Means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophilic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
    Wetland protection district : Means all wetlands within the jurisdiction of the City of St. Marys in Camden County, Georgia, as indicated on the wetlands map; provided however, that the wetlands map does not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of St. Marys, Camden County, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-202. - Wetlands protection district. 
    The wetlands protection district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of St. Marys, Camden County, Georgia that are mapped as wetland areas by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. This map shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands map and is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. The generalized wetlands map does not represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City of St. Marys, Camden County, Georgia and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-203. - Protection criteria. 
    No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the City of St. Marys, Camden County, Georgia. If the area proposed for development is located within 50 feet of a wetlands protection district boundary, as determined by the city staff using the generalized wetlands map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the USACOE determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or letter of permission is issued. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-204. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be allowed as a right within the wetlands protection district to the extent that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining, or dredging except as provided herein. (The activities listed in this section are exempted from Section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances.) 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided it does not affect waters of Georgia or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoors passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall be the pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(5)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2). Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-205. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses are not permitted within the wetlands protection district: 
(1)  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste of other contaminants. 
(2)  Hazardous or sanitary waste landfills. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-206. - Land disturbing activity and wetland protection. 
(a)  When wetlands assessment required: This section is intended to provide applicants for a land disturbing activities permit with notice when the proposed activity may require a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE) permit due to impact upon jurisdictional wetlands. The provisions in the following paragraph of this section shall not apply if the applicant can provide to the city a valid USACOE wetland delineation that verifies that the proposed activity is not located within jurisdictional wetlands, or if the applicant can provide a valid USACOE permit or letter that authorizes the proposed activity within the jurisdictional wetlands. If such evidence of compliance with USACOE permitting requirements is provided, the city shall follow normal procedures for issuing a land-disturbing permit. 
(b)  Wetlands assessment: Prior to the issuance of a land disturbing activities permit the city shall assess whether the proposed activity could result in a disturbance of wetlands and, if so, shall also assess whether the proposed activity is located inside or within 50 feet of a wetland protection district. 
(1)  If the city determines that the proposed activity could not result in a disturbance of wetlands or if the proposed activity is not located inside or within 50 feet of a wetland protection district, the city shall follow normal procedures for issuing a land-disturbing permit. 
(2)  If the city determines that the proposed activity could result in a disturbance of wetlands and that the proposed activity is located inside or within 50 feet of a wetland protection district, a USACOE jurisdictional wetland determination shall be required prior to issuance of a land disturbing activities permit. No land-disturbing permit will be issued without a USACOE permit or letter of approval. If the USACOE determines that the proposed activity would not require a USACOE permit, the city shall proceed with normal procedures for issuing a land-disturbing permit. 
(3)  Wetlands inventories as identified in the current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps for Camden County, Georgia do not necessarily represent jurisdictional wetlands within Camden County and cannot serve as a substitute for a jurisdictional wetland determination or wetlands delineation. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-207. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The provisions of the wetlands protection ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Planning Director or Building Director for the City of St. Marys. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-208. - Penalty. 
    Violations of any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-209. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the City of St. Marys Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(c)  Effective date. This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(2), Ex. A) 
Secs. 46-210-46-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 46-220. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Title: This article will be known as the "City of St. Marys, Georgia Groundwater Recharge Area Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  Purpose: In order to provide for the health, safety, and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate with the City of St. Marys, Georgia and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the City of St. Marys, Georgia and surrounding communities rely on as a source of public water. 
    Groundwater resources are contained within underground reservoirs known as aquifers. These aquifers are zones of rock beneath the earth's surface capable of containing or producing water from a well. They occupy vast regions of the subsurface and are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas in order to ensure that pollution threats are minimized. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-221. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this article: 
    Aquifer means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
    DRASTIC means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. (Note: the "DRASTIC" methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluation of pollution susceptibility.) 
    Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. Recharge areas are determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Hydrologic Atlas 20, Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, prepared by the Natural Resources. 
    Pollution susceptibility maps means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the department of natural resources, using DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land area of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
    Recharge area means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
    Significant recharge areas mean those areas mapped by the department of natural resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18 (current edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type and thickness, slope, density or lithologic contacts, geologic structure, the presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-222. - Establishment of the groundwater recharge area protection district. 
(a)  The groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City of St. Marys, Camden County, Georgia that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made part of this article. 
(b)  Determination of pollution susceptibility: Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium, or low based on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition. Said map is hereby adopted and made a part of this article. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-223. - Protection criteria. 
(a)  No construction may proceed on a building or manufactured home to be served by a septic tank unless the Camden County Health Department first approves the proposed septic tank installations as meeting the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resource for On-Site Sewage Management (hereafter DHR Manual), and subsections (b) and (c) below. (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-33-16(3) (k)). 
(b)  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimum set forth in DHR Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual. (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16.02(3) (f)). 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(c)  New manufactured home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (Hereafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in DHR Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in Sections A-F) of the DHR Manual (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16.02(3)(g)). 
(1)  One hundred fifty percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area. 
(2)  One hundred twenty-five percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area. 
(3)  One hundred ten percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
(d)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre- feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the natural resource and conservation service. (Georgia DHR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16.02(3) (e)). 
(e)  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided that [they] comply with all federal requirements. (Georgia DNR, EPD Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, 391-3-16(3) (d)). 
(f)  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types referenced in Sections 311/312 Hazardous Chemical Storage Reporting Requirements of the Emergency Planning and Community Right to Know Act (EPCRA) and listed specifically in EPA's Title III Consolidated List of Chemical Subject to the Emergency Planning and Right to Know Act and Section 112(r) of the Clean Air Act (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
(g)  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-224. - Exemptions. 
    Any lot of record approved prior to the adoption of this article is exempt from the minimum lot size requirements contained in section 46-223(b) and (c). 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-225. - Administration and enforcement. 
    The provisions of the groundwater recharge areas protection ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Planning Director or Building Director for the City of St. Marys. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-226. - Penalty. 
    Violations of any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Sec. 46-227. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Conflicting provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provisions of the City of St. Marys Code of Ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall govern and the other conflicting provisions shall be deemed repealed insofar as they would otherwise apply to the subject of this article. 
(c)  Effective date. This article shall take effect immediately upon its adoption. 
(Ord. of 1-9-06(3), Ex. A) 
Secs. 46-228-46-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - FORECLOSED AND VACANT REAL PROPERTY REGISTRY ORDINANCE 

Sec. 46-300. - Title. 
    The ordinance codified in this article is adopted by the city council, pursuant to the O.C.G.A. § 44-14-14, and shall be referred to as the "St Marys Vacant and Foreclosed Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-301. - Findings and intent. 
    This article is adopted to address the interest of public health, safety and welfare. 
(1)  The governing authority finds that there is a need to establish a foreclosure and vacant real property as a mechanism to protect our citizens health, welfare and property values in neighborhoods for all property owners. 
(2)  Due to the lack of adequate maintenance and security of properties that are foreclosed or where ownership has been transferred after foreclosure, the health, welfare, property values and quality of life of neighboring properties and residents are negatively impacted. 
(3)  Improperly maintained and secured foreclosed properties can become a hazard to the health and safety of persons who may come on or near the property and can adversely affect the aesthetic and economic attributes of communities. Difficulties also often arise in locating the person responsible for the condition of foreclosed or vacant real property. The governing authority finds that there is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety and welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the provisions in this article. 
(4)  This foreclosure and vacant real property registry will require owners and agents to provide the city with official information for contacting a party responsible for bringing foreclosed and vacant real property into compliance with applicable provisions of Municipal Code of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-302. - Definitions. 
    The terms agent , foreclosed real property , street address , and vacant real property shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A., § 44-14-14. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-303. - Registration of vacant or foreclosed property. 
(a)  Owner or agents of foreclosed real property or vacant real property, including foreclosed real property and vacant real property which is also residential rental property, are required to register such property with the St. Marys code compliance office within 30 days of such property becoming foreclosed or vacant real property by following the provisions of this section unless otherwise exempted by this article or state law. 
(b)  Any such owner or agent of foreclosed real property or vacant real property located within the jurisdiction of the city is required to file with the St. Marys code compliance office a registration form, provided by the city in paper or electronic format containing the following information: 
(1)  The real property owner's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(2)  The agent's name, street address, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The real property's street address and tax parcel number; 
(4)  The transfer date of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner; and 
(5)  At such time as it becomes available, recording information, including deed book and page numbers, of the instrument conveying the real property to the owner. 
(c)  Registration is required for all vacant or foreclosed real property unless otherwise exempted, pursuant to this article, but is not required for vacant or foreclosed real property within 90 days of such real property's transfer: 
(1)  Pursuant to a deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure; or 
(2)  To the first subsequent transferee after the vacant real property has been acquired by foreclosure under power of sale, or acquired pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(d)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-304. - Foreclosed and vacant real property exemptions. 
(a)  Registration or payment of any administrative fees of foreclosed real property pursuant to this article and Georgia law is not required of transferees as described in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any transferee who acquires any real property by foreclosure under power of sale pursuant to the O.C.G.A., § 44-14-160 or acquires any real property pursuant to a deed in lieu of foreclosure and: 
(1)  The deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure contains the information specified in subsection (a) of this section; 
(2)  The deed is filed with the clerk of the superior court within 60 days of the transfer; and 
(3)  Proof of the following is provided to the office or the officer in charge of the city foreclosed real property registry: 
a.  A filing date stamp or receipt showing payment of the applicable filing fees; and 
b.  A copy of the entire deed under power of sale or entire deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(c)  Any owner or agent required to register any vacant or foreclosed real property pursuant to this article or to Georgia law shall also be required to update the information specified in subsection (a) of this section within 30 days after any change in such required information regardless of whether the information provided to the registry was in the deed under power of sale or deed in lieu of foreclosure. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-305. - Removal from registry. 
(a)  Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property may apply to the city to remove a vacant or foreclosed real property from the city registry at such time as the real property no longer constitutes a vacant or foreclosed real property. 
(b)  Any application for removal allowed under subsection (a) of this section shall be granted or denied by the St. Marys code compliance office within 30 days, and if no such determination is made within 30 days then the application for removal from the registry shall be deemed granted. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-306. - Administrative fees. 
    Any owner or agent of a vacant or foreclosed real property which is required to be registered with the city under this article shall be required to make a payment of $100.00 for administrative fees to the city for the establishment, maintenance, operation, and administration of the registry. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-307. - Appeal procedures. 
(a)  Any owner or agent aggrieved of any determination or decision of the St. Marys code compliance office or the city in the administration of this article may appeal to the municipal court of the city. All appeals hereunder must be taken within 30 days of the decision in question by filing with the St. Marys code compliance office a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
(b)  The St. Marys code compliance office shall forthwith transmit the notice of appeal and all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed was taken to the municipal court clerk who shall schedule an appeal hearing within 60 days following the date the appealing party submits its completed written appeal with subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The municipal court judge may call for further information to be provided within the next 35 days following the hearing, and may continue the hearing for the purpose of receiving such information or for such other proceedings and reasons as the municipal court judge deems appropriate. 
(d)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the St. Marys code compliance office certifies to the municipal court of the city, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, the proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the municipal court judge on notice to the St. Marys code compliance office, and on due cause shown. 
(e)  The municipal court judge may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the decision, requirement, or determination of the St. Marys code compliance office appealed from by the owner or agent and may make such decision, requirement, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-308. - Administration. 
(a)  The foreclosure and vacant real property registry is subject to the Open Records Act of the State of Georgia and the city may make such registry information available online. 
(b)  Registration information shall be deemed prima facie proof of the statements contained therein in any court proceeding or administrative enforcement proceeding in connection with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-309. - Nuisances. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair, limit, or preempt in any way the power of the city to enforce any applicable codes, as defined in state law, or to define or declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-310. - Penalties. 
    Any owner or agent required to register a vacant or foreclosed real property under this article who fails to register or fails to update the information specified in subsection 46-93(a), of this article, registration of vacant or foreclosed property, may be fined up to $1,000.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Sec. 46-311. - Conflicts and severability. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. If any section, clause, sentence or phrase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2015-025 , 7-20-15) 
Chapter 50 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- On June 12, 1995, the city and county entered into an intergovernmental fire services agreement relating to the creation of a special tax district, maintenance of the fire station and equipment, extension of water lines, participation by the county E.M.S. life squad in calls for service, and other matters. An official copy of such agreement is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 34; emergency services, ch. 42; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(1); state-wide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200; providing of fire escapes by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-2 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; firefighter standards and training, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-2 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; electronic security systems installed and serviced by counties or municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-12. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Fire department. 
    The city fire department shall have the authority to: 
(1)  Protect life and property against fire, explosions, hazardous materials, or electrical hazards; 
(2)  Detect and prevent arson; 
(3)  Administer and enforce the laws of this state; the rules and regulations, and any ordinances and codes that are adopted by the city council that are related to the prevention and suppression of fires, explosions, or injuries from hazardous materials and explosions and the protection of life and property from such hazards; 
(4)  Conduct programs of public education in fire prevention and safety; 
(5)  Conduct emergency medical services and rescue assistance, subject to O.C.G.A. tit. 31, ch. 11 and subject to the approval of the city; 
(6)  Control and regulate the flow of traffic in areas of existing emergencies, including rail, highway, water, and air traffic; and 
(7)  Perform all such services of a fire department as may be provided by law or which necessarily appertain thereto. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 50-2. - Position of fire chief. 
    The fire chief of the city fire department shall be responsible for the direct administration and enforcement of the City of St. Marys International Fire Code, this chapter, and other fire prevention and protection rules, regulations and ordinances. The fire chief of the city fire department may appoint qualified members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The fire chief of the city fire department may also designate such number of inspectors as shall from time to time be authorized by the city. When used in this chapter, the term(s) "fire chief," "code official," [or] "fire official" shall include the fire chief and the chiefs lawful designees. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-3. - Powers of fire chief. 
    The fire chief, his designees and fire inspectors are hereby vested with the powers of police officers while acting in their fire department capacity, and are authorized to issue citations for violations of the International Fire Code, this chapter, rules and regulations, or other fire protection ordinances enacted by the city protection ordinances enacted by the city. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-4. - Duties of fire chief. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the fire chief, in addition to the general duties of section 50-42, to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city covering the following. 
(1)  The prevention of fires. 
(2)  The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive material. 
(3)  The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems, and fire extinguishing equipment. 
(4)  The maintenance and regulations of fire escapes. 
(5)  The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories, schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters, amphitheaters, and all places in which numbers of persons work, live or congregate, from time to time, for any purpose. 
(6)  The investigation of the cause, origin, and circumstances of fires. 
(7)  The establishment of fire lanes. 
(8)  Fire safety, and fire protection. 
(b)  The fire chief shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged and, as far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such a fire. Every fire shall be reported in writing within the fire department as soon as possible after occurrence of the investigated fire. Such reports shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the fire chief, and shall contain a statement of all facts relating to the cause, origin and circumstances of such fire, the extent of the damage thereof, and the insurance upon such property and such information as may be required, including the injury, death or rescue of persons. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 50-5. - Fire prevention scope. 
    The provisions of the International Fire Code, this chapter, rules and regulations, and other fire protection ordinances of the city shall apply equally to both public and private property, and shall apply to all structures and their occupancies, except as otherwise specified. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-6. - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate this chapter, to permit or maintain such a violation, to refuse to obey any provision thereof, or to fail or refuse to comply with any such provision or regulation. Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such act is that of the owner or other person in control of the premises. Prosecution or lack thereof of either the owner, occupant, or the person in charge shall not be deemed to relieve any of the others. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 50-7. - Inspections. 
(a)  The fire chief or his assistants and inspectors shall inspect or cause to be inspected all premises on a periodic basis for compliance with the International Fire Code, this chapter, rules and regulations and other fire protection ordinances of the city, and shall make such orders as may be necessary for the enforcement of the laws and ordinances governing the same. 
(b)  Additionally, upon compliant submitted in writing alleging a failure to comply with the International Fire Code, this chapter, and fire related rules, regulations, and ordinances, the fire chief or assistants or inspectors may enter in or upon any building or premises complained of for the purpose of investigating the complaint. 
(c)  Additionally, if the fire chief or assistants or inspectors has been deputized by the state safety fire commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12.1 then that person is further authorized to seek inspection warrants against non-cooperating parties pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-22.1. Inspection warrants may be issued by any judge of the superior, state, municipal or magistrate court upon proper oath or affirmation showing probable cause. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-8. - Order to remove fire hazard. 
    Whenever the fire chief or inspector, shall find in any building, or upon any premises or other places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulations of rubbish or unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings, or any highly flammable material especially liable of fire, and which is so situated as to endanger property; or shall find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or windows, liable to interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of occupants in case of fire, the fire chief or inspector shall order the same to be removed or remedied, and such order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such premises or buildings, subject to the appeals procedure provided for in this chapter. An owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a reasonable period after the service of the said order shall be liable to penalties as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 50-9. - Service of order to remove hazard. 
    The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant or owner of the premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy of same to such occupant or owner personally, or leaving it with any person in charge of the premises, or, in case no such person is found upon the premises, by affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place on the door to the entrance of said premises, such order may be served either by delivering or and leaving with said person copy of the order, or, if such owner, is absent from the jurisdiction of the officer making the order, by mailing such copy by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 50-10. - Submission of plans and specifications required. 
    Owners, their agents or designees, of all buildings and tenant spaces covered by this chapter are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall forward all plans to the fire chief's office for approval prior to construction. A final inspection and letter of compliance must be obtained from the fire chief prior to occupation or conducting of business. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 50-11. - Permits. 
    In accordance with requirements as detailed in chapter 4 of the International Fire Code, a permit shall be obtained from the fire chief to conduct certain operations described therein, or to store, handle, or use those processes described therein that are considered to present an extra or unusual fire hazard to life or property. Before permits may be issued, the fire chief or assistants and inspectors shall inspect and approve the receptacles, processes, vehicles, buildings, storage places or sites to be used for any such purposes. A $10.00 processing fee to cover administrating cost shall be imposed upon each permit application. The city shall revoke or suspend an individual or entity's business license for violation of this section. Violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00 and/or imprisonment of up to 30 days. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-12. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park or stand a vehicle within a designated fire lane. 
(b)  A fire lane shall be a 12-foot traffic lane closest to buildings and other structures, unless otherwise designated. The police chief or the fire chief shall be authorized to designate fire lanes within the city by the posting of signs or by marking upon the pavement or roadway, so designating the fire lanes, or by requiring the owner of the property to so designate the fire lane. 
(c)  This section shall be enforced by any police officer of the city. Citations for violations shall be issued by such officers. 
(d)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the municipal court of the city and shall, upon conviction, be subject to up to the maximum fine and/or the maximum term of imprisonment as authorized by the city's Charter. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-13. - Building numbering and identification for emergency response. 
(a)  Each one- and two- family dwelling unit shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the property, visible from the street providing general public access, the address of such dwelling unit in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background. 
(b)  Each multifamily (three or more dwelling units) building shall have posted and maintained in a conspicuous place on the building, visible from the parking lot or street providing general public access, the address(s) or number(s) of the building in figures at least six inches high on a contrasting background and each individual apartment/unit within the building shall be marked on or about its main entrance with the individual apartment/unit number and/or address in figures at least three inches high on a contrasting background. In addition to the above, where a multifamily building has more than one exterior entrance, each such entrance shall be marked, in figures at least three inches high on contrasting background, with the numbers and/or address of each and every individual apartment/unit to which access is provided through that common entrance. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Sec. 50-14. - Marking of utilities. 
    All buildings having more than one tenant space, or in complexes where utilities are not directly affixed to the building all electrical disconnects, meters and gas shut offs shall be marked by a permanent means with the unit number in which the device is servicing. The number will be at least two inches in height and on a contrasting background. The manner in which the device is marked must meet the approval of the fire official. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A)) 
Secs. 50-15-50-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- A motion adopted Aug. 11, 1997, abolished provisions formerly set out as Art. II, §§ 50-36-50-42, of this chapter, which pertained to liquefied petroleum gas regulations and derived from an ordinance adopted May 6, 1982, §§ 1-7. Section 1, Exhibit A of an ordinance adopted April 28, 2003, enacted new provisions as Art. II, §§ 50-41-50-43, as herein set out. 

Sec. 50-41. - Fire prevention code. 
    There is hereby adopted by the city council that certain code known as the International Fire Code. Reference to this chapter shall include the International Fire Code. This fire code is hereby adopted in its entirety and all codes referenced therein, save and except such portions are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended in section 50-43, and is hereby incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the incorporated area of the city. No less than one copy of the International Fire Code is filed at city hall and not less than one copy is filed in the office of the chief of the city fire department. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-42. - Adoption of state code. 
    In addition to above-referenced International Fire Code, there is hereby adopted by the city council the state minimum fire safety standards as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12 and all subsequent revisions thereof. This code is hereby incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the incorporated area of the city. Furthermore, it is hereby resolved that pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(b), the city will enforce the minimum fire safety standards as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a). 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Sec. 50-43. - Fire prevention code amendments and changes. 
    The International Fire Code is amended and changed in the following respect: 
Amend Chapter 1 of the fire prevention code by deleting sections 105, 105.1, 105.3, and substitute a new section as follows: 
SEC. 1-5 APPEALS. 
 Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit when applied for, or when it is claimed the provisions of the International Fire Code, this chapter, or other city fire-related rules, regulations, or ordinances do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the same has been misconstrued or improperly applied, claimant may appeal the decisions to the city council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia, within 30 days from the date of decision. 
(Ord. of 4-28-03, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. No. 2014-011 , 4-7-14) 
Secs. 50-44-50-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OUTDOOR BURNING 

Sec. 50-66. - Permit-Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to set, kindle, maintain, or authorize the setting, kindling, or maintenance of any outdoor fire without first having obtained a permit therefor as provided in this article. 
(b)  Permits will be issued beginning at 9:00 a.m. each day. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, §§ 1.1.1, 1.1.2) 
Sec. 50-67. - Same-Issuance; site inspections. 
(a)  Permits must be obtained from the city fire department. Permits may be issued over the telephone. 
(b)  If deemed necessary, an inspection of the site may be required before a permit is issued. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2.1.1) 
Sec. 50-68. - Same-Denial. 
    The fire chief or his designated representative has the authority to issue permits and may prohibit any or all outdoor fires based upon adverse weather conditions or consideration of risk of danger to the general health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2.1.3) 
Sec. 50-69. - Fires to be extinguished by sundown. 
    All permitted fires shall be extinguished by sundown on the date issued, unless otherwise specified by the fire chief or his designed representative. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2.1.2) 
Sec. 50-70. - Residential burning. 
    Residential burning may be no less than 50 feet from any structure. Adequate provision must be made to prevent fire from spreading within 50 feet of any structure. Burning materials other than leaves originating on the premises is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2.1.4) 
Sec. 50-71. - Combustible demolition or construction materials. 
    Destruction of combustible demolition or construction materials, either on site or transported to a burning facility, is prohibited unless approved by the director of air protection branch, state environmental protection division. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2.1.5) 
Sec. 50-72. - Land clearing burns. 
    All land clearing burns must be a minimum of 1,000 feet from any dwelling and conducted in a predominantly nonresidential area. Plant growth only may be burned. All other materials are prohibited. Burning shall be limited to piles no higher and no wider than 20 feet and no longer than 20 feet. A maximum of three piles may be established per nine acres. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2.1.6) 
Sec. 50-73. - Fire to be attended. 
    No person shall leave a fire unattended. The fire shall be under observation at all times by the person starting the fire, or his designee. Such person shall have a continuous water supply or other adequate fire extinguishing equipment readily available for use (e.g. shovel, axe, rake, heavy land clearing equipment). 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § 2.1.7) 
Sec. 50-74. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. If the violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate violation under this article. 
(Ord. of 11-14-94, § III) 
Secs. 50-75-50-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted April 5, 2005, added new provisions to the Code as ch. 50, art. II, §§ 50-37-50-47. As other provisions existed within the Code as ch. 50, art. II, the provisions of the ordinance adopted April 5, 2005, § 1, have been included herein as ch. 50, art. IV, §§ 50-91-50-101, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 50-91. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the control and containment of hazardous materials after accident or discharge. The purpose of this article is not to impose upon the city or any of its officers and agents, any obligation to secure or remove any hazardous materials from the city once safe containment of the material is made; and that nothing in this article is intended to relieve any owner or person in possession of hazardous material of any obligation imposed by state or federal law; and specifically, that nothing in this article shall be deemed to permit the possession, storage, or use of hazardous materials, except in conformance with all state, federal or local laws. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-37)) 
Sec. 50-92. - Application. 
    This article shall apply to all incidents involving hazardous waste or hazardous materials within the boundaries of the city, and to all persons who may possess such materials found within the city except as prevailing state or federal laws or regulations may take precedence and control over any such incident or person. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-38)) 
Sec. 50-93. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    Cleanup: The management, control, containment, recovery, removal or neutralization of any released hazardous material for the purpose of promoting or protecting public health or safety. 
    Hazardous materials: Those substances or materials in such quantity and form which may pose an unreasonable risk to health and safety or property, which may include, but are not limited to, explosives, radioactive materials, etiologic agents, flammable liquids and solids, combustible liquids or solids, poisons, oxidizing or corrosive materials, and compressed gases which are listed by the Materials Transportation Bureau of the United States Department of Transportation in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations, and any amendment thereto. 
    Person: Any individual, corporation, partnership, trust, or other legal entity. 
    Responsible party: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, trust or other entity partially or solely responsible for the release of any hazardous material within the city. 
    User: Any person who manufactures or transports, or owns, uses, handles, stores, or has the legal authority to control hazardous materials, specifically including their officers, directors, employees, and agents. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-39)) 
Sec. 50-94. - Duty to report. 
    Any person who causes or has knowledge of any discharge or release of hazardous materials from their safe container, in any manner which poses an actual or potential threat to people, animals, wildlife, vegetation, property, or the environment, shall immediately report the incident to the city fire department. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-40)) 
Sec. 50-95. - Cleanup. 
    The user or transporter of a hazardous material which is intentionally or accidentally discharged or released within the city shall, in addition to reporting the accident as required by section 50-94, take immediate action to cause the discharge or release to be cleaned up in an environmentally safe and scientifically sound manner, and to restore the site and the surrounding environment. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-41)) 
Sec. 50-96. - Intentional discharge or release. 
    The intentional discharge or release of a hazardous material within the city is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-42)) 
Sec. 50-97. - Cost recovery. 
(a)  Upon the completion of any cleanup or mitigation of hazardous materials in which city employees participated, all costs of the cleanup shall be itemized by each city department involved, including the fire department. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Charges for each responding vehicle but not limited to the fire department, police department, code enforcement, and public works. 
(2)  Replacement costs for equipment that is contaminated beyond re-use or repair. 
(3)  All personnel related expenses incurred by the city, including but not limited to wages, salaries, fringe benefits and insurance for full-time, part-time and volunteer employees. These personnel related expenses will commence when the affected departments begin responding to the incident and shall continue until all city personnel have concluded hazardous materials related responsibilities. 
(4)  Expenses of decontaminating and cleaning equipment. 
(5)  Technical consulting services specifically required as a result of the incident, including but not limited to technical experts or specialists not otherwise available to the city. 
(6)  Laboratory costs of analyzing samples taken during the incident. 
(7)  Costs of cleanup, storage or disposal of the released hazardous materials. 
(8)  Medical and hospital expenses incurred as a result of the incident. 
(9)  Legal, engineering, accounting billing, collection and other administrative expenses incurred as a result of the incident, including but not limited to recover expenses pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Upon receipt of these itemizations (including its own), but in no event later than 30 days from the date of the release, the city shall bill the full cost of the cleanup to the responsible party or parties. The bill shall include a description of costs incurred. Bills for less than the full amount of these costs shall be allowed, provided that the responsible party is advised of the reason therefore and the approximate date by which it can expect to receive a complete bill. Any amounts unpaid after 30 days will bear a late charge at the highest rate permitted by law. Further, if the owner of the real property upon which the abatement of the emergency took place is determined in any report to be responsible for the discharge of hazardous materials therein, then and in the event; any charge not paid within 30 days from the date of the incidents shall be a lien upon the land or premises where the abatement took place. If the responsible party contests charges, he/she shall have ten days from receipt of the assessment to give notice of appeal, in writing to the city manager. A hearing shall be held and a written decision made by the city manager within 15 days thereafter. If the party is not satisfied with the decision of the city manager, the matter shall be placed on the agenda for the nest regular meeting of the city council for further consideration. A final decision shall be made with 15 days thereafter. 
(c)  Each responsible party shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the costs of the cleanup for which they are responsible. Such costs may be collected by any lawful means including, but not limited to, appropriate court proceedings. All funds received from responsible parties shall be forwarded to the finance officer for deposit in the city treasury. 
(d)  Any and all costs recovered from a responsible party shall be separate from and in addition to any penalty that may be assessed for any violation of any provision of this article. 
(e)  The minimum charges for hazardous materials emergency response on behalf of the city shall be based upon the following schedule: 
(1)  Emergency response vehicles. 
a.  Ladder truck, per hour ..... $300.00 
b.  Engine, per hour ..... 250.00 
c.  Command type vehicle, per hour ..... 100.00 
d.  Service vehicle, per hour ..... 150.00 
e.  Police response vehicle, per hour ..... 75.00 
(2)  Specialized equipment/personal safety protection. Activities that require special protective equipment. Current reference to EPA/OSHA protection levels based on EPA protective ensembles: 
a.  Level A, per man hour ..... $200.00 
b.  Level B, per man hour ..... 150.00 
c.  Level C, per man hour ..... 100.00 
d.  Level D, per man hour ..... 50.00 
(3)  Emergency clean-up/containment response. 
a.  Manpower: Same as above. 
b.  Absorbents: Normal resupply fee. 
(4)  Contaminated equipment. The party responsible for the spill/incident shall be financially responsible for replacement of any routine or specialized equipment that becomes contaminated during response, containment, abatement and recovery efforts. 
(5)  Personnel. Reimbursement for personnel utilized during the spill/incident shall be at 11/2 times the hourly rate except as annotated below: 
Department head, per hour\$ 50.00 
(6)  Other types of vehicles. 
a.  Track hoe ..... $250.00 
b.  Back hoe, per hour ..... 200.00 
c.  Dump truck, per hour ..... 100.00 
d.  Hauler, per hour ..... 150.00 
e.  Vac Con, per hour ..... 250.00 
f.  Crew trucks, per hour ..... 50.00 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-43)) 
Sec. 50-98. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who fails to report, as required by section 50-94, shall be assessed a civil forfeiture not to exceed $1,000.00. Each 24-hour period that the incident is not reported shall constitute a separate violation. 
(b)  Any person who intentionally discharges or releases, or causes another to discharge or release any hazardous materials from their safe container, in any manner which poses an actual or potential threat to people, animals, wildlife, vegetation, property, or the environment, shall be assessed a civil forfeiture not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)  Any person who fails to take the action required by section 50-95 shall be assessed a civil forfeiture not to exceed $1,000.00. Each 24-hour period that a person fails to take action to cause the discharge or release of a hazardous material to be cleaned up, shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-44)) 
Sec. 50-99. - Use of costs and civil forfeiture collected. 
(a)  A special account will be established to accept these costs penalties, and forfeitures, this account will be utilized to provide additional training, equipment, and materials to aid in the mitigation of further incidents and releases. This account will be known as the hazardous materials mitigation fund, and will be administered by the fire department. 
(b)  All costs, penalties and civil forfeitures collected under this article shall be placed in the hazardous materials mitigation fund. 
(c)  Unless the proceeds of such funds are utilized for city-wide training to enhance the hazardous material emergencies' capabilities of the city, all city departments responding to the incident will be eligible for funding from this account, based upon amount of invoiced charges. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-45)) 
Sec. 50-100. - Emergency operations. 
    The fire chief of the city or his designated representative shall take, and be in control of, any actions necessary to mitigate a hazardous materials incident within the city, except where state or federal agencies have jurisdiction by law. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-46)) 
Sec. 50-101. - Enforcement. 
    The fire chief of the city or his designated representative(s) shall be responsible for enforcing this article. 
(Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1(50-47)) 
Secs. 50-102-50-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 13, 2006, amended the Code by the addition of provisions designated as art. IV, §§ 50-80-50-85. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as art. V, §§ 50-121-50-126, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 50-121. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate and restrict the use, sale and storage of fireworks, including sparklers, within the city to prevent adverse affects on the public health, safety and welfare of the city, on its citizens and property. This article is not intended as a de facto prohibition of legally authorized activities, but is meant to represent a balancing of interests between such lawful activities and the city's responsibility to assure the reasonable public health, safety and welfare and to protect the city and its citizens from the danger of fire. 
(Ord. of 3-13-06, § 50-80) 
Sec. 50-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section: 
(a)  Fireworks means any combustible or explosive composition or any substance or combination of substance or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, including blank cartridges, balloons requiring fire underneath to propel them, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, Roman candles, bombs, and other combustibles and explosives of like construction, as well as articles containing any explosive or flammable compound and tablets and other devices containing an explosive substance. 
    The term "fireworks" shall not include model rockets and model rocket engines, designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models; toy pistol paper caps in which the explosive content does not average more than one-quarter grains of explosive mixture per paper cap; nor toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices using such paper caps; or "sparklers" as further defined. 
(b)  Sparklers are defined as being constructed of wire or wood containing 100 grams or less of mixture per item; other sparkling items which are non-explosive and non-aerial and contain 75 grams or less of chemical compound per tube or a total of 200 grams or less for the multiple tubes; snake or glow worms; trick noise makers which include paper streamers, party poppers, string poppers, snappers, and drop pops each consisting of one-quarter grains or less of explosive mixture. 
(Ord. of 3-13-06, § 50-81) 
Sec. 50-123. - Sparklers regulated. 
(a)  Sale and storage. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to offer for sale at retail or wholesale, or to manufacture any sparklers except within commercial zoning districts as described and defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to store more than 50 pounds of sparklers except within the commercial zoning districts as described and defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
(3)  The storage and display of sparklers is prohibited within 30 feet of matches, lighters, or any other similar devices designed to produce spark or flame for initiating combustion. 
(4)  Any storage or display of sparklers must be accompanied within 50 feet by a fully charged and functional fire extinguisher. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to store, keep, or sell any sparklers within 50 feet of any gasoline or diesel pump, or gasoline or diesel filling location (where fuel tankers dispense fuel). 
(b)  Use. 
(1)  The use of sparklers is prohibited by any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership within or upon property classified and used as residential high rise, commercial high rise, or industrial high rise, as such classifications are described and defined by the city zoning ordinance. 
(2)  The possession or use of sparklers is prohibited by any person, firm, and corporation, association, or partnership within or upon any city property. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to allow any child less than 12 years of age to use sparklers without adult supervision. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership to use sparklers in a reckless manner, which creates a substantial risk of death or serious physical injury to another person or damage to the property of another. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to throw any ignited sparklers. 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to use any sparklers within 500 feet of any gasoline pump or gasoline filling station. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful to use any sparklers within 1,000 feet of any hospital, nursing home or day care center. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful to sell sparklers without having a sign with letters at least five inches in height stating, "NO SALE OF SPARKLERS TO ANY PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 18 YEARS OLD, PHOTO ID REQUIRED". 
(9)  It shall be unlawful to sell sparklers without having a sign with letters at least five inches in height stating "NO SMOKING" or the sign at least two and one-half inches in diameter depicting the international symbol for no smoking. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful to use any sparkler at any public event except as provided by section labeled "Public Exhibitions or Display of Fireworks" 
(Ord. of 3-13-06, § 50-82) 
Sec. 50-124. - Hours of use. 
    It shall be unlawful to use sparklers between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. from January 2 through December 31. On January 1, it shall be unlawful to use sparklers between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. of 3-13-06, § 50-83) 
Sec. 50-125. - Public exhibitions or display of fireworks. 
    Public exhibitions or display of fireworks, sparklers and sale and transportation of fireworks for such use, shall be allowed if properly permitted according to provisions of O.C.G.A ch. 25, art. 10. 
(Ord. of 3-13-06, § 50-84) 
Sec. 50-126. - Penalty. 
    All fireworks, manufactured, offered for sale, exposed for sale, or stored in violation of this article are declared to be contraband and may be seized, taken, and removed, or caused to be removed and destroyed at the expense of the owner thereof by the local police official. 
    Any person, firm, corporation, association, or partnership violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the City of St Marys Code of Ordinances. If the violation continues, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense under this Code. Each sales transaction in violation of this article shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 3-13-06, § 50-85) 
Chapter 54 - FLOODS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2014-001 , adopted Jan. 6, 2014, amended ch. 54 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 54, §§ 54-1-54-93, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from an ordinance adopted Nov. 24, 2008(3), § 1. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; civil emergencies, ch. 34; emergency services, ch. 42; environment, ch. 46; historical preservation, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98. 

Sec. 54-1. - Statutory authorization, findings of fact, purpose and objectives. 
(a)  Statutory authorization. Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City Council of the City of St. Marys, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(b)  Findings of fact. 
(1)  The flood hazard areas of the City of St. Marys, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(2)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(c)  Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Sec. 54-2. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Sec. 54-3. - General provisions. 
(a)  Lands to which this chapter applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(b)  Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(1)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated December 21, 2017 or latest maps as adopted by the city, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for Camden County, GA., dated December 21, 2017, are hereby adopted by reference. 
(2)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas in the City of St. Marys known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(3)  The repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located in the Planning Department of the City of St. Marys, 418 Osborne Street, St. Marys, GA., 31548. 
(c)  Establishment of development permit. A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(d)  Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(e)  Abrogation and greater restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(f)  Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(g)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City of St. Marys or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(h)  Penalties for violation. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $5,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of St. Marys, GA., from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-003 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 54-4. - Administration. 
(a)  Designation of ordinance administrator. The floodplain manager or qualified staff is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Permit procedures. Application for a development permit shall be made to the floodplain manager on forms furnished by the planning department prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
Specifically, the following information is required to be shown on the appropriate drawings or on related paperwork to be kept on file in the office of the floodplain manager: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 54-6(b)(2) and (d)(2); 
d.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of section 54-6(f); and 
e.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazards areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The floodplain manager shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Sec. 54-5. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the floodplain manager shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334, and the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended, require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection (c) of this section, then the floodplain manager shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor, including basement (if any), of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with this chapter. 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with this chapter. 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the floodplain manager shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 54-6. 
(8)  Obtain design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of this chapter. 
(9)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(10)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(11)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(12)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain manager shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(13)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the floodplain manager and shall be open for public inspection. 
(14)  If a portion of the structure is located in a SFHA, the entire structure shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(15)  If a structure is located in multiple flood zones and/or BFEs, the entire structure shall comply with the most restrictive requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Sec. 54-6. - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
(a)  General standards. In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction and substantial improvements that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater (not applicable in coastal high hazard areas). 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse and lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state and city requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(b)  Specific standards. In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with engineered or estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and substantial improvement of any structure including manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection (a)(4), "Elevated buildings" of this section. 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above two feet above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and the substantial improvement of any structure including manufactured housing, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation (not applicable for coastal high hazard areas) the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in section 54-6. An operation and maintenance plan shall be prepared to assure the continued viability of floodproofing measures. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels; (2) in new and substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 48 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (ref. subsection (a)(6) of this section). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions); or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (b)(1), above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 54-3(b), are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during the base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting analysis, technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (b)(4)a., above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and floodway (A-Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 54-3(b) where streams exist but no base flood data and floodway data have been provided (A-Zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  For subdivisions and developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivisions and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(2)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with subsection 54-3(b), then the floodplain manager shall obtain review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this chapter. Only if data is not available from these sources, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
(3)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(4)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated two feet above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 54-6(4) "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
The floodplain manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(d)  Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations and without designated floodways. Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 54-3(b), where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with subsection 54-6(b). 
(e)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). Areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 54-3(b), may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to at least two feet above as high as the flood depth number specified (in feet) on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 54-6(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The floodplain manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction and the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified flood level in this chapter plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in this chapter. An O&M plan shall be submitted to assure continued viability of the floodproofing measures. 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(f)  Coastal high hazard areas (V-Zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 54-3(b), are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (V-Zones). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge, therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation level. All space below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction or constructed with non-supporting breakaway walls. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with subsection (6), below; 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely anchored on pilings or columns; 
(4)  All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components, both (non-structural and structural). Water-loading values shall equal or exceed those associated with the base flood. Wind-loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the International Building Code, as amended; 
(5)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in this chapter; 
(6)  All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open wood lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated portion of the structure. The following design specifications are allowed: 
a.  No solid walls shall be allowed; and 
b.  Material shall consist of open wood lattice or insect screening only; and 
c.  If aesthetic open wood lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
(7)  Prior to construction, plans for any structures having open wood latticework or insect screening must be submitted to the floodplain manager for approval; 
(8)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with open wood lattice work or decorative screening, as provided in this section; 
(9)  There shall be no fill used as structural support, or to elevate areas used for septic tank drain fields. Limited non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The floodplain manager may approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully evaluated: 
a.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
b.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave deflection to adjacent properties; and 
c.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(10)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage; 
(11)  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes are not permitted within the City of St. Marys as per Ordinance No. 110), except in an existing manufactured homes park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of section 54-6 are met. 
(g)  Standards for subdivisions. 
(1)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; and 
(3)  All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(h)  Standard for critical facilities. 
(1)  No new critical facilities and substantial improved critical facilities shall be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(2)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(3)  Hazardous materials shall not be stored in the SFHA. The following materials are prohibited in the SFHA. Acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, prussic, magnesium, nitric acid, oxides of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sodium and sulfur. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Sec. 54-7. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The planning commission as established by the City of St. Marys shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the floodplain manager in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the St. Marys Planning Commission may appeal such decision to the court of proper jurisdiction as provided by ordinance or by state law. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The floodplain manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Sec. 54-8. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
    "Accessory structure" means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other nonhabitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    "Addition" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter or height of a building. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain manager's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in subsection 54-3(b). 
    "Base flood," means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, Al-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    "Basement" means any portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Building," see definition for structure. 
    "Critical facility" means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines; 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
    "Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, or piers adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during the base flood event. 
    "Existing construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 1, 1984. 
    "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before June 1, 1984. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood Insurance Study" the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    "Floodproofing," means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge and culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
    "Manufactured home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    "New construction" means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 1, 1984 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 1, 1984, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after June 1, 1984. 
    "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be: (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include: 
a.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    "Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Sec. 54-9. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2014-001 , 1-6-14) 
Chapter 58 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Power of county board of health to adopt and enforce rules and regulations, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-4(4); rules and regulations of local application, O.C.G.A. § 31-3-6; promulgation of rules, regulations and standards by Department of Human Resources and county boards of health, O.C.G.A. § 26-2-373. 

Sec. 58-1. - Special refuse disposal. 
(a)  Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from some other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall be decontaminated prior to removal under the supervision and direction of the county health department. Such refuse shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk containers for city collection until decontaminated. 
(b)  Hypodermic instruments. No person shall dispose of or discard any hypodermic syringe, hypodermic needle or any instrument or device for making hypodermic injections before first breaking, disassembling, destroying or otherwise rendering inoperable and incapable of reuse, such hypodermic syringe, needle, instrument or device, and syringe, needle, instrument or device, and without safeguarding the disposal thereof, by wrapping or securing same in a suitable manner so as to avoid the possibility of causing injury to the collection personnel. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88) 
State Law reference- Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; possession and use of drug related objects, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.2; transportation of biomedical waste, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253.1. 
Sec. 58-2. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter dealing with an act which is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
Sec. 58-3. - Tobacco use ordinance. 
(a)  Tobacco use in city buildings, vehicles, and within those areas of buildings which are operated or occupied by city employees, including leased office space, city motor vehicle of every type owned, leased, or operated by employees, elected and appointed officials, is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Tobacco use is prohibited within a distance of 25 feet from the doorway or enclosed area of buildings or facilities leased by or owned by the city. 
(c)  Each city department head may designate outside areas as tobacco use areas. In making these designations, attempts should be made to accommodate the needs of all employees and citizens who use tobacco products and those who do not that are using the facility while complying with subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  The city manager shall post "No Smoking or Tobacco Use" signs in all hallways, restrooms, and public meeting places. Employees and citizens should note that it is a violation of state law (O.C.G.A. § 16-112-2) to smoke in an area which has been designated with a "No Smoking" sign. 
(e)  The city's police department, and all other law enforcement officers, shall be authorized to issue citations to violators of any provisions of this section. 
(f)  Any person violating this section, or provisions hereof upon conviction, shall be punished up to the maximum punishment, which may be imposed for violation of a city ordinance; and in no case shall the maximum punishment of the violation of such ordinance exceed the fine of $100.00. The jurisdiction over violations of this section shall be in the municipal court of St. Marys, Georgia. 
(g)  As used in this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Electronic smoking device shall mean an electronic or battery-operated device that delivers vapors for inhalation. This term shall include every variation and type of such devices whether they are manufactured, distributed, marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah or any other product name or description. The term "electronic smoking device" does not include any asthma inhaler or other device that has been specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration or prescribed by a physician and used for its intended purpose. 
    Smoke shall mean the gases, particles or vapors released into the air as a result of combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization, including from an electronic smoking device, when the purpose of the combustion, electrical ignition or vaporization is human inhalation of the gases, particles or vapors. Smoke does not mean the combustion of material solely for olfactory purposes that does not contain any tobacco or nicotine or the emissions from a product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in mitigating, treating or preventing disease. 
    Smoking shall mean engaging in an act that generates smoke, such as having in one's immediate possession a lighted pipe, a lighted hookah pipe, a lighted cigar, a lighted cigarette, or having an operating electronic smoking device. 
    Tobacco product means any product in leaf, flake, plug, liquid, or any other form, containing nicotine derived from tobacco, which product is intended to enable human consumption of the tobacco or nicotine, whether chewed, smoked, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means. For purposes of this chapter, the term "tobacco product" excludes any product that has been specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other medical purposes, where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose. 
    Tobacco use or use tobacco products means the consumption of tobacco products by burning, smoking, chewing, inhalation, or other forms of ingestion or having in one's immediate possession a lighted tobacco product or having in one's immediate possession an operating electronic smoking device. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1; Ord. No. 2015-003 , 1-5-15) 
Chapter 62 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Mar. 8, 2010, amended ch. 62 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former ch. 62, §§ 62-1-62-178, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Aug. 25, 1984, §§ I-VII, XI. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-211 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; floods, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Heritage Trust Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-70 et seq.; historic areas, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-34. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 amended the title of art. II as herein set out. Formerly entitled Preservation of Historic Buildings. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 
State Law reference- The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; buildings presenting special hazards to persons or property, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13; grants to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; Facade and Conservation Easements Act of 1976, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.; Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.; powers and duties of department of natural resources as to historic preservation, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50; grants for preservation of historic properties, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.1; Georgia Register of Historic Places, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-50.2; Heritage Trust Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-70 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-35. - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of St. Marys is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the waterfront district and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance historical and aesthetic qualities of the city for the enjoyment of the city's residents and visitors alike; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal tax relief of property owners under relevant provisions federal law. In order to provide for designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and districts and to participate in federal programs to do the same; in order that the above activities will perpetuate the city's high quality of life for present and future generations. The Mayor and Council of the City of St. Marys hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When a definition is required that is not listed, the New American Dictionary, latest edition, shall be the source for the definition. 
    Alteration of structure: The visually observable change to any element of a structure within the designated historic district. 
    Building: A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail, or a house and barn. 
    Building official: The building department director or his designated staff of the City of St. Marys. 
    Certificate of appropriateness: A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission (HPC) of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Character: For the purposes of this article, character shall be defined as features of the structure and adjacent structures that contribute to the overall visual appearance of the street of grouping of the structures. 
    Code compliance officer (CCO): For the purposes of this article, any reference to code enforcement officer shall refer to the properly designated CCO. 
    Commission : The St. Marys Historic Preservation Commission or HPC. 
    Demolition and/or removal of a structure: The physical act of removing permanently any structure or any part of any structure. For the purposes of this article, the term demolition and removal shall have identical definitions. 
    Designated districts: A historic district or historic property. 
    Erection of structure: The building of, or raising of, any structure from the existing grade upwards or outwards or from any floor upwards or outwards. 
    Exterior architectural features: To include, but not be limited to, the architectural style, general design, height of the structure, mass of the structure, and scale of the structure, the general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
    Exterior environmental features: All those aspects of the landscape or the development of the site which affect the historical character of the property to include, but not be limited to, trees, walks, curbs, landscaping of any kind, trellises, sidewalks, curbs, exterior lighting features, fountains, carports, pools (in ground or above ground), heavy-duty playground equipment (fixed to ground), and/or signage. General gardening and planting of flowers and shrubs are exempt from this article. 
    Hardship: Hardship shall be as defined in subsection 62-200(b). 
    Height: Height shall be as per the zoning ordinances of the City of St. Marys. Height of the structure shall not exceed the heights noted in the zoning ordinance, but may be less. Lower height based on the historic character of the surrounding structures may be enforceable by the HPC. 
    Historic buffer district: An area of the city that borders the historic district, but is not within the physical and legal jurisdiction of the historic preservation commission. Structures in this area may be eligible for inclusion into either the existing historic district or within a new district as designated by council and approved by the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
    Historic district: Either the St. Marys Historic District or a geographically definable area which contains structures, sites, works of art or a combination thereof, which exhibit a special historical, architectural or environmental character as designated by the mayor and council or recommended by the HPC. 
    Historic district survey: An on-the-ground survey of structures within any designated historic district that identifies the salient features of the structures, listing all available historic and visual features of the structure in a format acceptable to the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
    Historic property: An individual structure, site or work of art which exhibits a special historical, architectural or environmental character as either designated or recommended by the mayor and/or council and/or the HPC. 
    Mass: The mass of the structure is its overall bulk and visual presence of all elements of any particular structure. Mass is related to scale in that some structures having large mass are in scale in certain instances and out of scale in other instances. 
    Material change in appearance: A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a property within a designated district or site may include any one of the following. All work shall be in strict accordance with Secretary of the Interiors "Standards for Historic Preservation": 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, height, mass, scale or facade of an existing building or structure or a historic property, including any of its architectural elements or details. 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a building or a structure. 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes as noted in paragraph (1) above. 
(4)  A change in the location of all advertising visible from the public right-of-way, including freestanding signs, window signs, wall-mounted signs, banners, etc. All signs in the historic district shall comply with all requirements of the City of St. Marys Sign Ordinance. 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
(6)  The construction or removal of exterior environmental features. 
    Object: An object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, moveable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Relocation of a structure: The physical relocation of a structure from its original site to a new site or location. Relocation or raising of a structure to comply with floodplain regulations is permitted. 
    Restoration of a structure: The repair of any element of any structure to its original appearance using identical materials or historically correct alternate materials as approved by the HPC. 
    Scale: The relationship of the structure to its surrounding site and/or structures. Scale is mostly a subjective analysis of the overall effect on the neighborhood of the introduction of any new structure into the existing built environment. 
    Site: A site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
    Structure: A structure is a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 62-37. - Penalty. 
    Violations of any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 62-199. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 62-38-62-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Boards and commissions, § 2-111 et seq.; zoning, ch. 110. 

Sec. 62-61. - Creation. 
    There is created a commission, the title which shall be the "St. Marys Historic Preservation Commission," referred to in this article as the historic preservation commission or HPC. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-62. - Position within city government. 
    The historic preservation commission shall be considered within the jurisdiction of the Community Development Department of the City of St. Marys. The ordinance from which this chapter derives shall supersede and replace, in its entirety, any and all past ordinances related to historic preservation within the City of St. Marys. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-63. - Members. 
    The historic preservation commission shall consist of seven members appointed by majority vote of the mayor and city council, who shall be full-time residents of the City of St. Marys for a continuous period in excess of one year and have a demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. There shall be no less than four members of the historic preservation commission who are residents of designated City of St. Marys Historic Districts as established in this article and subsequent ordinances. A maximum of three members of the commission may be appointed at large from the general full-time resident population of the City of St. Marys, of which, the mayor and council shall appoint at least one member from among professional members from the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archeology or other historic preservation related discipline such as urban planning, American Studies, American Civilization, cultural geography or cultural anthropology. Members shall serve three-year staggered terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms the initial appointment shall be as follows: Two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-021, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-64. - Powers of and authority of the historic preservation commission. 
    The historic preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within the City of St. Marys having the potential for designation as historic property. 
(2)  Recommend to the Mayor and Council of the City of St. Marys specific places, sites, buildings, structures, objects or works of art and districts to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts. 
(3)  Review and/or provide guidance for any applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Recommend to the City of St. Marys City Council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, object or work of art as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed. 
(5)  Review the change in exterior architectural appearance or exterior environmental appearance of any city-owned property within designated districts and sites. 
(6)  Monitor the condition of designated districts and sites and determine if a condition of demolition by neglect exists. If such a condition does exist, see section 62-178 herein, for process for correction of deficiencies. 
(7)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1-44-10-5). 
(8)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the City of St. Marys and on general historic preservation activities. 
(9)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the City of St. Marys City Council as the historic preservation commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources. 
(10)  Seek out state and federal funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the City of St. Marys City Council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
(11)  Submit to the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or historic districts designated and provide the historic preservation division whatever information is needed to nominate these to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(12)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the City of St. Marys Historic Preservation Program. 
(13)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the historic preservation commission; the historic preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(14)  Receive donations, grants, funds or gifts of historic property, and to acquire and sell historic properties; the historic preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent. 
(15)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city and/or the HPC as directed by city council. 
(16)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources and/or the coastal regional commission as applicable concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(17)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the City of St. Marys City Council, and enter into agreements to do the same. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-65. - Historic preservation commission's power to adopt rules and standards. 
    The historic preservation commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaw, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The historic preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to the ordinance from which this chapter derives. The historic preservation commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. The commission shall select a chairman and such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-66. - Authority to receive funding from various sources. 
    The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-67. - Records of meetings. 
    A public record shall be kept of the historic preservation commission's resolutions, proceedings and actions. The City of St. Marys shall designate staff from the community development department to take the minutes and provide a written record of all motions, discussion on the motion and vote. Community development department staff shall also coordinate the receipt of all information necessary for HPC review and for all notifications to applicant and adjacent property owners of any pending action or the results of any action by the HPC. Minutes shall be kept in electronic form by scanned written documents. Minutes are open records available to all citizens under the Open Records Act using the open records rules and procedures. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-68. - Conflicts of interest. 
(a)  The historic preservation commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City of St. Marys Charters. 
(b)  At any time the historic preservation commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other economic or vested financial or property interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(c)  If the community development director of the city determines that there is a conflict of interest as outlined in this section, he shall issue a stop-work order immediately and call an emergency meeting of the commission. The community development director will present his findings to the commission and the commission may either: 
(1)  Sustain the community development director and require that an application for certificate of appropriateness be resubmitted and approved before the project may proceed; or 
(2)  Overturn the decision of the community development director and allow the project to proceed without further delay. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-69. - Removal of members. 
    If a member of the historic preservation commission misses more than three consecutive regularly scheduled meetings in any consecutive 12-month period without written notification of the chairman of the historic preservation commission, the member shall be automatically removed from the historic preservation commission and the mayor and city council shall appoint a replacement according to the procedure outlined herein for membership. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-70. - Conflict of interest complaints or alleged ethics violations. 
    Any complaint of alleged conflict of interest or other alleged ethics violations against any member of the HPC, shall be immediately forwarded to the City of St. Marys Ethics Board for review and determination. The HPC will not be involved in the resolution of any matter brought before the ethics commission. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 62-71-62-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - JURISDICTION OF COMMISSION 

Sec. 62-86. - Designation of St. Marys Historic District. 
(a)  Since the St. Marys Historic District has been recognized in local ordinance by the City of St. Marys and by listing in the National Register of Historic Places since 1978, this document will serve as the primary jurisdiction for the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  The boundaries of the St. Marys Historic District shall conform to the boundaries as listed in the National Register of Historic Places and as per the map official identified as Attachment A, [on file with the city] which is incorporated into this chapter by this reference thereto. 
(c)  Evaluation of the properties within the St. Marys Historic District shall be by the HPC or their designated staff or consultant. Individual properties within the historic district shall be classified as: 
(1)  Historic (more than 50 years old and contributing to the historical character of the district). 
(2)  Historic-obscured (more than 50 years old, but not contributing to the historical character of the district due to unsympathetic but not irreparable alterations). 
(3)  Nonhistoric (less than 50 years old if possessing architectural character). 
(4)  Intrusions (structures of any age which detract from the historical character of the district). 
(5)  Vacant. 
(d)  The historic preservation commission shall, subject to available funding, keep an up-to-date listing of all properties either located within the district or any properties outside of the district that become older than 50 years from any given date. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-87. - Preliminary research by historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Historic preservation commission's mandate to conduct survey of local historical resources. The historic preservation commission shall have the authority to compile and collect information and conduct historic resources surveys within the City of St. Marys. 
(b)  Historic preservation commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the City of St. Marys City Council for designation. The commission shall present to the mayor and city council recommendations for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(c)  Historic preservation commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the historic preservation commissions recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the City of St. Marys City Council for designation, the historic preservation commission shall prepare a report for nomination in accordance with requirements of the Historic Preservation Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources that consist of the following items. The following items shall apply for new historic districts and/or properties as well as for expansion or amendment of existing historic districts and/or properties: 
(1)  A physical description. 
(2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and or aesthetic significance. 
(3)  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing, or historic, nonhistoric, vacant, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties. 
(4)  Representative photographs. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-88. - Designation of additional historic districts; amendments to or reclassifications within the St. Marys Historic District. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area by itself or which is contiguous to the St. Marys Historic District, which contains structures, landscape, sites, grave markers, works of art or a combination thereof which: 
(1)  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest. 
(2)  Exemplify the history of the city, the county, the state or coastal area. 
(3)  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city, such as a historically compact grouping of structures. 
(b)  Boundaries of historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be specified on tax maps; these boundaries will be included in the separate ordinances designating local districts. Boundaries specified in legal notices shall coincide with the boundaries finally designated. Districts shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(c)  Evaluation of properties within designated historic districts. Areas within historic districts shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Historic (more than 50 years old and contributing to the district). 
(2)  Historic-obscured (more than 50 years old but not contributing to the character of the district because of substantial but not irreparable changes). 
(3)  Nonhistoric (less than 50 years old yet possessing architectural character). 
(4)  Intrusions (buildings of any age which detract from the historical character of the district). 
(5)  Vacant lots. 
A list of properties in the proposed historic district and their classifications shall be included in every ordinance designating a historic district. 
(d)  Affirmation of existing zoning. This article is not a use ordinance, and local zoning laws, where they exist, remain in effect until modified. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-89. - Designation of historic properties. 
(a)  Criteria for selection of properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site or work of art, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the county, the state or coastal area, for one or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era. 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style. 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the city, the county, the State of Georgia, the United States of America or the coastal region. 
(4)  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, the county, the State of Georgia, the United States of America or the coastal area. 
(b)  Boundaries of historic property. Boundaries of a historic property shall be specified on tax maps; these boundaries will be included in separate ordinances designating historic properties; boundaries specified in legal notices shall correspond with the boundaries finally designated; historic properties shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-90. - General matters affecting the designation of additional historic districts, historic properties or historic buffer areas. 
(a)  Application for designation of historic district or historic property. Designations may be proposed by the City of St. Marys City Council, the historic preservation commission, or: 
(1)  For historic districts -A historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
(2)  For historic properties -A historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the historic preservation commission for designation. 
(b)  Required public hearings. The commission or the City of St. Marys shall hold public hearing on the proposed ordinance for designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the historic preservation commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten, nor more than 20 days prior to date set for the public hearing. A letter sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner of the property, as recorded on the tax rolls in the county tax assessor's office, and a notice sent via "attention of the occupant" shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(c)  Notification of property owners of proposed designation. Any ordinance recommending any property as a part of a historic district or as a historic property for designation shall: 
(1)  Describe each property to be designated, which shall include, as a minimum: 
a.  A physical description. 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and or aesthetic significance. 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, noncontributing, or historic, nonhistoric, vacant, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties. 
d.  Tax parcel number and other site related data. 
e.  Representative color photographs of all facades of the building and any significant details (digital ok). 
f.  Photographs of the streetscape approaching the site from both directions (digital ok). 
(2)  Set forth the names of all known present and historic owners of the properties to be designated. 
(3)  After designation of the area a certificate of appropriateness must be obtained from the historic preservation commission prior to any material change in appearance to the property as defined in the definition section of this chapter. 
(d)  Requirements regarding district boundaries. Any ordinance designating any property as a historic property, or as part of a historic district area, shall require that the designated property district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(e)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to the recommendation on any ordinance designating any property or district as historic, the historic preservation commission must submit a report on the historic, cultural, architectural or aesthetic significance of each place, district, site, building/structure or work of art to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. Once a historic district or historic property has been designated by the city council, the historic preservation commission shall work with the Coastal Georgia CRC area planning and development commission historic preservation planner to provide whatever additional information is needed by the historic preservation division to nominate the designated district or site to the National Register of Historic Places. 
(f)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made within 15 days following the public hearing, and shall be in the form of a resolution by the City of St. Marys City Council. 
(g)  The City of St. Marys City Council actions on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the City of St. Marys City Council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(h)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days immediately following the adoption of the ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each building, structure, site, object or work of art located within a designated historic district shall be given written notification of such designation by the City of St. Marys City Council, which notice shall apprise the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness for undertaking any material change in appearance of a property which is a part of a designated district or site. A notice sent via the United States Mail to the last-known owner of the property, as recorded on the tax rolls in the county tax assessor's office, and/or a notice sent via "attention of the occupant" shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(i)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including the mayor and city council, the planning commission and the office of building official and zoning official. The commission will also notify individuals and agencies throughout the city, the county, the state and coastal area likely to be interested in the ordinance. 
(j)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the historic preservation commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 62-91-62-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , adopted Oct. 16, 2017, amended div. 4 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 4, §§ 62-110-62-130, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-021 , adopted June 2, 2014; Ord. No. 2014-047 , adopted Oct. 20, 2014; and Ord. of July 6, 2015 . 

Sec. 62-110. - Definition of applicant. 
    The application for any certificate of appropriateness shall be in person by the owner(s) of the structure or parcel. In the event that the owner(s) are physically or mentally unable to present the application in person, a notarized letter authorizing another individual to represent them must be submitted at the time of the submission of the application. If the owner(s) or authorized individual as defined herein, is not present at the stated meeting, the application will be postponed without review until the next regularly scheduled meeting. Applications for any changes to exterior architectural or environmental appearance visible and adjacent to the public right-of-way within historic districts or historic properties shall be within the jurisdiction of the historic preservation commission. Applications for any changes to city-owned property within districts or sites shall be by department or board representative. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-111. - Approval of new construction within historic districts or historic properties. 
    After the designation by ordinance of a historic district or historic property, no new building or structures shall be constructed until the owner or occupant thereof has submitted an application for a certificate of appropriateness to the commission and the commission has approved it. These structures or developments shall conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and other exterior architectural features to the character of the designated district and site as specified in the commission's design guidelines. Decisions of the historic preservation commission shall follow any necessary approvals of the planning commission, according to chapter 110 of the zoning code and shall not override or supersede the requirements of the official zoning ordinances of the City of St. Marys without utilizing the procedures outlined in the zoning ordinance, chapter 110. All property directly abutting the project under consideration shall be notified in writing as to the presence of an application for consideration by the HPC. Notification shall be only to abutting property owners that share a property line, and shall not cross any street or right-of-way or major watercourse or feature. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-112. - Material changes to exterior architectural and environmental features on historic properties or within historic districts. 
(a)  After the designation by ordinance of a historic district or historic property no changes in exterior environmental features or exterior architectural features of existing buildings shall occur unless an application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted by or for the owner to the commission and approved by the commission. Decisions of the historic preservation commission shall not override or supersede the requirements of the official zoning ordinances of the City of St. Marys without utilizing the procedures outlined in the zoning ordinance, chapter 110. All property directly abutting the project under consideration shall be notified in writing as to the presence of an application for consideration by the HPC. Notification shall be only to abutting property owners that share a property line, and shall not cross any street or right-of-way or major watercourse or feature. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic property, which maintenance or repair does not involve a material change in design, material, or outer appearance thereof, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other laws, ordinances, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-113. - Disposition, alteration or removal of trees in the historic district or on historic properties. 
(a)  Disposition of all trees, at least ten inches in diameter, as measured at a point 48 inches above the ground, in the historic district shall be determined by either the HPC or the City of St. Marys Tree Board in compliance with this section. Within private parcels of the historic district, if there is an immediate threat to life or property, posed by a dead or dying tree, the community development director has the authority to have the tree removed. Within private parcels of the historic district, where a tree is dead, diseased or in otherwise poor health, as determined by the community development director, and is not considered an imminent threat, the tree board will have sole jurisdiction to authorize removal. Within private parcels of the historic district, where a tree is determined to be healthy by the community development director and requested to be removed by either the city or a property owner, the historic preservation commission shall have sole jurisdiction as to its removal. However, the HPC requires that for all live oak trees determined to be removed for any reason, one new live oak of minimum diameter of two inches shall be planted on the site. Replacement of other species of trees shall be replaced as per the requirements of the tree board. 
(b)  If a dead or damaged tree poses an immediate and/or imminent physical threat to the safety of the community, or danger to citizens, historic property or other property as evidenced by appropriate documentation by either a tree removal specialist, or the community development director, the community development director may authorize its removal without going before the historic preservation commission, with notification to the HPC, the tree board and the city manager. The city manager will notify council of this action. Documentation shall be in writing with appropriate data as necessary to state the reasons for the immediate removal of the tree(s). 
(c)  If the tree board is eliminated by direct action of council, all jurisdiction of trees on private property in the historic district or historic properties shall be transferred to the HPC. In the event of any conflict with the tree board ordinances, the HPC ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-114. - Guidelines and criteria for review. 
(a)  When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to exterior architectural and environmental features of historic properties or within historic districts, the Secretary of the Interior's "Standards of Rehabilitation" and the "St. Mary's Historic District Guidelines Study, June 30, 1986, by Galyon and Associates/PDM" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. 
(b)  Determine the classification of the property according to section 62-86, by year built, era in context and architectural style. 
(c)  If classified as historic or historic-obscured, the commission shall determine that: 
(1)  A property will be used as it was historically or be given a new use that requires minimal change to its distinctive materials, features, spaces, and spatial relationships. 
(2)  The historic character of a property will be retained and preserved. The removal of distinctive materials or alteration of features, spaces, and spatial relationships that characterize a property will be avoided. 
(3)  Each property will be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or elements from other historic properties, will not be undertaken. 
(4)  Changes to a property that have acquired historic significance in their own right will be retained and preserved. 
(5)  Distinctive materials, features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property will be preserved. 
(6)  Deteriorated historic features will be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature will match the old in design, color, texture, and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features will be substantiated by documentary and physical evidence. 
(7)  Chemical or physical treatments, if appropriate, will be undertaken using the gentlest means possible. Treatments that cause damage to historic materials will not be used. 
(8)  Archeological resources will be protected and preserved in place. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures will be undertaken. 
(9)  New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction will not destroy historic materials, features, and spatial relationships that characterize the property. The new work will be differentiated from the old and will be compatible with the historic materials, features, size, scale and proportion, and massing to protect the integrity of the property and its environment. 
(10)  New additions and adjacent or related new construction will be undertaken in such a manner that, if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. 
(d)  If classified as non-historic, intrusions, or vacant, the commission shall determine that: 
(1)  General design arrangement is in keeping with the district. 
(2)  Scale and massing are in keeping with surrounding properties. 
(3)  Context, texture and material of any architectural or environmental features involved in the change and the relationship thereof to surrounding properties do not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-115. - Submission of plans. 
    In order for an application for a certificate of appropriateness to be reviewed, it must be submitted at least 15 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the commission and as outlined on the historic commission's rules and regulations. The application for a certificate of appropriateness will be logged in by the community development director or designated staff on the day it was received and copies of all applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be given to the chairman and all board members of the historic preservation commission no later than seven calendar days before the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the commission. No application for a COA will be considered complete without a submission date. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-116. - Commission reaction to application. 
(a)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors as outlined herein and in other sections of the ordinance, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, scale, mass, context, texture and material of the architectural features involved in the relationship thereof to the exterior architecture style, and pertinent features of the site and other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(b)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would have identifiable adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(c)  The commission may make approval of a certificate of appropriateness conditional upon complying with certain situations which may be listed in the certificate. Such stipulations are to be used only to diminish the adverse impact of the changes in material appearance proposed in the application for a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-117. - Public meetings; notices; right to be heard. 
(a)  At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any adjacent property likely to be affected materially by the change in material appearance for which the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been made. All meetings of the commission at which applications for certificate of appropriateness are being discussed shall be open to the public. 
(b)  At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, staff shall post a sign on the parcel under consideration for any request for a certificate of appropriateness. The sign shall identify the parcel, note the nature of the request, and the date and time of the public meeting. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-118. - Interior alterations. 
    In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features, unless the applicant specifically requests same, or the interior is listed as part of the National Register designation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-119. - Technical advice. 
    When dealing with technical questions, the commission shall have the power to seek expert advice. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-120. - Deadline for approval or rejection of application. 
(a)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within not more than 45 days after the hearing of the application. Evidence of approval shall be a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of approval or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States Mail to the applicant at the address listed on the application and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the historic preservation commission. 
(b)  Failure of the historic preservation commission to act with said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. Applicant may request that the HPC postpone any approval or denial of the application beyond the 45-day period. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-121. - Necessary actions taken by commission upon approval of application. 
    When a certificate of appropriateness is issued by the historic preservation commission, the applicant shall submit drawings and specifications and all other required data to the Community Development Department of the City of St. Marys for receipt of a building permit. The building permit shall list on the face of the documents whether the property is in a historic district and if the certificate of appropriateness was approved with the date. Lack of inclusion of this data on the request for a building permit will delay processing of the application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-122. - Necessary actions taken by commission upon rejection of application. 
(a)  If the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after making said modifications. The same procedure shall be followed for resubmission as for a new submission using the data included in this chapter. 
(b)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official. In such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-123. - Signage within the historic district. 
(a)  [Sign provisions are as follows:] 
(1)  Purpose. In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of St. Marys is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the waterfront district and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance historical and aesthetic qualities of the city for the enjoyment of the city's residents and visitors alike; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal tax relief of property owners under relevant provisions federal law; in order to provide for designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and districts and to participate in federal programs to do the same; in order that the above activities will perpetuate the city's high quality of life for present and future generations, the Mayor and Council of the City of St. Marys hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of the article. 
(2)  Definitions. For the purposes of this article and except as may be revised herein, definitions of any term shall be consistent with the definitions contained in section 46-137 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of St. Marys. In the absence of any definition listed below, the New American Dictionary, latest edition shall be used to provide the proper definition. 
(3)  General. Any sign proposed to be erected within physical limits of the St. Marys Historic District regardless of the underlying zoning shall be submitted for a certificate of appropriateness (COA) from the historic preservation commission (historic preservation commission). The planning commission will not review or approve any signage within the historic district. 
(4)  Adherence to historic preservation commission guidelines. All owners or prospective owners of businesses or residential properties in the historic district must adhere to historic preservation commission guidelines whose sole purpose is to retain the historic character of the district. All signs visible from the public street or public alley and/or directly adjacent to the public street or alley shall be within the jurisdiction of the historic preservation commission. 
(5)  Criteria. When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness for new or revised signage in the historic district, the historic preservation commission shall use the criteria contained within this article. 
a.  For the purposes of this section, the term signs shall include banners, fixed signage, freestanding signage, flags, sandwich board signs, push-in signs, streamers, balloons, canopy advertising, umbrella advertising, mobile parked vehicle signage (but not including signs on vehicles doing business within the district), and similar advertising media. Sign requests shall be submitted on an application form as approved by the historic preservation commission with date of submission to the community development department. 
b.  Signs shall strictly comply with this section of Ordinance No. 62. 
c.  Signs shall initially be reviewed by staff of the community development department as to completeness of the submitted documents. Incomplete applications will not be accepted by the staff of the community development department or reviewed by the historic preservation commission. 
d.  Complete applications for any signs shall then be submitted to the historic preservation commission for review in public session with the historic preservation commission voting to approve or disapprove the submitted sign. The owner of the sign or representative authorized in writing to represent the owner, is required to be in attendance to present the application to the historic preservation commission. Owner or representative shall be authorized to make decisions for or on behalf of the owner. 
e.  Signs must not distract or detract from the visual historic character of the St. Marys Historic District and shall not obscure architectural details of the building and property. 
(6)  Specific regulations: 
a.  No more than two exterior signs per lot. Of the two exterior signs, only one may be pylon or freestanding. 
b.  All freestanding or pylon signs shall be considered a special use, under the requirements of a special use listed in Ordinance No. 110. In consideration of the special use, applicant shall note the height, size (not to exceed 25 square feet on one side), location, photographs of the location, type of construction, whether the pylon sign will block any historic features, illumination, and whether the sign would create a safety or visibility problem with pedestrians or vehicles as well as other factors that the historic preservation commission would need to consider before granting approval. Materials for freestanding signs should use materials that coordinate with the surrounding properties construction design. The base of said signs shall be shielded by plants. Materials for freestanding signs should be of wood or a material that closely resembles wood in appearance. 
c.  Other exterior wall signs shall either be attached flat against the wall or project at 90 degrees from the wall for maximum of 36 inches. Signs flat on the wall shall not project out from the surface more than six inches and not create a safety or visibility problem with pedestrians or vehicles. The total size of all wall and projecting signs is 40 square feet. 
d.  Multi-tenant buildings with separate doors to the exterior may post one sign at each main entry not to exceed two square feet. 
e.  Multi-tenant buildings with one main door to the exterior shall post one sign at the main entry not to exceed six inches by 18 inches for each tenant stacked vertically. 
f.  Signs may be illuminated from ground mounted up-lamps with no spillover of light that will affect pedestrian and vehicle traffic. 
g.  Backlit, neon, digital, LED, flashing, or changing illumination is prohibited whether located on the exterior or behind the glass and visible from the sidewalk or street. 
h.  Non-illuminated signage in the windows of exterior windows shall be no more than 20 square feet to enable visibility into the building for security purposes. 
i.  Signs with changeable or moveable letters/messages are not permitted. 
j.  Roof signs are not permitted. 
k.  Billboards are not permitted. 
l.  Freestanding signs (similar to sandwich signs) may not be located on sidewalks or on street rights-of-way or on medians. 
m.  One push-in real estate sign not to exceed four square feet located off of the public ROW is permitted. 
n.  Signs advertising businesses or activities not located on the same site as the sign are not permitted. 
o.  Businesses or activities located outside of the historic district are not permitted to post signage of any type within the historic district. 
p.  Paintings or works of art that do not convey a commercial message are permitted upon approval of the historic preservation commission. 
q.  Official flags. Official U.S. or Georgia flags shall be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States for the stars and stripes, or State of Georgia, as applicable. 
r.  Traffic safety and traffic directional signs installed within the right-of-way of a public street, and traffic safety and traffic directional signs along private streets driveways, and in off-street parking lots that are installed per the requirements of the city engineer or per city, state or federal ordinance shall be permitted. 
s.  Street address numbers attached to buildings (maximum letter height 12 inches) to ensure visibility for public service recognition shall be permitted. 
t.  Any sign not visible from a public street does not require historic preservation commission approval. 
u.  Signs pertaining to the time a business, activity, or establishment is open, and conditions under which patrons may receive service, including credit card identification signs or stickers up to a total of all such signs to a maximum of one square feet in area per main entry door. 
v.  Any signage regarding "official" sponsorship of any event held on a private property shall be limited to eight inches by 24 inches and not be placed within the ROW. Sponsorship signs shall be permitted to be placed only on the parcel containing the event a maximum of 30 days in advance of the event, with removal ten days after the event. 
(7)  Prohibited signs. The following types of signs are prohibited in all zoning districts of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided by this section: 
a.  Animated signs. 
b.  Automated changeable copy signs. 
c.  Flashing signs. 
d.  Any air- or gas-filled balloons. 
e.  Portable signs. 
f.  Pylon signs not otherwise permitted per this section. 
g.  Roof signs not permitted. 
h.  Sidewalk signs not otherwise permitted per this section. 
i.  Streamers and pennants. 
j.  Signs that imitate an official traffic sign or signal. This includes signs that use colored lights at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with, or construed as, traffic control devices. 
k.  Signs within the right-of-way, including those attached to traffic signs or telephone poles, trees, the ground, or vehicles of any wheeled or wheel-less type. 
l.  Signs attached to trees, other natural features and utility poles. 
m.  Signs attached to courtesy benches, trashcans, and similar devices, with the exception of signage related to the ownership of such items. 
n.  Trailer-mounted signs. 
o.  Banners. 
p.  Any sign or outdoor advertising display that depicts any material which is obscene as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
q.  Any sign or outdoor advertising display that shows nudity as defined in O.C.G.A. § 32-6-75. 
r.  Signs illuminated in such a way that they cast intense light onto any residential premises or public roadways, or impair motorist vision, as determined by law enforcement personnel. 
s.  No exterior outdoor advertising or interior advertising visible from the exterior shall be erected in the city advertising or promoting the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
t.  Signs shall not be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, any window, door or opening used as a means of egress. 
u.  State law prohibits the placement of any sign on city rights-of-way, including political signs. Signs on the city or state rights-of-way are considered littering and a misdemeanor and be subject to the fines for littering and for removal costs as noted herein. 
v.  All signs prohibited by the Official Code of Georgia. 
w.  Consistent with the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 Rev. Rule 585-89(7)(b), a private club should not advertise its facilities for nonmember patronage since this would be prima facie evidence it was engaging in business. 
x.  Push in signs for any purpose (except real estate signs and signs not to exceed two square feet per sign for any registered candidate for any city, county, or federal election) are not permitted within the historic district or on privately owned property or within the street right-of-way (ROW). 
(8)  Administration. 
a.  All signs erected within the St. Marys Historic District must have approval of the historic preservation commission. 
b.  A certificate of appropriateness (COA) application in a form approved by the historic preservation commission must be completed, submitted to the planning community development director or designated staff member for completeness at least 15 days in advance of the regularly scheduled monthly meeting. 
c.  The application will be reviewed and approved by the historic preservation commission at their regularly scheduled monthly meeting. 
d.  The applicant for a COA must be in attendance to present their application. A written letter of authorization for another to represent them can be provided should the applicant wish to have another represent them. 
e.  Upon approval, all signs must conform to the regulations of this article. 
f.  The community development director or designated staff member shall be authorized to issue sign permits after approval by the historic preservation commission in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
g.  The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of both a completed and approved COA and a sign permit fee. In no event, except with permission of the applicant, may the community development director or designated staff member delay acting upon a sign permit application. 
h.  The community development director or designated staff member shall reject any application containing any false material statements or omissions. Any rejected application later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of re-submission, instead of original submission. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an application containing a false material statement or omission, the community development director or designated staff member shall revoke said application and the subject sign shall be removed. A revocation pursuant to this section shall be appealable pursuant to this article. 
i.  Sign permit expiration date. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within 12 months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for a permit after the permit is issued. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application for the sign must be processed, the approval process restarted from the beginning, and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
j.  Sign permit fees. No sign permit shall be issued until the appropriate application has been filed with the development director or designated staff member and fees have been paid as adopted from time to time by the St. Marys City Council. 
k.  Upon failure of the sign owner, lessee, or property owner to comply with this article, the community development director shall give written notice of intent to obtain a removal order, by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, to the sign owner, lessee, or property owner. Among other items, provided to the sign owner will be a written notice, certified and return receipt requested, to be and appear at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the historic preservation commission to show cause why said sign should not be subject to a removal order. At such meeting the following will transpire: 
1.  The community development director will provide the reasons why the sign should be removed and the sign owner will be awarded the opportunity to explain why the sign should remain. 
2.  Afterwards, members of the general public may be granted the opportunity to speak at the discretion of the historic preservation commission chairperson. Thereafter, any member of the historic preservation commission may make a motion to take action. 
3.  Upon the motion being seconded, discussion will follow customary meeting procedures as contained elsewhere in chapter 62 - Historic Preservation. 
(9)  Nonconforming signs. 
a.  Nonconforming signs that met all legal requirements when erected may stay in place until the deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a threat to public safety, and no repairs have been effected within five days of receipt of registered or certified notice, return receipt requested, from the community development department directing that immediate repairs are necessary to protect public safety. Any sign removed in accord with this section, shall not be replaced except in accord with the current requirements of this article. 
b.  Any nonconforming sign shall either be eliminated, or made to conform to the requirements of this article, when any proposed change, repair, or maintenance would constitute an expense of more than 50 percent of the lesser of the original value or replacement value of the sign. 
(10)  Enforcement. This article shall be administered and enforced by the community development director or his or her designee. In case any sign that is proposed to be erected, constructed, altered, converted, or used in violation of any provision of this article, the community development director may, in addition to other remedies, and after notice to the appropriate person, issue a citation for violation of the city ordinance thereby requiring the presence of the violator in municipal court; institute the filing of a petition for an injunction, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, alteration, conversion, or use to correct or abate such violation. Additionally, the director of the department of planning or building may have the sign removed at the expense of the owner with a lien filed against the property, and may issue a citation for violation of the city ordinance to the agent that placed the sign, as well as those parties responsible for directing the agent, including the person or business owner whose name, message, and/or address, and/or telephone number appears on the sign. 
a.  The city, without warning or notice to the sign owner, may remove any sign located within a public street right-of-way immediately. Signs so removed shall be immediately destroyed without any consideration of compensation to the sign owner, known or unknown. 
b.  Penalty for violation. Any person violating any provision of this article or conditions of the issued permit, or stop-work order shall be subject to a fine up to $1,000.00 per violation per day or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
c.  City occupation taxes, public liability insurance required. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to engage in the business of erecting or maintaining signs within the city, unless and until such entity shall have paid a city occupational tax or furnished proof of payment of an occupation tax to another municipality or county, reference section 22-24 of the St. Marys Code of Ordinances, and a certificate of insurance from an insurance company authorized to do business in the state evidencing that the person or entity has in effect public liability and property damage insurance. 
d.  Termination of sign permit and/or city occupation license. Violation of any provision of this article will be grounds for terminating the sign permit granted by the city to the owner and/or the occupation tax certificate of the person or entity erecting the sign. Except as otherwise provided in this article, no permit and/or occupation tax certificate shall be suspended, revoked or canceled except for cause as hereinafter defined, and the permittee is granted a public hearing before the planning commission. The permittee will be given ten days' written notice, by certified mail and return receipt requested, of the time, place and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the suspension, revocation or canceling of such permit and/or certificate. "Cause" is the willful and/or continued violation of the provisions of this article. The termination of the permit and/or license does not in any way preclude the person or persons alleged to have violated the provisions of this article from being tried under the enforcement provisions of this article. Should a permittee fail to pick up the certified mail, and said mail is returned, this failure to pick up will not delay the termination action or create any defense to stay any enforcement action. 
e.  Removal of abandoned signs. It is the intent of this section to establish reasonable time periods for the removal of abandoned signs. For purposes of this section, all signs pertaining to a business, service, institution, industry, or other activity that ceases operations shall be deemed to be abandoned. For purposes of this section, "ceases operations" shall be interpreted literally and to include cases where there is substantial evidence that a business or activity has vacated the building or grounds; provided, further, that this section shall not apply to any case where a business or activity is temporarily suspended and there is evidence that the business or activity will resume operations within a specifically designated period. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner, the operator of a business or activity discontinuing a lease if any, and the leasehold manager if any, ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section and each owner, operator, or manager shall be considered individually responsible for compliance with this section. Property owners will be given written notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, of the appropriate procedures necessary for abandoned signs. Should a property owner fail to pick up the certified mail, and said mail is returned, this failure to pick up will not delay the termination action or create any defense to stay any enforcement action. 
1.  All abandoned signs that meet the definition of a window sign, wall sign, off-premises directional sign, marquee or canopy sign, temporary sign requiring a permit, or temporary sign, shall be removed within ten days from the date of discontinuance. The community development director may permit an extension of this removal period only in cases where special equipment is needed to remove the sign and removal of the sign structure cannot reasonably be arranged by the sign owner within the ten-day time period. 
2.  All abandoned signs that meet the definition of a pylon sign shall be removed within 60 days from the date of discontinuance. The community development director may permit one 30-day extension of this removal period only in cases where special equipment is needed to remove the sign or sign structures, and removal of the structure cannot reasonably be arranged by the sign owner within the 60-day time period. 
3.  This section shall not apply to the structure of a monument sign, provided that it might reasonably be used by a future tenant or property owner, complies with the provisions of this article, and is maintained in good condition; provided further, that the following shall be met: 
(i)  If an abandoned monument sign contains a message panel that is removable from the monument structure without disassembling the monument, then within 30 days of the date of discontinuance said panel shall be removed and the portion of the monument structure that previously held the message panel shall be covered with durable cloth or canvas to avoid the appearance of blight, until such time as a new sign permit is applied for and granted and an approved sign panel is installed in said monument. 
(ii)  If an abandoned monument sign contains a sign copy area that is not removable without disassembling the monument, then said sign copy area shall be modified (e.g., painted over) or covered with durable cloth or canvas so that the sign copy pertaining to the business or activity discontinued is no longer visible, until such time as a new sign permit is applied for and granted and approved sign copy is affixed on the sign copy area of said monument. 
(iii)  Removal of signs not maintained. All signs shall be maintained by the property owner in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The community development director may remove or cause to be removed, after proper written notice, any sign that shows gross neglect, becomes dilapidated, or in the opinion of the chief building inspector poses a threat to public safety. The community development director or his designee will give the owner 45 days written notice, by certified mail with return receipt requested, to correct the deficiencies or to remove the sign or signs, except signs that pose a threat to public safety which shall be removed in accord with this section. If the owner refuses to correct the deficiencies or remove the sign, the community development director or his designee will have the sign removed at the expense of the owner, with a lien filed against the property. Should a permittee fail to pick up the certified mail, and said mail is returned, this failure to pick up will not delay the termination action or create any defense to stay any enforcement action. 
(b)  When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness for new signage, the sign ordinance of the City of St. Marys will be used along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. Signs shall be as designated in the sign ordinance, and shall include banners, pole-mounted signs, building-mounted signs, flags (but not including U.S. flags) signs painted in windows, murals, seasonal and sale signs and sandwich board signs. Except for directional or public safety (public ROW), real estate (on private property), political (on private property with owner's permission), and personal (on private property) push in signs, all other types of push in signs are not permitted at any time in the historic district. Electronic flashing signs are not permitted at any time in the historic district. All signs shall be approved by the HPC as well as comply with the sign ordinance as administered by the community development department. Signs shall be as designated in the sign ordinance, and shall include banners, pole-mounted signs, building-mounted signs, flags (but not including U.S. flags) signs painted in windows, murals, seasonal and sale signs and sandwich board signs. 
(c)  All facades of the building and all structures or other site features visible from the public street or public alley and directly adjacent to the public street or alley shall be within the jurisdiction of the historic preservation commission. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-124. - Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness, shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is not performed in accordance with such certificate, the community development director shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(b)  The community development director shall issue stop-work orders for projects within the jurisdiction of the commission if: 
(1)  Work has begun which requires a certificate of appropriateness without such certificate. 
(2)  Work has begun with an expired certificate of appropriateness. It is done not in accordance with an issued certificate of appropriateness. 
(c)  In all such cases the owners of the projects involved may apply for a certificate of appropriateness and upon the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, the stop-work order will be removed immediately. 
(d)  If any member of the historic preservation commission observes construction from the public street that may not be in compliance with the approved certificate of appropriateness, the commission member shall communicate his concerns to the community development director for investigation. The commission member shall not approach the applicant or engage in any discussions related to the building permit. Once an application for a COA is completed and submitted for consideration, no individual member of the HPC will engage in an ex parte communication/s with the applicant regarding the form and/or substance of the pending application prior to the meeting where the applicant's COA is to be reviewed by the HPC. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-125. - Certificate void if construction not commenced. 
(a)  A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. A single six-month extension shall be considered by the historic preservation commission where the delay in the start of the work has been delayed for reasons beyond the direct control of the applicant. No further extension will be considered. 
(b)  Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable upon written request of the holder of the certificate of appropriateness at least 30 days in advance of the 18-month period. Commencement of construction shall be defined as the date of initial application for a building permit. Where a building permit is not required, commencement of construction shall be defined as two weeks after the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-126. - Recording of applications, proceedings. 
    The historic preservation commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with the application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-127. - Acquisition of property. 
    The commission may, where such action is authorized by the mayor and council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 62-128, 62-129. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62-130. - Allegations of misconduct by any member of the historic preservation commission. 
    Any allegation of improper conduct by any member of the historic preservation commission shall be referred to in writing to the City of St. Marys Ethics Board. Any person making allegations shall follow the procedures of the ethics commission regarding any allegation. The historic preservation commission shall not be involved in any manner with the complaint except to make testimony as requested by the ethics board. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 62-131-62-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DEMOLITION OR RELOCATION PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , adopted Oct. 16, 2017, amended div. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 5, §§ 62-151-62-154, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1. 

Sec. 62-151. - Authority to comment on applications. 
    The commission shall have the authority to grant or deny any request for a permit to demolish or relocate a historic or historic-obscured structure within a historic district, or on a historic property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-152. - Considerations of post-demolition plans. 
    The commission shall not grant demolition or relocation permits without reviewing the plans for the building or other development that would replace the structure, unless found by the commission or community development director to be an emergency demolition. Plans to be submitted shall be similar in scope and detail as required for a new construction certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-153. - Requirements for the demolition or relocation of structures within the historic district. 
(a)  All requests for demolition or relocation of any building, wall, fence, porch, or stoop for a historic or historic-obscured property shall be submitted to the community development department in an application for a certificate of appropriateness. All requests for demolition or relocation of buildings designated as historic or historic-obscured shall come before the commission following the procedures of section 62-155. 
(b)  All requests for demolition or relocation of structures designated as nonhistoric or intrusions are subject to the requirements of section 62-113 and to city Code of Ordinances chapter 18. 
(c)  The owner of the property is responsible for any unsafe building on that property as notified in writing by the building official and can be fined up to $1,000.00 per day for non-compliance in shoring up the structure until the hearing process and/or any waiting period is completed. 
(d)  The commission will determine whether to permit demolition based upon information including, but not limited to, reports, photographs or inspection as part of a site visit by some or all members of the commission and other individuals designated by the commission. The opinion of a professional engineer licensed in Georgia, as describe in subsection (e) below, that the building is unsafe or unsound or that it poses imminent threat to public health or safety is only one part of the information the commission may use to make an informed decision. The commission may also consider the information provided pursuant to subsections 62-154(a)(5)-(8) to determine whether to permit demolition. 
(e)  A professional engineer licensed in Georgia giving a written opinion shall have primary expertise in structural engineering, and must have demonstrated credentials in rehabilitation of historic structures, including a portfolio of at least three historical projects on the Georgia Historical Registry, or historic structures within a designated Georgia Historic District and must clearly display their professional stamp on the assessment document. The commission may consider reports from multiple professionals if necessary. 
(f)  Any structure approved for demolition by the commission shall be dismantled in a manner ensuring reclamation of its historic materials. 
(g)  In granting a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations as will best fulfill the purposes of this article. 
(h)  When the commission determines under the standards of this section to permit demolition or relocation of a building, the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness shall be subject to a delay of demolition or relocation, and notice of the proposed demolition or relocation shall be given 12 months to be removed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-154. - Application requirements to demolish or relocate a building rated as historic or historic-obscured. 
(a)  All demolition and relocation applications rated as historic or historic obscured shall include the following information: 
(1)  The date of application. 
(2)  A report from a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia as to the structural soundness of the building and its adaptability for continued use, renovation, restoration or rehabilitation. Any dangerous conditions must be identified. This report must carry the engineer's professional stamp. The report shall also include the engineer's opinion on whether the structure poses an imminent threat to public health and safety, and whether that threat can be alleviated only through demolition. The report shall include the engineer's rationale for those opinions. 
(3)  An appraisal of fair market value of the property from a qualified professional appraiser. This appraisal must include a full market sales report to include comparable sales. 
(4)  Amount paid for the property, remaining balance on any mortgage or other financing secured by the property, and annual debt service for the previous two years. 
(5)  If the property is income producing, the annual gross income from the property for the previous two years; the itemized operating and maintenance expenses for the previous two years; and depreciation deduction and annual cash flow before and after debt service for the previous two years. The commission may require details of past rental history. 
(6)  Price asked and offers received within the previous two years. Most recent assessed values of the property and real estate taxes. 
(7)  Economic incentives and/or funding available to the applicant through federal, state, city or private programs. 
(8)  Landscape plan of property, including all existing trees, over ten inches in diameter, as measured 48 inches from ground, and any structures, utilities or facilities on the grounds. 
(b)  The commission retains the right to waive any of the requirements set forth in subsections 62-154(a)(4)-(8) above, within 30 days from the submission of an application, at which time the community development director will certify the application as complete. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-155. - The process required for demolition and relocation hearings. 
(a)  The commission shall evaluate certified complete applications for demolition or relocation pursuant to the two-hearing procedure described in subsections 62-155(b) and (c) below. If the applicant is dissatisfied with the commission's decision at any of these hearings the applicant may appeal to city council pursuant to the procedures described in section 62-156. The commission may not grant a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation until the hearing and determinations described in subsection 62-155(c) have taken place. 
(b)  At the initial hearing the commission will determine whether to permit demolition or relocation. At the hearing the applicant shall introduce the report described in subsection 62-153(a) above. The applicant may introduce evidence of hardship-financial, structural, as found in subsection 62-200(b) below. At this hearing the applicant or his or her representative may present, but is not limited to, the following: any documents, photos, opinions of licensed engineers, or financial information. If the hardship is claimed to be economic, the applicant shall be required to submit sufficient evidence to demonstrate that the application of the standards and regulations of this section deprives the applicant of a positive economic use or return on the subject property. Economic hardship shall be only one of the factors considered by the commission in determining whether to allow demolition or relocation. If the commission declines to permit demolition or relocation, it shall issue in writing the reasons for the denial to the owner. If the commission decides to permit demolition, it must proceed to the second hearing. 
(c)  At the second hearing the commission will review plans for a new building or other development proposed for that location. This hearing is no longer about demolition, but it is held after the decision to allow demolition has been made in the belief that any new plans for the site should not have any influence on the retention or demolition of a historic building. The commission may not issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation until the applicant posts bond in an amount sufficient to ensure completion of the building or other development replacing the demolished or relocated structure, or finds that a vacant site does not create a substantial adverse impact for the site or district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-156. - The appeal of a denial of demolition decision. 
    Any person adversely affected by the determinations if the commission pursuant to this division, chapter 62 of the Code of Ordinances, City of St. Marys, Georgia, may appeal such determination to the mayor and city council under the provisions of section 62-200 of said chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-157. - Notice. 
    Any notice required by this division of the Code of Ordinances shall be posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition or relocation in a location clearly visible from the street at least 15 days prior to the hearing. In addition, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general local circulation at least three times prior to the date of the permit, the first notice of which shall be published no more than 15 days after the application for a permit to demolish is filed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-158. - Emergency demolition permits. 
(a)  If the community development director, under recommendation of the building official determines that a landmark or existing building in the historic district poses immediate threat to the safety of the community, he or she, after properly notifying the property owner and general public, may convene an emergency meeting of the commission. At such times, the commission may authorize the emergency demolition of such structures or require that the owner of the property shore up such a building while the application and hearing process delineated above is carried through. 
(b)  Sufficient data, as identified in writing by the building official under the guidelines of Section 108, Unsafe Structures and Equipment of the International Property Maintenance Code, to justify the emergency demolition shall be provided to the historic preservation commission for use in making the determination. Written backup of any verbal or field decisions shall be provided to the commission within two weeks of the emergency declaration. 
(1)  The commission shall evaluate the effect the demolition or relocation of a building will have on. 
(2)  The structure has been damaged or destroyed by an act of God or fire, and the cost to repair is. 
(3)  The structure has been declared structurally unsound by a licensed Georgia professional engineer. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 62-159-62-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , adopted Oct. 16, 2017, deleted div. 6, §§ 62-176-62-178, entitled "Maintenance of Property," which derived from Ord. of Mar. 8, 2010, § 1. 

Secs. 62-176-62-198. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - ENFORCEMENT, APPEALS, HARDSHIP AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 62-199. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the Community Development Director of the City of St. Marys or their duly authorized representatives, as applicable. 
(b)  Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this article, or whenever a police officer or code enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe that there exists upon any property a condition or violation which is unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or detrimental to the public interest, the officer may enter upon the grounds of such property at all reasonable times to inspect the same; provided, however, that if such structure or property is occupied, the officer shall first present proper credentials and request entry upon such grounds. If such entry is refused, the officer shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry upon such grounds. 
(c)  The initial observation of any deficiency under this chapter shall consist of a courtesy letter, with notations as to the nature of the deficiency, and a request to provide a resolution plan as to how the property owner intends to address and/or eliminate the deficiency within 30 calendar days from the date of receipt of the courtesy letter. Once the resolution plan is reviewed and approved by HPC and the community development director, the property owner shall eliminate the deficiency within 30 calendar days. If the elimination of the deficiency is determined to take longer than 30 days as reviewed and approved by the building inspector, this shall be noted on the plan of resolution. 
(d)  If no resolution plan is submitted within the time noted, or if the deficiency is not resolved within the time noted, then penalties will be assessed and enforced as noted below: 
(1)  Fine and/or sentence. Any person convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of violating a duly adopted ordinance of the City of St. Marys, and shall be punished for each count either by a fine not less than $100.00 per day not to exceed $1,000.00 per day, or by a sentence of imprisonment not to exceed 60 days in jail, or both a fine and jail or a community work alternate as determined by the court. 
(2)  Powers of the court. The court shall have the power and authority to order the violation corrected in compliance with this article and the court may require payment of restitution or impose other punishment as allowed by law. 
(3)  Other legal remedies. In any case in which a violation of this chapter has occurred, the City of St. Marys, in addition to other remedies provided by law, may petition for a restraining order, injunction, abatement, or take any other appropriate legal action or proceeding through a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent, restrain, or abate such unlawful use or activity. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-021, 6-2-14; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Sec. 62-200. - Appeals/hardship. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the historic preservation commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, may appeal such determination to the mayor and city council; the appeal must be applied for within 30 calendar days after notification of the decision is sent. The mayor and city council may approve, modify or reject the determination made by the historic preservation commission if they find the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals to the mayor and city council may be appealed to the Superior Court of Camden County in a manner provided by law for appeals from conviction of ordinance violations. 
(b)  Hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to the provisions, or to interpret the meaning of the provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the provisions, so that architectural or historic integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgement, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall be a situation not of the applicant's own making, not will economic hardship be the sole reason for requesting of a designation of undue hardship. 
(c)  In the event that compliance with any section of this chapter are the result of issues beyond the control of the citizen, thereby creating a hardship, the citizen has the right to request a determination of hardship. This determination shall be requested by the citizen via written letter to the community development director stating the reasons for a hardship determination. This determination shall be requested after the issuance of a courtesy letter outlining the deficiencies and prior to the issuance of any formal citation to, the citizen. 
(1)  This letter shall be received within 30 calendar days of receipt of any courtesy citation. 
(2)  The basis for a determination of the economic hardship of the proposed action on the citizen shall be made by the community development director, with appeal of any decision to city council. 
(3)  The receipt of the letter by the community development director will postpone any other legal remedy outlined above, for the period of time that the petition is being reviewed by the community development director and in the event of an appeal, by the council. 
(4)  The letter shall also outline the method and timing of the resolution of the issue, based on the ability of the citizen. 
(Ord. of 3-8-10, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-10-16-001 , 10-16-17) 
Secs. 62-201-62-225. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - LIBRARY[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Recreation commission, § 2-231 et seq. 
State Law reference- Local and regional public libraries, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-20 et seq. 

Sec. 66-1. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
(a)  The constitution and bylaws for the St. Marys Public Library adopted March 10, 1988, are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(b)  An official copy of such constitution and bylaws is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Chapter 70 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; courts, ch. 38; emergency services, ch. 42; environment, ch. 46; fire prevention and protection, ch. 50; health and sanitation, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; vegetation, ch. 102. 
State Law reference- Limitations on home rule powers of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 70-1. - Handbills and advertising matter-Placement in or on automobiles. 
    It shall be unlawful to place in or on any automobile in the city a handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster or other literature except with the express permission of the owner or the occupant of such automobile. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88) 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6. 
Sec. 70-2. - Same-Placement on private property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, bulletin, newspaper or other literature, whether single page or multipage, unless the literature is placed in a secure area of a building (such as a door jam, screen door, etc.) or attached to a building or structure by means which will not alter or damage the building or structure (such as hanging literature from a doorknob, placing literature in a container to hang from a doorknob, etc.). This section shall not apply to United States Postal Service deliveries (which are made to containers erected for the purpose of containment). Subscription newspapers (newspapers which are delivered under contract with the owner or occupant) shall be exempt as long as they are placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon other private property. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88) 
Sec. 70-3. - Same-Delivery after notice of prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any private property any handbill, circular, pamphlet, poster, postcard, bulletin, newspaper or other literature, whether single page or multipage, after the owner or inhabitant of the property has, either through direct communication with the publisher or distributor of the literature, notice on the property, made known that any such delivery is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88) 
Sec. 70-4. - Posting signs on utility poles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tack, post or nail any paper, metal, wood or other signs of any character on any telegraph, telephone or electric light pole, located in any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88) 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6. 
Sec. 70-5. - Public drunkenness. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of public drunkenness by being in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, in an intoxicated condition caused by alcohol or any other mood-altering drug or combination of such drugs, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section the term "public place" means any and all public property, including but not limited to the federal government, the state government, the county government, the city government, or any political subdivisions thereof; any area of a business enterprise, or apartment complex, where the public has general access; and any property other than a private residence and curtilage held in private ownership, unless the owner is the complainant. 
(Ord. of 9-4-58(2), § 7-503(2); Ord. of 6-10-91, § 3) 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10. 
Sec. 70-6. - Fighting. 
    No person in the city shall fight another person except in boxing exhibitions duly authorized and licensed under law. 
(Ord. of 9-4-58(2), § 7-503(4)) 
Sec. 70-7. - Disturbing worship. 
    No person in the city shall disquiet or disturb any congregation or assembly for religious worship by making a noise or by rude or indecent behavior, or profane discourse within their place of worship, or so near the same as to disturb the order or solemnity of the meeting, including the driving or operation of vehicles, motorcycles, motor scooters, bicycles or any other motor conveyance without having the exhaust thereof muffled. 
(Ord. of 9-4-58(2), § 7-503(6)) 
Sec. 70-8. - Tampering with public property. 
    No person in the city shall tamper with, injure, deface, destroy or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire plug, topographical survey monument or any other personal property erected or placed by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-4-58(2), § 7-506(2)(a)) 
Sec. 70-9. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Imposed. It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m.; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to a minor accompanied by his/her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. Each violation of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Responsibility of parents. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 17 years to knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds, wharves, docks or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:30 a.m.; provided, however, that the provisions of the section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or where the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor. Each violation of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Penalty. Any minor violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating subsection (b) of this section shall be charged with such violation, tried in municipal court, and upon being found guilty shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 9-4-58(1), §§ 7-401-7-403; Ord. of 11-28-05, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 70-10. - Discharge of weapons within city limits. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge a firearm or air gun, BB gun, or zip gun within the city limits, except in a lawfully established firing range; provided, that this section shall not prohibit any duly sworn law enforcement officer from discharging a firearm in the performance of his duty, nor any citizen from discharging a firearm in defense of human life. As used in this section, the term "firearm" shall include, pistols, revolvers, rifles, shotguns, pellet guns, zip guns, and similar weapons. This section shall not prohibit the discharge of BB guns on one's own property. 
(Ord. of 8-11-81(1)) 
State Law reference- Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105. 
Sec. 70-11. - Unlawful uses of services, injury to, interference with property of utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally without authority and permission from the owner thereof, to alter, injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, pole, lamp, manhole cover, fire plug or any accessories thereto, belonging to the city or any other public or private utility (hereinafter called owner) engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, the furnishing of sanitary sewer service, or other public services, without the intent to pay the fair cost of repair or replacement thereof. 
(2)  Intentionally and without authority and permission from the owner utilize any such service or consume any such product with intent not to pay the regular charge therefor to the owner, but with the intent to deprive the owner thereof. 
(3)  Intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from registering the quantity of such service or product supplied with the intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor. 
(4)  In any way interfere with the proper action of any such owner with intent to divert any service or product so as to deprive the owner of the regular charge therefor. 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the consent of such owner, any product or service furnished, manufactured, sold or distributed by such owner with intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section, or proof that a person knowingly received the benefits of such acts, or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) of this section were done on the premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facia evidence that such person is responsible for such prohibited acts. 
(Ord. of 11-5-85, § 1) 
State Law reference- Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, municipalities or political subdivisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Sec. 70-12. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant reasonable concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  The following circumstances may be considered in determining whether concern is warranted: 
(1)  The fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a police officer. 
(2)  The fact that the person refuses to identify himself. 
(3)  The fact that the person fails or refuses to give a reasonable and truthful explanation of his presence and conduct. 
(4)  The fact that the person endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer, prior to any arrest under this section, shall afford the person an opportunity to dispel any concern which otherwise would be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if an arrest was not authorized under this subsection. 
(Ord. of 6-10-91, § 1) 
Sec. 70-13. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he idles, loafs or loiters in, on, upon, about or around any street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public right-of-way or any public building or other building or premises open to the general public so as to interfere with the use thereof or free passage by other persons. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he remains in, on, upon, about or around any public building or place or other building or premises open to the public or any lounge or barroom for the purpose of procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he assembles or congregates with others in the parking area of any commercial business, shopping center or shopping mall for any purpose other than working, shopping or doing business related to the goods or services available at the commercial business, shopping center or shopping mall, without specific license from any person authorized to grant permission to use the premises for such assembly or congregation. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section the term "public place" means any and all public property, including but not limited to the federal government, the state government, the county government, the city government, or any political subdivisions thereof; any area of a business enterprise, or apartment complex, where the public has general access; and any property other than a private residence and curtilage held in private ownership, unless the owner is the complainant. 
(Ord. of 6-10-91, § 2) 
State Law reference- Governing body may adopt ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24; loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
Sec. 70-14. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person or any property whereby any person is placed in fear of his safety or property is placed in danger. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he remains in any place where there is disagreement being expressed between persons for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in a fight or brawl. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he commits any violent act which interferes with another person's pursuit of a lawful activity or occupation. 
(d)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he recklessly or knowingly commits any act which reasonably may be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(e)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he engages in loud conversation or argument using profane, obscene or vulgar language within the hearing of persons other than the participants. 
(f)  For the purpose of this section the term "public place" means any and all public property, including but not limited to the federal government, the state government, the county government, the city government, or any political subdivisions thereof; any area of a business enterprise, or apartment complex, where the public has general access; and any property other than a private residence and curtilage held in private ownership, unless the owner is the complainant. 
(Ord. of 6-10-91, § 4) 
Sec. 70-15. - Littering. 
(a)  As used in this section the term "litter" means all kinds of garbage, trash, debris and junk, including kitchen waste, glass, cans, plastic or paper containers, newspapers, magazines, slag, gravel, construction materials, dead animals, abandoned motor vehicles and parts thereof, discarded furniture and appliances, leaves and other lawn or garden waste and other refuse and discarded matter of every kind and description. 
(b)  The term "public or private property" for the specific purpose of the offense of littering shall mean the right-of-way of any street, highway or alley, any public building and the grounds thereof, marshland and any body of water or watercourse and the shores thereof, any park, playground or recreational area, and private property which is open to view from public property or other private property. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of littering by dumping, depositing, throwing or leaving litter on any public or private property within the city. 
(d)  The foregoing subsection shall not apply under the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the litter is placed in a litter receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(2)  If the litter is being stored temporarily in an orderly and unobtrusive manner on private property in the course of routine commercial, institutional or industrial business operations. 
(3)  If litter such as discarded furniture and appliances or other items too large to be placed in a receptacle or container are being stored temporarily in an orderly and unobtrusive manner on residential property, not to exceed ten days. 
(4)  If leaves and other lawn and garden waste are left on or near the public right-of-way and not on any paved area of the right-of-way, awaiting routine pickup by city employees. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-10-91, § 5) 
Sec. 70-16. - Criminal trespass by motor vehicle. 
    In accordance with the authority granted by O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252, the city council hereby ordains and enacts into law the city criminal trespass by motor vehicle ordinance and it is hereby ordained by the mayor and council to adopt by reference the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252. 
(Ord. of 1-7-87) 
Sec. 70-17. - Penalty for violation of sections 70-1 through 70-16. 
    Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the provisions of sections 70-1 through 70-16 shall be charged with such violation, tried in municipal court, and upon being found guilty shall be punished in accordance with section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 7-11-57, § 9-5003) 
Sec. 70-18. - Crabbing from city pavilion. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to fish or crab, or to engage in any similar or related activity or sport from or on the St. Marys City Pavilion. 
(b)  A violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $25.00 for the first offense or 20 hours of community service, or both. For each subsequent offense the violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine of up to $100.00 for each such subsequent offense or 20 hours of community service, or both. 
(Ord. of 5-23-94, §§ 1, 2) 
Chapter 74 - PERSONNEL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Regulations pertaining to city employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, sexual harassment, holidays and leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals are contained in the City of St. Marys Personnel Policies Manual which is compiled and published separately by the city. In addition, the city compiles and publishes separately the retirement plan for the employees of the city. The retirement plan sets forth the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of the plan. An official copy of both publications is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council. 
Charter reference- City manager, § 4-204; personnel, § 4-301. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; courts, ch. 38. 
State Law reference- City's power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Project manager. 
    The city council may authorize the hiring of a project manager as an executive position to provide support to the mayor and city council for the management of a variety of projects as assigned by providing funds in the budget for the position. The project manager shall report to the mayor who shall perform all the duties including supervising, hiring and disciplining the project manager and have all the powers as to that position which are held by the city manager in relation to other employees under the City of St. Marys Personnel Policy provided, however, that the project manager shall respond to city manager's declaration of a weather emergency under Policy 8 of the City of St. Marys Personnel Policy in like manner as other employees. 
(Ord. No. 2018-3-19-001 , 3-19-18) 
Secs. 74-2-74-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DRUG TESTING FOR SAFETY SENSITIVE POSITIONS 

Sec. 74-36. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol test means a test performed by a breath alcohol technician using a breath testing device which measures alcohol use for evidential purposes. 
    Controlled substance means any drug, pharmaceutical, and/or other substance whose use or possession is controlled or prohibited by state or federal law. 
    Drug test means a urinalysis test administered under approved conditions and procedures to detect controlled substances in the urine sample submitted, as outlined in section 74-40. 
    Employee means all personnel employed by a law enforcement agency, both sworn and civilian; all personnel employed by a fire department and all personnel employed by the city whose jobs involve duties where an impaired performance of those duties could threaten the public's health or safety, including, but not limited to, the operation of motor vehicles. 
    Reasonable suspicion means a reasonable ground for belief in the existence of facts or circumstances warranting an order to submit to a drug test, including, but not limited to the facts or circumstances outlined in section 74-41. 
    Substance abuse means any irresponsible use of alcohol, or other controlled substances which results in reporting to work under the influence of drugs or alcohol, and any illegal possession, use, manufacture, transfer, sale or attempt to sell controlled substances on or off city property. For purposes of this article, an employee shall be determined to be under the influence of alcohol if: 
(1)  The employee's normal faculties are, in the opinion of his supervisor impaired due to consumption of alcohol; or 
(2)  The employee has a blood alcohol level of .05 or higher. 
    Supervisor means both sworn and civilian city employees assigned to a position having day-to-day responsibility for supervising subordinate employees of the city or who are responsible for commanding a work element and are employed by the police department or fire department. 
    Sworn employee means all sworn employees, including ranking officers. 
(Ord. of 11-14-88, § II; Ord. of 3-27-95, § II) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-37. - Purpose of drug testing program; notice. 
(a)  The city has a legal responsibility to its personnel and a management obligation to ensure a safe work environment; as well as a paramount interest in protecting the public's health and safety by ensuring that its employees have the physical capability and stability to perform their assigned duties without impairment from drugs or alcohol. A requirement for employment must be an employee who is free from drug dependence, illegal drug use, and alcohol or drug abuse. 
(b)  Liability could be found against the city and the employee if the city fails to address and ensure that employees can perform their duties without endangering themselves or the public. 
(c)  There is sufficient evidence to conclude that use of illegal drugs, drug dependence, and alcohol or drug abuse seriously impairs an employee's performance and general physical and mental health. The illegal possession and use of drugs and narcotics by employees is a crime in this jurisdiction, and clearly unacceptable. Further, illegal drug possession and/or substance abuse by police officers, firefighters and employees in safety sensitive positions jeopardizes the public health and safety of the citizens of the city. Therefore, the police department, the fire department and the city as a whole has adopted this written policy to ensure an employee's fitness for duty as a condition of employment; to ensure drug tests are administered pursuant to an established policy and procedure and to ensure that all affected employees are aware testing pursuant to the policy is a condition of employment. 
(Ord. of 11-14-88, § I; Ord. of 3-27-95, § I) 
Sec. 74-38. - General rules. 
(a)  Employees shall not take any controlled substance unless prescribed by a person licensed to practice medicine. Employees who are required to take prescription medicine shall notify their immediate supervisors of the medication prescribed, the nature of the illness or injury, and any limitations on their activities caused by the medication. Any statutorily defined illegal use of controlled substances by an employee, whether at or outside employment, will not be tolerated. 
(b)  All property belonging to the departments or the city is subject to inspection at any time without notice as there is no expectation of privacy. 
(1)  City property includes, but is not limited to, city-owned vehicles, equipment, desks, containers, files and storage lockers. 
(2)  Employee assigned lockers are also subject to inspection by the employee's supervisor in the presence of the employee. 
(c)  Employees who have a reasonable basis to believe that another employee is engaged in substance abuse shall report the facts and circumstances immediately to their supervisor. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the intent or provisions of this policy may be used as grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including discharge. Refusal by an employee to take a required drug or alcohol test or follow this policy will result in immediate relief from duties pending disposition of any administrative personnel action. 
(Ord. of 11-14-88, § III; Ord. of 3-27-95, § III) 
Sec. 74-39. - Policy of drug testing, urinalysis. 
(a)  Applicants for position of employee. Applicants shall be routinely tested for drug or narcotic usage as part of the application process. The testing procedure and safeguards set forth in section 74-40 shall be followed by the examining physician and others involved in the testing procedure. 
(1)  Refusal to take the test, or test results reporting a presence of unexplained controlled substances shall be the basis of discontinuing an applicant in the selection process. Any use or possession that constitutes a felony shall preclude any further consideration for employment. 
(2)  Applicants found to be involved in the illegal sale, manufacture or distribution of any controlled substance will be permanently rejected. 
(3)  Any substance abuse by an applicant after application will be grounds for permanent rejection. 
(4)  After one year from the date of the above drug test, an applicant may reapply for the position of employee if use or possession of the identified controlled substance did not constitute a felony. Applicants who previously refused the test are not eligible for further consideration. 
(5)  The results of drug tests of applicants for the position of employee shall be kept confidential. 
(b)  Current employees. Current employees shall be required to submit to a drug or alcohol test as outlined below: 
(1)  A supervisor may order a drug and/or alcohol test when there is documentation of reasonable suspicion that an employee is impaired or incapable of performing his assigned duties as outlined in section 74-41, and after approval of the need to test by the supervisor's superior. The contents of the documentation shall be made available to the employee. 
(2)  A supervisor shall order a drug and/or alcohol test immediately following any motor vehicle accident where property damage or physical injuries occurred and in which an employee was involved while driving a city-owned motor vehicle. 
(3)  Current sworn employees may be ordered by a supervisor to take a drug and/or alcohol test for the following reasons: 
a.  Where an allegation is made by a citizen or employee that involves the use, possession or sale of drugs or narcotics by the accused employees; 
b.  Where the employee is involved in an incident involving the actual use of force; or 
c.  Where there is serious on-duty injury to the employee or another person. 
The purpose of the test is to determine if drug use affected the employee's actions or judgment. The employee shall be advised of the content and details of the allegation. 
(4)  A supervisor who orders a drug and/or alcohol test shall forward a report containing the facts and circumstances directly to the chief of police, the fire chief, or the city manager as applicable. 
(5)  A drug test shall be a part of each routine physical examination, and physical examination required for promotion or specialized assignment for affected employees. Test results indicating substance abuse will be submitted as a part of a written complaint by the supervisor consistent with subsection (b)(3) of this section requesting departmental action. 
(c)  Current sworn employees assigned to the drug/narcotic enforcement unit or vice unit. Such employees shall be required, in addition to subsection (b) of this section, to submit to a periodic unannounced drug test at the direction of their supervisor. 
(1)  Prior to accepting a special assignment, affected sworn employees shall execute a written agreement and release stating that he consents to any medical, physical, psychiatric, psychological, or other testing, including urine and/or blood for drug or narcotic substances. In addition, the agreement or release shall give the police department permission to have access to all the employee's medical records. 
(2)  The supervisor of the drug/narcotic enforcement unit or vice unit shall select the date and time when each employee assigned to the unit will be tested. The test may be administered randomly at least four times a year without advance notice. 
(d)  Procedure for administering program. The procedure for administering the urinalysis program is outlined in section 74-40. 
(e)  Disciplinary actions. Any city employee who engages in substance abuse as defined in this article shall be disciplined in accordance with the city's personnel policies. 
(Ord. of 11-14-88, § IV; Ord. of 3-27-95, § IV) 
Sec. 74-40. - Urinalysis procedures. 
(a)  Obtaining urine samples. 
(1)  The employee designated to give a sample must be positively identified prior to any sample being obtained. 
(2)  The room where the sample is obtained must be private and secure with documentation maintained that the area has been searched and free of any foreign substance. An observer of the appropriate sex shall be present for indirect observation to ensure that sample is from the employee and was actually passed at the time noted on the record. Specimen collection will occur in a medical setting, and the procedures shall not demean, embarrass, or cause physical discomfort to the employee. 
(3)  An interview with the employee prior to the test will serve to establish the use of drugs currently taken under medical supervision. 
(4)  Specimen samples shall be sealed, labeled and checked against the identity of the employee to ensure the results match the testee. Samples shall be stored in a secured and refrigerated atmosphere until tested or delivered to the testing lab representative. 
(b)  Processing urine samples. 
(1)  The testing or processing phase shall consist of a two-step procedure: 
a.  Initial screening step. 
b.  Confirmation step. 
(2)  The urine sample is first tested using a screening procedure. A specimen testing positive will undergo an additional confirmatory test. An initial positive report shall not be considered positive; rather it should be classified as confirmation pending. 
(3)  The confirmation procedure should be technologically different than the initial screening test. Notification of test results to the supervisor or internal affairs investigator will be held until the confirmation test results are obtained. In those cases where the second test confirms the presence of a drug or drugs in the sample, the sample will be retained for six months to allow further testing in case of dispute. 
(4)  The testing method selected shall be capable of identifying marijuana, cocaine, and every major drug of abuse including heroin, amphetamines and barbiturates. Personnel utilized for testing will be certified as qualified to conduct urinalysis, or adequately trained. 
(5)  The laboratory selected to conduct the analysis must be experienced and capable of quality control, documentation, chain-of-custody, technical expertise, and demonstrated proficiency in urinalysis testing. 
(6)  Employees who have participated in the drug test program, where no drugs were found, shall receive a letter stating that no illegal drugs were found. If the employee requests such, a copy of the letter will be placed in the employee's personnel file. 
(c)  Chain of evidence storage. 
(1)  Where a positive report is received, urine specimens shall be maintained under secured storage for a period of not less than six months. 
(2)  Each step in the collecting and processing of the urine specimens shall be documented to establish procedural integrity and the chain of evidence. 
(d)  Urinalysis tests available. The following analytical methods for the detection of drugs in the urine are recommended for consideration following adoption of a drug testing program: 
(1)  Chromatographic methods: 
a.  TLC (Thin Layer Chromatography, recommended for initial screening step), or HPTLC (High Performance Thin Layer Chromatography). 
b.  GLC (Gas Liquid Chromatography). 
c.  GC/MS (Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry). Recommended for confirmation step. 
d.  HPLC (High Pressure Liquid Chromatography). 
(2)  Immunological methods: 
a.  RIA (Radioimmunoassay). 
b.  EMIT (Enzyme Multiplied Immunoassay Technique). Recommended for initial screening step. 
(Ord. of 3-27-95, app. A) 
Sec. 74-41. - Factors which may constitute suspicion of substance abuse. 
    The existence of an alcohol or drug problem often manifests itself in an employee's work performance, behavior or appearance in the following ways. One or more of the following factors observed by an employee's supervisor may constitute reasonable suspicion of substance abuse: 
(1)  Excessive absences and/or tardiness (especially after a weekend or holiday). 
(2)  Frequent requests for time off during the workday. 
(3)  Numerous accidents without explanation. 
(4)  Pattern of accidents in employee's work, employee's particular time shift, or higher than average accident rate by employee off the job. 
(5)  Noticeable increase in medical insurance claims, particularly for nonjob injuries. 
(6)  Unsatisfactory work performance, and/or breakdown of relationship with others on the job, including overreaction to real or imagined criticism. 
(7)  Lack of concentration or decreased productivity after lunch or breaks. 
(8)  Non-work-related visits from other employees or strangers. 
(9)  Frequent trips to the restrooms or water fountain. 
(10)  Long lunch hours. 
(11)  Frequent visits to automobile parking lot. 
(12)  Drowsiness, slurred speech, lack of coordination, inability to concentrate, nausea or other physical symptoms. 
(13)  Agitation, rapid or slurred speech, dizziness, dilated pupils. 
(14)  Bloodshot eyes, runny nose. 
(15)  Drastic weight changes. 
(16)  Marked change in mood, attitude and behavior. 
(17)  Deterioration in personal grooming and hygiene. 
(18)  Wearing sunglasses and long-sleeved shirts at inappropriate times to hide dilated pupils or needle marks. 
(19)  Frequent need to borrow money. 
(20)  Avoidance of supervisors. 
(21)  Evidence that employee has tampered with a previous drug test given by the city. 
(22)  Evidence that an employee has used, possessed, sold, solicited, or transferred drugs while working or while on the employer's premises or while operating the employer's vehicle, machinery, or equipment. 
(Ord. of 3-27-95, app. B) 
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Sanitary tax, § 5-102; service charges for water, sewer, sanitation and health services, § 5-107. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; health and sanitation, ch. 58; history, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102; vehicles for hire, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries pursuant to contract, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; transportation of biomedical waste; solid waste management education program; establishment of Georgia Clean and Beautiful Advisory Committee and Interagency Council on Solid Waste Management, O.C.G.A. § 50-8-7.3. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Clean Community Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building material means any material such as lumber, roofing material, brick, concrete block, plaster, gutters, sand, gravel or other substances used in repairs or alteration of existing buildings, construction of new buildings, or demolition of existing structures. 
    Business trash means any waste accumulation such as dust, paper, cardboard, excelsior, rags or other substances, except for garbage or household trash, which are usually attendant to the operation of stores, offices, commercial buildings and similar type activities. 
    Commercial establishment means any building devoted to the retail or wholesale sales uses, warehousing uses, institutional uses, religious uses, governmental uses, or other nonresidential uses at which garbage or trash may be generated. 
    Curbside means within ten feet of that area designated for public vehicular travel and bordering an occupied residential tract of land, in a position determined by the director to be suitably accessible to collection crews. 
    Director means the principal officer of the department of public works of the city. 
    Disposal site means a tract of land or a facility designated by the city for the use as a site for the disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except this term shall not be deemed to include land or a facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling by the owner, occupant or lessee thereof. 
    Garbage means the byproduct of animal or vegetable food resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odor, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
    Hazardous refuse means materials such as poisons, acids, caustic matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances. 
    Household trash means forms of waste such as paper, sweepings, dust, rags, bottles, cans, or all other materials of any kind, other than garbage, which is normally attendant to the occupancy of a building for dwelling purposes. 
    Industrial waste means all waste, including solids, semisolids, sludges and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing concerns. 
    Large bundle means waste accumulations consisting of a pile exceeding eight feet long by six feet wide by three feet deep (5.25 cubic yards), tree stumps, logs, trees, concrete, etc. 
    Litter means all garbage, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, tin cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any of the discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Loading and unloading area means space or area used by any moving vehicle or other form of transportation for the purpose of receiving, shipping, and transporting goods, wares, commodities and persons, which shall be established pursuant to the city zoning ordinance. 
    Multifamily dwelling means any duplex, apartment, group of apartments, townhouses or condominiums used as a residential dwelling for more than one family. 
    Multifamily projects means apartment and condominiums as defined in the city zoning ordinance and consisting of more than four units located on the same premises. 
    Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse; any park, playground, building, refuse or conservation or recreation area and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forest. 
    Refuse means solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, yard trash and business trash as herein defined. 
    Rowhouse condominium means a multifamily dwelling complex in which all individual units are owned as undivided real estate parcels and each unit has a ground level entrance directly onto the street. 
    Scavenge or scavenging means unauthorized or uncontrolled retrieval of discarded refuse materials. 
    Single-family dwelling unit means a detached dwelling place designated for, or occupied exclusively by, one family. 
    Small dead animals means cats, dogs, small household pets and other animals of similar size having a weight of less than 50 pounds. 
    Solid waste means refuse accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash, yard trash and business trash as herein defined. 
    Street means that portion of a public right-of-way that is dedicated and used for vehicular travel. 
    Tree and shrubbery trimmings means waste accumulation of tree branches, tree limbs, parts of trees, bushes, shrubbery cuttings or clippings, or other natural waste. 
    Yard trash means waste accumulation of lawn, grass or shrubbery cuttings or clippings and dry leaf rakings, free of dirt, rocks, large branches and other bulky or noncombustible material. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-3. - Declaration of intent. 
    It is the intention of the mayor and council in enacting this chapter to provide for uniform collection of solid waste within the incorporated limits of the city, to provide for the uniform prohibition throughout the incorporated limits of the city of any and all littering on public or private property and to curb thereby the desecration of the beauty of the city which is harmful to the health, welfare and safety of its citizens. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Secs. 78-4-78-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 78-36. - Enforcement by director of public works. 
    The collection, transportation and disposal of refuse shall be under the supervision and control of the director of public works. In the performance of his duties, the director shall have the authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and location of refuse containers and such other matters as may pertain to the collection, transportation and disposal of refuse as he may deem necessary and reasonable. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-37. - Maintenance of property. 
(a)  All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. 
(b)  No person shall sweep into or deposit in any street or sidewalk the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-38. - Transportation of refuse generally. 
    All persons who desire to haul refuse over roads which are a part of the city road system shall use a vehicle provided with a cover and operate it so as to prevent refuse from being dropped, blown or spilled therefrom. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-39. - Collection by city. 
    All refuse, except building materials, tires, large limbs, tree stumps, logs, tree removal, etc. generated or accumulated in the city shall be collected, transported and disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-40. - Receptacles and containers. 
(a)  Every person in possession, charge or control of any building or from which business trash, industrial waste or other waste is accumulated or produced shall be required to keep in a suitable place readily accessible to the city's collection crews or other licensed private collector receptacles and containers issued by the city for the deposit of all such waste materials which will normally accumulate between the established collection dates. The director shall determine the quantity and location of the receptacles and shall determine whether the receptacles and containers are in a serviceable condition. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to collect refuse within the city, except from his own residence, business or industrial plant, without first having obtained a proper permit from the state department of natural resources and all required state and local license. 
(c)  All receptacles and containers as required by this article shall be issued by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-41. - Responsible enforcing agency; violations and penalties. 
(a)  The clean community commission, the director, or inspectors designated by him, shall investigate complaints or violations of any provisions of this article. They shall determine if there has been a violation and to initiate an attempt to obtain compliance with this article by the person in violation thereof. 
(b)  The director or his designated inspectors shall be authorized to sign a complaint with the approval of the city attorney against the violator with the city police department. 
(c)  Upon appropriate notice to the person violating this article, the city manager may suspend any service or the use of any facility maintained by the city during the period such violation continues to exist. 
(Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-42. - Punishment. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article dealing with an act which is prohibited or is declared to be unlawful, or whenever this article declares the doing of any act to be unlawful, such person upon conviction shall be punished as provided for in section 1-12. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Secs. 78-43-78-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 78-66. - Precollection practices generally. 
    The following practices and procedures shall be employed by persons in the city in order to facilitate the collection of solid wastes: 
(1)  Refuse. All refuse shall be placed and maintained in city-issued containers as specified herein. 
(2)  Dry trash pickup. 
a.  Yard trash. Yard trash (limbs, leaves, clippings, branches shrubbery, etc.) from regular yard maintenance by the resident, consisting of a pile no larger than eight feet by six feet by three feet (5.25 cubic yards) will be picked up by the city at no charge. A large quantity (a pile over eight feet by six feet by three feet or 5.25 cubic yards) of yard trash, such as lot clearing, tree removal, re-landscaping or any form of landscaping (new construction or remodeling) must be disposed of by the resident. Any work done by a contractor or paid workers must be disposed of by them. Any limbs should be cut up in lengths of not more than eight feet and must be less than three inches in diameter. Leaves and limbs are to be separated. Yard trash must be separated from other items in order to be picked up. 
b.  Corrugated boxes. A large quantity of corrugated boxes, such as moving boxes, must be taken, by the resident, to the recycling trailers located behind the city public works facility at 511 Pt. Peter Road. 
c.  Large bundles. The city will not pick up any large bundles, such as a pile exceeding eight feet by six feet by three feet (5.25 cubic yards), tree stumps, logs, trees, building materials, household items, etc., other than described in this subsection. The resident must remove these items or have them removed by someone. 
d.  Tires. Absolutely no tires will be picked up. The landfill will not accept them. 
e.  Miscellaneous items. For a fee of $15.00 per item, the city will pick up miscellaneous items that are placed at the curb, such as small bundles weighing less than 50 pounds or a sofa, swing set, etc. Please note that the $15.00 charge is per item for large furniture items. White goods, such as washers, dryers, refrigerators, stoves, hot water heaters and similar appliances, will be picked up at no charge. All doors on such white goods must be secured or removed. Miscellaneous items as described herein must be separated from yard trash. Pick-up days for paid pick-up items and white goods will be Friday of each week. Fees for miscellaneous pick-up items must be paid in advance at city hall by noon on the Thursday preceding the Friday pick-up day. 
(3)  Garbage. All garbage placed in containers for collection shall first be drained of all liquids, and shall be wrapped, bagged, or enclosed in paper or plastic material. 
(4)  Household trash. All household trash shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in refuse receptacles. Household trash may be combined with garbage. 
(5)  Injurious trash items. All waste material of an injurious nature, such as broken glass, light bulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes shall be securely packaged or wrapped for the purpose of preventing injury to the collection crews or other third parties. 
(6)  Hazardous refuse and building materials. No hazardous refuse or building materials shall be placed in any receptacle at any time, unless such refuse is to be disposed of by the person packing the refuse. The city shall not be required to collect any hazardous refuse, or building material. All hazardous refuse shall be secured against the possibility of causing injury to any person and shall not be placed on public property or private property without the written consent of the owner thereof. 
(7)  Standard refuse collection. Standard refuse collection for multifamily dwelling projects shall be by onsite city-issued containers. Entire rowhouse condominium complexes may receive individual curbside collection as described in subsection (1) of this section by payment of special services fees as established in the fee schedule. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 3-1-93; Ord. of 3-10-97(1), § I; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-67. - Prohibited activities. 
    The following activities are hereby declared to be unlawful and in violation of this article: 
(1)  Public streets and private property. No person shall place any accumulations of refuse and trash in any street, median strip, alley or other public place of travel, nor upon any private property except with the written consent thereof and then only in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Blockage of drainage. No person shall place any refuse, trash, refuse receptacles, or containers on, over or near any storm drain or drainage ditches, or so close thereto as to cause such material to interfere in any way with such drainage. 
(3)  Unauthorized storage. Any accumulation of refuse or trash items on any lot, property, premises, public streets, alley or other public or private place not permitted by this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Failure of owner or occupant to remove and correct any such accumulation of refuse after appropriate notice from the director shall arise the presumption that such person intended to violate this article. 
(4)  Scavenging. No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the director, shall disturb or interfere with any container used for the purpose of storing refuse pending its collection, or remove any contents therefrom or remove such container from its location. 
(5)  Use of streets. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials on any city road to transport same without suitable covers securely fastened to the vehicle. This section shall not apply to the transportation of poultry, livestock, silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of poultry or livestock. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-68. - Residential collection generally. 
(a)  Household garbage. Household garbage accumulated by residences shall be collected at least once each week. Such collections shall be limited to city-issued containers only. Residents within the city limits are required to have the city's trash service. 
(b)  Yard trash. Yard trash will be picked up by zones. Pick up times for all zones will vary depending on volume placed on routes. A zone will not be repeated until all zones have been picked up. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00; Ord. of 5-2-11(2) 
Sec. 78-69. - Commercial establishments generally. 
    Service to commercial establishments will be provided at least once each week. Such collections shall be limited to city-issued containers only. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-70. - Holidays. 
    Unless otherwise specified by the director, collections shall not be made on Christmas Day and other holidays as specified by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-71. - Special refuse and wastes. 
(a)  Industrial waste. Industrial waste shall be collected, removed and disposed of by any factory, plant or enterprise creating or causing the waste. 
(b)  Hazardous refuse. No hazardous refuse shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of refuse by the city. 
(c)  Dead animals. Dead animals in the public right-of-way will be collected by the city. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. 
(d)  Building materials. The city shall not be responsible for the collecting or hauling of building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new building, alterations or additions to an existing building of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures. Such material shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. 
(e)  Hazardous or liquid waste. Hazardous or liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste shall not be disposed of by the city. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-72. - Use of bulk containers. 
    All commercial establishments and multifamily dwelling projects shall provide on-site bulk containers for the collection and storage of household trash. The bulk containers shall be installed so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about premises. Any spillage or overflow shall be immediately cleaned up by the establishment. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-73. - Loading and unloading areas. 
    All loading and unloading areas shall be provided with refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging materials and other trash. The owner or occupant of the commercial establishment or multifamily project must request a sufficient number of containers from the city and shall place such containers in the area to maintain a clean, neat and sanitary condition at all times. Such owner or occupant may contract with a private contractor if desired. The number of such containers to be placed in service for a particular establishment or multifamily project shall be set by the director. The occupant of the premises shall maintain surveillance to ensure that all litter is placed in the proper container and the area is kept clean. If the occupant violates this section, collection service may be suspended by the city manager until such time as the owner or occupant of the premises brings the premises into full compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-74. - Parking lots. 
(a)  All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse receptacles within the parking area. The director shall have the authority to determine the number and types of receptacles necessary to provide property containerization. Such receptacles shall be weighed or attached to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to collect refuse and trash deposited in such containers and store this material in a location until collected by the city. 
(b)  It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking areas to place any litter in receptacles or containers and it shall be unlawful for any person to dump, scatter, or throw on any parking lot, any refuse, garbage or trash of any kind. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-75. - Construction sites, demolition sites. 
    All construction and demolition contractors shall provide onsite refuse receptacles, bulk containers, or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building materials and other trash produced by those working at the construction site. The site shall be kept in a litterfree condition. The number of refuse receptacles (not to exceed four bulk containers, or detachable containers) shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the contractor upon completion of the construction. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-76. - Classification of refuse for disposal. 
(a)  Domestic refuse. The following types of refuse shall be classed as domestic refuse and shall be accepted for disposal: 
(1)  Garbage. 
(2)  Business trash. 
(3)  Refuse. 
(4)  Household trash. 
(b)  Industrial waste. The following types of waste shall be classed as industrial waste and shall not be accepted for disposal: 
(1)  Industrial waste. 
(2)  Hazardous refuse. 
(c)  Building materials. Building materials may be accepted for disposal upon such terms and conditions as may be determined by the council. 
(d)  Materials for recycling. Materials for recycling shall be separated for storage at each disposal site. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-77. - Private disposal sites-Permits required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his owner-ship and control and which is within the corporate limits of the city any refuse without having first obtained a disposal area permit as required by any regulation of the state department of natural resources, the environmental protection agency and the city. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-78. - Same-General maintenance. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any private disposal site to keep the site in an orderly condition and maintained so as not to be a public nuisance or a menace to public health. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-79. - Same-Right of entry for inspections. 
    The director or his designated representative shall have the right to enter a private disposal site at any time during normal business hours for the purpose of inspecting the site to determine whether or not the site is in compliance with this article and all other pertinent laws and regulations of the city. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Sec. 78-80. - Burning prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall set fire to, or burn any papers or other refuse deposited at any disposal site or on the grounds thereof, within the city. 
(b)  No garbage or other materials, from which offensive odors emanate during combustion shall be burned outside of any building, within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-24-88; Ord. of 6-12-00) 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments for street and sidewalk construction, § 5-108. 
Cross reference- Advertising, ch. 6; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 26; environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; historical preservation, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; subdivisions, ch. 86; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94; utilities, ch. 98; vegetation, ch. 102; vehicles for hire, ch. 106; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Authority to construct and maintain streets and roads, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 82-1-82-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC EVENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 22, 2004, deleted former art. II of this chapter in its entirety and added provisions as a new art. II as herein set out. Former art. II, § 82-36, pertained to parades and demonstrations and derived unamended from the original Code. 

Sec. 82-36. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the St. Marys "Public Event Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1) 
Sec. 82-37. - Vesting authority. 
    The mayor and council for the City of St. Marys (the "city") and its city manager shall be vested with the responsibility to receive applications for, and to accede to or deny, permits for the conduct in public spaces of demonstrative, informative, celebratory, or other forms of public expression, hereinafter referred to as an "event". The city manager shall determine to permit or refuse to permit any such conduct in or about public spaces solely on the basis of the factors or combination of factors set out hereinafter, and in light of a presumption that all peaceable expression not inconsistent with the goals of this article hereinbefore enumerated shall be permitted at all reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 2) 
Sec. 82-38. - Use of public spaces and facilities. 
    There shall be no demonstrative, informative, celebratory, or other forms of public expression, either fixed or processional, conducted on, over, upon, or burdening the public properties of the city, or employing the facilities thereon, without first being permitted by the city after application made according to the requirements set out hereinafter. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 3) 
Sec. 82-39. - Application. 
    Within no less than 20 days prior to an event, the person or persons associated in fact, whether or not a legally recognized entity, who wishes to conduct such event, shall apply to the city for a permit. Such application shall at a minimum include: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is an association of persons in fact or in law, the application shall contain a description of the entity; the name of said entity, if named; the registered or recognized address of the entity, if any; the name of the person making the application on behalf of the entity; such person's relationship to said entity; and some demonstration or recitation of the authority of the person making the application to act on behalf of the entity. 
(2)  A plan for review by the city, which plan will include: 
a.  The anticipated number of persons participating in the event; 
b.  The date or dates of the event; 
c.  The hours of each day the event will be conducted; 
d.  The exact location of said event, or, if the event is processional or mobile, the route of the event; 
e.  Whether sound amplification equipment will be employed; 
f.  Whether artificial lighting will be employed; 
g.  Whether temporary static structures will be constructed or employed, whether vehicles will be employed, and if so, a description of same sufficient to permit the city to evaluate the permitting factors set out hereinafter; 
h.  A description of provisions necessary to the safety and welfare of the participants in the event and members of the public in the area where the event will be conducted and routes of access thereto and therefrom; 
j.  Whether the event will requires that public spaces or facilities be used or burdened, or the routes and means of access thereto and therefrom, be temporarily diverted from their dedicated or customary uses, or the public or private users thereof be diverted or excluded from, or limited in their uses or enjoyment of, or their access to or through, said spaces or facilities before, during or after the event. 
(3)  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has in the past conducted or participated in an event of a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject of the instant application, and, if so, where and when such prior event(s) took place, and whether as a result of such event(s) the applicant or entity became the subject, whether or not then operating under the same name, as plaintiff or defendant, of any legal action, civil, criminal, or administrative. 
(4)  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or entity for whom the application is being made has defaulted upon or is in arrears as to any judgment civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant, or entity, whether or not then operating under the same name, as a result of participation in any prior event(s) or a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject of the instant application, and if so, a description of said judgment or order and an explanation for non-compliance. 
(5)  An indemnification and hold harmless agreement in favor of the city, its elected officials, officers, agents, and employees, in a form satisfactory to the attorney for the city. 
    If, as a direct consequence of exigent, unanticipated or other circumstances beyond the control of the applicant the applicant is unable to file an application not less than 20 days before an event, nothing herein shall be construed as precluding the filing of an application at a later time, but in such case the time limits for review by the city, and for review and appeal in the case of a denial of a permit, shall remain the same. 
    Where an event conducted on, over, upon, or burdening public properties, or employing the facilities thereon, which is also to substantially involve or take place partly or wholly upon private property with the consent of the owner(s) thereof, such owner(s) or their authorized representatives must join as an applicant for any permit for such event. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 4) 
Sec. 82-40. - Review by the city. 
    Within seven working days of receipt of an application, the city manager shall review the application in light of all of the contents thereof and the goals, intentions, and presumption of this article as set out hereinbefore, and render a decision and communication same to applicant, either permitting the event as planned or denying a permit for same. If the permit is denied, the city manager shall provide the applicant in writing a statement of the reasons therefore. (First class mail to the address provided by applicant, postmarked no more than seven working days after receipt of the application, shall be sufficient for this purpose, though not the exclusive means of notice.) 
    Nothing in this process shall prevent the city manager, at his/her sole option and within the seven days' period for approval or denial, to confer with applicant with respect to modifications of applicant's plan for the event, and amend the application to reflect such modifications if agreed to by the applicant. However, applicant may neither supplement nor amend its application within said seven days' period except at the invitation of the city. Any attempt to do so shall be automatically deemed a separate and new application. 
    The city manager may deny the application for permit upon any of the following reasons or combination of reasons: 
(1)  The application does not contain all required information, or that information set out is so incomplete, vague, or ambiguous as to prevent full and proper review by the city; 
(2)  The application contains material omissions, falsehoods, or misrepresentations; 
(3)  The applicant or entity represented by applicant is incompetent to contract, sue, or be sued; 
(4)  The person applying lacks authority to represent the entity for which the application is made; 
(5)  The applicant or entity represented by applicant has on prior occasions damaged public property, or has not paid in full for such damages, or is in arrears as to any judgment civil, criminal, or administrative rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant or entity, whether under the same name(s) or another; 
(6)  The applicant or entity represented by applicant has on prior occasions violated permitting ordinances in connection with events of a substantially similar nature; 
(7)  The plan of the event as proposed would present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of participants in the event or other members of the public (though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public); 
(8)  The plan of the event as proposed would unduly restrict and/or congest traffic (vehicular or pedestrian) on any of the public roads, rights of way, sidewalks, or waterways in the immediate vicinity of such event; 
(9)  The plan of the event as proposed would constitute an unreasonable disturbance of the peace, or would unreasonably burden lawful commerce in the area at the time of the proposed event, or would unreasonably intrude upon the privacy or property of citizens in the area of the proposed event (though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public); 
(10)  The plan of the event as proposed includes activities which are prohibited by laws of the United States, the State of Georgia, or ordinances of the city or county, or activities which constitute a nuisance or tortuous conduct with respect to public or private property or persons. 
    It is the specific intent of the city in enacting this article to regulate only the time, place and manner of events and not to regulate the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. The factors enumerated above, which the city finds express and support the substantial and compelling interests in this governing body in the preservation of the rights and liberties of its citizens and the safety, health and good order of its society, are the only bases upon which the city manager shall decide to issue or deny a permit applied for hereunder, and no such decision shall be made or justified based upon the anticipated or predicted content of the speech or expressive conduct of any applicant. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 5) 
Sec. 82-41. - Revocation. 
    Notwithstanding the grant of any permit as provided herein, law enforcement authorities shall have the authority to terminate an event at any time, or prevent its initiation, should traffic, weather or other conditions develop which present an imminent and undue danger to those participation gin the event pursuant to said permit, to the public at large, or should any consideration or combination of considerations enumerated herein as a ground for denial of a permit arise or first become apparent to law enforcement authorities after the grant of a permit. If in preparation for or after the start of an event for which a permit has been issued, participants in said event violate the terms of the permit or deviate in material fashion from the plan submitted in application for the permit, law enforcement authorities shall have the authority to terminate the event. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 6) 
Sec. 82-42. - Administrative review by city council. 
    Upon receipt of any decision by the city manager denying an application, the applicant may within five calendar days file an appeal of said denial with the governing board of the city, which appeal shall be in writing and be sent to the city by certified mail or hand delivery. Upon the receipt of any such appeal the city manager shall notify the attorney for the city, who shall promptly (but in case no later than seven calendar days after receipt of the appeal) seek review of the denial of the application in a called meeting of the mayor and council. The city manager shall have the burden of demonstrating the validity of the denial of the permit as applied for by the applicant. If no appeal is filed by the applicant, there shall be no duty on the part of the city to seek judicial review of the decision of the city manager. Nothing contained herein shall preclude the applicant from seeking judicial review of a denial of a permit in a court of competent jurisdiction at any time after notification of the decision on the application. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 7) 
Secs. 82-43-82-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RIGHT-OF-WAY CONSTRUCTION SAFETY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Obstructing, encroaching on, or injuring public roads, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1. 

Sec. 82-61. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "St. Marys Right-of-Way Construction Safety Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 10-26-87, § 1) 
Sec. 82-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Contractor means any person who engages in excavation, construction, building or work within or upon the right-of-way or streets located within the city. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-63. - Supervision. 
    The superintendent of public works shall from time to time inspect or cause to be inspected all work, building, excavation, tunneling or other work being made in or under or upon any public street or alley within the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to him at least ten hours before the work referred to herein commences. 
(Ord. of 10-26-87, § 3) 
Sec. 82-64. - Protective measures and routing of traffic. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person cutting or making an excavation in or upon any public place, or place and maintain barriers and warning devices necessary for safety of the general public. 
(b)  Barriers, warning signs, lights, etc., shall conform to the requirements of all applicable city ordinances. Warning lights shall be flares, torches, lanterns, electrical markers or flashers used to indicate a hazard to traffic from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day. Torches shall be open wick or flame flares or bombs generally used in connection with roadway repairs or construction and operating on kerosene or similar fluid. 
(c)  Lanterns shall burn kerosene or a similar fluid, and have clear red or ruby globes. Electrical markers or flashers shall emit light at sufficient intensity and frequency to be visible at a reasonable distance for safety. Reflectors or reflecting material may be used to supplement, but not replace, light sources. The city council may restrict the use of lanterns or open flame devices in fire hazard areas. 
(d)  The contractor shall take appropriate measures to assure that during the performance of the excavation work, traffic conditions as near normal as possible shall be maintained at all times so as to minimize inconvenience to the occupants of the adjoining property and to the general public. 
(e)  When traffic conditions permit the superintendent of public works may by written approval permit the closing of streets and alleys to all traffic for a period of time prescribed by him, if in his opinion it is necessary. Such written approval may require that the permittee give notification to various public agencies and to the general public. In such cases, such written approval shall not be valid until such notice is given. 
(f)  Warning signs shall be placed far enough in advance of the construction operation to alert traffic within a public street and cones or other approved devices shall be placed to channel traffic, in accordance with the instructions of the superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. of 10-26-87, § 4) 
Sec. 82-65. - Clearance for vital structures. 
    The excavation work shall be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water gates, underground vaults, valve housing structures, and all other vital equipment as designated by the superintendent of public works. 
(Ord. of 10-26-87, § 5) 
Sec. 82-66. - Protection of traffic. 
    The contractor shall maintain safe crossings for two lanes of vehicle traffic at all street intersections where possible and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals of not more than 300 feet. If any excavation is made across any public street, alley or sidewalk, adequate crossings shall be maintained for vehicles and for pedestrians. If the street is not wide enough to hold the excavated material without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, a passageway at least one-half of the sidewalk width shall be maintained along such sidewalk line. 
(Ord. of 10-26-87, § 6) 
Sec. 82-67. - Nonenforcement does not constitute waiver of regulations. 
    Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms or conditions of this article shall not constitute a general waiver or relinquishment of any such terms or conditions, but the same shall be and remain at all times in full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 10-26-87, § 7) 
Chapter 86 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 28, 2008, amended chapter 86 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 86, §§ 86-1-86-152, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of Sept. 7, 1978, §§ 101-902; Ord. of Apr. 1, 1982; Ord. of Jan. 22, 1990(1); and Ord. of Mar. 10, 1997(1). 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; historical preservation, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 98; zoning, ch. 110. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 86-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Subdivision Regulations of St. Marys, Georgia. 
Sec. 86-2. - Administration. 
    This chapter shall be administered by the Planning Commission of the City of St. Marys. 
Sec. 86-3. - Authority of planning commission. 
    Pursuant to the powers and jurisdictions vested through the city council and other applicable laws, statutes, ordinances and regulations of the state, the planning commission does hereby exercise the power to review, approve and disapprove plats for the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city, and to require minimum standards for improvements within such subdivided areas. 
Sec. 86-4. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of the regulations are to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the city. The overall objective of this chapter is to consider land subdivision plats as part of a plan for the orderly, efficient, and economical development of the land within the planning commission's jurisdiction. The following provisions shall guide the planning commission in formulating its decisions: 
(1)  Proposed streets shall compose a convenient and efficient traffic circulation system, properly related to the proposals of any transportation plan. Streets shall be of such width, grade and location to accommodate prospective traffic, provide adequate light and air, and to provide access by service and emergency vehicles. 
(2)  Land of suitable location, size and character for utility or drainage easements or public community services shall be shown on the subdivision plat wherever appropriate. 
(3)  Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health and welfare from flooding, fire, contamination, erosion and other menace. 
(4)  The development of any subdivision should avoid unnecessary environmental degradation; pollution of air, streams, ponds, and so on; and be in harmony with the natural environment. 
(5)  Protect and conserve the value of land and buildings throughout the city while avoiding conflicts among the uses of lands and buildings. 
(6)  Provide for adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements, facilities, and open space needs as will accommodate the anticipated rate of development. 
(7)  Establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions and resubdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land: and insurance of proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land to provide adequate records for land titles. 
(8)  Avoid excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply of public services. 
Sec. 86-5. - Jurisdiction and application. 
    The jurisdiction of this chapter shall apply to all that incorporated area within the boundaries of the city and this chapter shall apply (except as specifically exempt herein) to the following forms of land subdivision: 
(1)  The division of land into two or more parcels, lots, or tracts. 
(2)  The dedication, vacation, or reservation of any public easement or right-of-way through any tract of land regardless of the area involved. 
(3)  The consolidation of two or more parcels, lots, or tracts into one or more larger parcels. This consolidation is defined as a "reverse subdivision". 
(4)  The leasing of any portion of any existing parcel where the leased parcel is a smaller portion of a larger parcel. This shall apply to all parcels leased as a smaller portion of a larger parcel regardless of the intent of the parcel owner to transfer ownership at any point. This applies to all zones. 
Sec. 86-6. - Tree protection plan. 
(a)  Protected trees. On single and subdivided commercial lots, the building and parking area must be identified and all remaining trees on single or subdivided lots shall be protected in a tree protection zone as outlined in this section. 
(b)  Protective measures. In the tree protection zone, protective measures shall be applied to the above ground portion of a tree and to roots within the critical root zone, as follows: 
(1)  Damage prohibited. No person shall: 
a.  Cut, carve, transplant or otherwise damage or remove any tree; 
b.  Attach any rope, wire, nails, advertising posters or other contrivance to any trees; 
c.  Allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to trees (such as concrete washout, fuel, lubricants, herbicides, paint) to come in contact with them; or 
d.  Set a fire or permit any fire to burn when such fire or the heat of the fire will injure any portion of any tree. 
(2)  Fence required. During excavation, filling, construction or demolition operations, each tree or stand of trees shall be protected against damage to bark, roots and low-hanging branches with a fence enclosing the critical root zone (four feet high, two-inch by four-inch posts; with double one-inch by four-inch rails, plastic construction area fencing, or 12-gauge two-inch by four-inch wire mesh). "Tree save area" signs shall be posted on all sides of the fenced area. 'Critical root zone' shall be defined as the drip edge of the tree. 
(3)  Compaction prohibited. All buildings materials, vehicles, construction equipment, dirt, debris or other objects likely to cause soil compaction or above ground damage shall be kept outside the critical root zone. Where a limited amount of encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the building official, the critical root zone shall first be mulched with a four-inch layer of processed pine bark or wood chips or a six-inch layer of pine straw. 
(4)  Grade changes prohibited. There shall be no raising or lowering of the ground level within the critical root zone. Stripping of topsoil in the critical root zone shall not be permitted. Where necessary, the use of moderate fill is permitted only with prior installation of an aeration system approved by the building official. The depositing of sediment in the critical root zone shall be prevented by placement of Type C sediment barriers, which shall be backed by two-inch by four-inch wire mesh in areas of steep slope. 
(5)  Ditches, trenches prohibited. No person shall excavate any ditch, tunnel or trench within the critical root zone. Where such encroachment is unavoidable and is approved by the building official, tunneling rather than trenching shall be used. If roots must be cut, root pruning procedures approved by the building official must be employed. 
(6)  Paving prohibited. No person shall pave with concrete, asphalt or other impervious material within the critical root zone. 
(c)  Plan required; contents. A proposal for development or improvement of any tract of commercial land shall include a tree protection plan, including trees to be planted in order to repopulate the landscape due to removing trees or due to the lot not having any trees. Such plan shall be submitted to the building official prior to any grading, bulldozing or other removal of the existing vegetation. The plan shall show the following: 
(1)  Names and addresses of the owner of record and the applicant. 
(2)  Boundary lines of the tract by lengths and bearings, streets adjoining the property, total area of the tract, north point, graphic scale and date. 
(3)  All existing specimen trees, including those to be removed, and all other trees ten inches in diameter at a breast height (DBH), measured at 4.5 feet from the ground, or greater which will remain on the site and shall be protected during construction. The owner of the property shall indicate the common and botanical names and the size of each tree. In heavily wooded areas that will not be disturbed, the site plan may show only the boundaries of each stand of trees and a list of the number, size and species of ten inches DBH or larger trees in each stand. 
(4)  Locations of all existing and proposed new buildings, structures and paved areas, whether to be removed or to remain. 
(5)  Locations of all existing and proposed new utility lines. New utility lines must be placed along corridors between critical root zones of trees which will remain on the site. 
(6)  Limits of land disturbance, clearing, grading and trenching. 
(7)  Limits of tree protection areas, showing trees to be maintained specifying species and size. 
(8)  Grade changes or other work adjacent to a tree which would affect it adversely, with drawings or descriptions as to how the grade, drainage and aeration will be maintained around the tree. 
(9)  Planting schedule and site plan showing where and what type vegetation will be planted on cleared land upon completion of construction project. A minimum of one, two-inch or larger DBH tree every ten feet between the commercial building and any roadway must be planted. 
(d)  No tree shall be planted closer to a building foundation or water, sewer, electrical or natural gas line than as follows: 
(1)  For a mature small tree, five feet. 
(2)  For a mature medium tree, ten feet. 
(3)  For a mature large tree, 15 feet. 
(e)  No tree shall be planted under overhead utility distribution lines if the average mature height of the tree is greater than the lowest overhead wire. 
(1)  Landscape islands shall be provided within parking areas of six or more spaces, but shall not be required within vehicle storage or display areas. Initial designs should take into account any existing trees whenever possible. Refer to chapter 110 article IV [of the St. Marys Code of Ordinances] for additional parking requirements. 
a.  The total area of all islands shall comprise at least five percent of parking lot area in commercial zoning districts or three percent of parking lot area in industrial zoning district; plus one percent of other vehicle use area on the property (such as loading, storage or display areas). 
b.  Each island shall contain a minimum of 50 square feet. It shall be so shaped that a five-foot diameter circle will fit within the island. No portion of an island less than three feet in width may be counted in the area. 
c.  Landscape islands shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving. 
d.  Vehicles may overhang the landscape island to a depth of 24 inches provided the island is at least 3.5 feet in depth per each abutting head to head parking space, at least 7.0 feet in depth overall for abutting head to head parking space, and protected by wheel stops or curbing. Two feet of the landscaped area may count as part of the required depth of each abutting head-in parking space. (Condition A of Figure 1). For spaces at the perimeter of the lot, and not abutting head-in parking, the vehicle may overhang the landscape island to a depth of 24 inches with no minimum island dimension. (Condition B of Figure 1) 

(2)  Distribution of trees shall be as follows: 
a.  At least one tree, as recommended in the St. Marys Trees and Shrub Ordinance section 102-48, shall be planted in each required landscape island, and at least one tree, as recommended in the St. Marys Trees and Shrub Ordinance section 102-48, shall be planted for every 30 linear feet of length in each required planting strip. 
(3)  Criteria for replacement trees shall be as follows: 
a.  Spacing and the potential size of species chosen shall be compatible with spatial limitations of the site. 
b.  The species must be ecologically compatible with the specifically intended growing site. 
c.  The trees must have the potential for size and quality comparable to those removed. 
d.  Preference shall be given to specimens of no more than three inches DBH. 
e.  Authority for questions of tree characteristics shall be City of St. Marys Ordinance sections 102-46 through 102-50; publications of the state forestry commission; publications of the cooperative extension service of the University of Georgia College of Agriculture; or other authority acceptable to the city. 
(4)  For specimen and nonspecimen trees, emphasis shall be given to the preservation of specimen trees, even isolated individual specimen trees, over retention of other nonspecimen trees. Nonspecimen trees, however, should be saved in stands rather than as individual trees scattered over a site. 
(5)  The property owner shall maintain trees on the property in accordance with this article and the approved plan, including replacing trees which die or are irreparably damaged. 
(Ord. of 12-8-08, § 1) 
Secs. 86-7-86-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITION OF TERMS 

Sec. 86-21. - Usage and interpretation of terms. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, certain numbers, abbreviations, terms and words used herein shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in this section. 
(1)  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual. 
(2)  The word "shall" is a mandatory requirement, the word "may" is a permissive requirement, and the word "should" is a preferred requirement. 
(3)  The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, designed, or arranged to be used or occupied. 
(4)  The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel" or "tract". 
(5)  Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular includes the plural; words in the plural number include the singular; the word "herein" means "in this chapter"; the word "regulations" means "this chapter". 
(6)  A "building" includes a "structure", a "building" or a "structure" and includes any part thereof. 
(b)  Words not defined herein and defined by the city zoning ordinance shall be interpreted by way of said subdivision ordinance definitions; all other words not defined herein or by said subdivision ordinance shall be construed to have the meaning defined by the latest edition of the Oxford American Dictionary. 
Sec. 86-22. - Words and terms defined. 
    Benchmark: A permanent marker located as per this chapter and in a form defined by this section. Benchmark data, including location and elevation related to USGS data shall be shown on the final as-built drawings. 
    Block: A parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets or highways, railroad rights-of-way, waterways, or by a combination thereof. 
    Buffer or buffer zone: An area of land between and/or within the lot line; or any other line determined by survey or other legal means that has been determined by local, state, or federal agencies to be a buffer, with highly regulated activities only permitted in or adjacent to the buffer. Buffer lines shall be determined by the agency having jurisdiction that may include, but not be limited to, the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR), the Environmental Protection Division (EPD), Corps of Engineers (COE), the City of St. Marys (COSM), or others as appropriate or required by law. 
    Buildable area of lot: Upland area between all setbacks and outside of any recorded easements (see also Lot area). 
    Building line: That line which represents the distance a building or structure must be setback from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or a street centerline according to the terms of the zoning ordinance. In all cases, the building lines of a lot shall be determined to run parallel to and setback the appropriate distance required within the district in which the lot is located from street right-of-way lines, street center lines or other lot boundary lines. May also be referred to as "setback line". 
    City engineer: Appointed by the City of St. Marys. The term city engineer shall also include by this definition the public works director, or his designated project engineer. 
    Digital media: Final plats, and all other drawings required by this section shall be submitted on digital media on a compact disc (CD-RW) in two separate formats: 1) .dwg format readable in AutoCAD latest edition; and 2) .eps or .tif format. Read only formats are not acceptable. 
    Easement: A grant by the property owner to any person, firm or corporation, or to the general public of the use of a strip or parcel of land for a specified purpose. 
    Engineer: A registered professional engineer in good standing with the Georgia Board of Registration. 
    Fair market value: The value of property or structures as determined by the tax assessor. 
    Greenspace: Nondeveloped, natural (i.e. not manmade) land consisting of grasses, trees, forests, wetlands, water, or marshes. Whenever possible greenspace should remain natural or with minimal clearing or cleaning. 
    Governing authority: The City Council of the City of St. Marys. 
    Land: The solid part of the earth's surface that does not include sea, water and air. 
    Leased parcel: A parcel of land smaller than the deeded area that is leased under a time contract to an independent third party. 
    Lot: A parcel or plot of land of varying size which is designated as a single unit of property and which is intended to be occupied by one building, or group of buildings, and its accessory buildings and uses as required by this chapter. 
    Lot area: Land area within lot lines. 
    Minimum lot area: Upland area of the lot area as defined herein. 
    Manufactured home: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, that when traveling is eight body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and that is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and that has within it plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. 
    Manufactured home subdivision: A manufactured home park where manufactured home spaces are offered for sale. 
    Monument: A permanent marker installed at property corners or any location along a lot line where the line changes bearing. See section 86-36. Monuments for required design of monument. 
    Pavement return radius: Radius of pavement between intersecting streets which is used for vehicle turning. 
    Parcel: A piece of land. 
    Planning commission: The city planning commission. 
    Plat: A map or drawing upon which the subdivider's plan of the subdivision is presented for approval. 
    Public works manual: This reference is to the city public works policies and specifications manual established by Ordinance of October 24, 1988. 
    Reserved strip: A small strip of land between the terminus of a platted street right-of-way and the plat boundary whose ownership could be retained by the subdivider which would prevent the extension of said street into adjacent property. 
    Reuse or reclaimed water: Urban water reuse is a term generally applied to the use of reclaimed water for the beneficial irrigation of areas that are intended to be accessible to the public, such as golf courses, residential and commercial landscaping, parks, athletic fields, roadway medians, etc. Expanded uses for reuse or reclaimed water may also include fire protection, aesthetic purposes (landscape impoundments and fountains), industrial uses and some agricultural irrigation. Reuse or reclaimed water is domestic wastewater or a combination of domestic and industrial wastewater that has been treated to stringent effluent limitations such that the reclaimed water is suitable for nonpotable use in areas of unrestricted public access. 
    Right-of-way line: The outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way, which are established by usage, dedication or by official action. 
    Setback or setback line: See definition of Building line. 
    Sewerage, public: A system that is owned, maintained, and operated by the municipality, or a community corporation or a privately-owned system serving more than one lot and approved by the county health department and/or the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). 
    Sidewalk: A pedestrian walkway constructed of class "A" concrete measuring a minimum of five feet in width and four full inches thick constructed adjacent to at least one side of all streets regardless of classification. 
    Street: A dedicated public way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, thoroughfare, road, highway, expressway, lane, drive, alley or other public way. For the purposes of this chapter, "streets" are divided into the following categories (See also Table T-1): 
(1)  Major street: A street or highway which is used to move fast or heavy traffic between population centers, around population centers or from one section of the urban area to another. Georgia 40, St. Marys Road, Colerain Road, Kings Bay Road, etc. are examples of major streets. 
(2)  Collector street: A public way designed primarily to connect local streets with a major street or to provide access from residential areas to major destination points such as shopping or employment centers and which may be expected to carry a significant volume of traffic. Point Peter Road, Dilworth Street, Douglas Drive, etc. are examples of collector streets. 
(3)  Local street: A street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. Norris Street, Fourth Street, Seagrove Street, etc. are examples of local streets. 
(4)  Minor street: [A street] dedicated to public use which affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street and which may be used for public utility purposes. Seminole Street, Lisa Lane, Bambi Drive are examples of minor streets. These streets typically have drive, alley, lane, or place as part of their name. 
(5)  Marginal street: A minor street parallel and adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(6)  Cul-de-sac: A minor street of short length having one end open to traffic and one end terminating in a vehicular turn-around with required curb guttering. All culs-de-sac must comply with the requirements of the St. Marys Fire Department Fire Life Safety Code, latest edition. 
(7)  Subdivision street: A street within a subdivision plat which has been approved by the planning commission. 
    Streetlight: An approved light mounted on an approved mounting location within a city street right-of-way for the purpose of providing illumination for the area during nondaylight hours. 
    Subdivider: Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity subdividing land within the jurisdiction of this chapter. 
    Subdivision: The division of a tract, parcel or lot into two or more lots or building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, leasing, or legacy, or building development. This includes all division of land involving a new street or a change in existing streets and includes a resubdivision and, where appropriate, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided or to leased parcels. The following distinguishes between major and minor subdivisions; in the case of a minor subdivision, only a final plat is required while a major subdivision requires the filing of both a preliminary and final plat: 
(1)  Major subdivision: All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including, but not limited to, subdivisions of six or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of the local governmental facilities, or the creation of any public improvements. 
(2)  Minor subdivision: Any subdivision containing not more than five lots fronting on an existing street, and not involving any new street or road, or the extension of municipal facilities, or the creation of any public improvements, and not adversely affecting the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the master plan, zoning ordinance, or this chapter. The remainder of the subdivided parcel shall be in compliance with the zone that the subdivision is located. 
(3)  Reverse subdivision: Any subdivision combining one or more lots into one larger lot. All of the requirements for a major or minor subdivision (based on the number of lots combined) shall be met for any reverse subdivision. 
    Surveyor: A registered land surveyor in good standing with the Georgia Board of Registration. 
    Upland: The total area of solid earth included within lot lines not including area containing water, air, marsh or wetlands and their related or required buffers. 
    Utility: This term shall include gas, water, sewer, stormwater piping, grey water piping, electric, telephone, CATV, or any other like system, whether public or private. 
    Water, public: A system that is owned, maintained, and operated by the municipality, or a community corporation, or a privately-owned system serving more than one lot and approved by Camden County Health Department and/or EPD. 
    Zoning ordinance: The officially adopted city zoning ordinance, chapter 110. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Secs. 86-23-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 86-31. - Minimum design standards and improvements. 
    In order that the various purposes of this chapter may be accomplished, all subdivisions hereafter established shall be developed and improved in accordance with the minimum design standards set forth in this article and the city public works policies and specifications manual, all state codes and in accordance with section 102-27 of the tree ordinance, and applicable sections of the zoning ordinance, chapter 110. A quantity of greenspace shall be maintained within every subdivision as per these ordinances. Final approval shall not be given a subdivision until all appropriate design standards have been met and until all appropriate required improvements have either been installed or an appropriate performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or as otherwise provided for herein, has been posted to secure the installation of such improvements. 
Sec. 86-32. - Streets. 
    All streets which shall hereafter be established in connection with the development of a subdivision, as defined by this chapter, shall comply with the following design standards: 
(1)  General provisions. The following general provisions shall apply to all streets hereafter established in a subdivision: 
a.  Street classifications. Streets shall be defined as major, collector, minor, marginal, and local of dimensions noted in Table T-1 and as defined under the definitions section. 
b.  Continuation of existing street pattern. The arrangement of streets in a subdivision should provide for the alignment with, or the continuation of, or the appropriate projection of existing collector and major streets in surrounding areas as shown on the Georgia Department of Transportation Road Classification Map or the Master Plan of the City of St. Marys. 
c.  Egress and ingress. Every major subdivision will endeavor to have a minimum of two streets to ingress and egress into and out of the subdivision. The planning commission may approve a variance to this requirement when meeting specifications or conditions outlined in section 86-104. 
d.  Street jogs. Street jogs, or centerline offsets in the horizontal alignment of streets across intersections of less than 150 feet shall be prohibited. 
e.  Intersections. The centerline of no more than two streets shall intersect at any one point. Streets shall be laid out so as the centerlines will intersect as nearly as possible at right angles and no streets shall intersect any other street at less than 80 degrees. 
f.  Streets intersecting with major streets and minor streets. New street entrances on roads designated or classified as major streets shall not be less than 1,500 feet apart and new street entrances on roads designated or classified as collector streets shall be not less than 500 feet apart measured along the street centerline. Provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce these requirements whenever it determines that such action will not be contrary to the purposes of this chapter. Georgia DOT separation standards shall apply to all roadways under the direct jurisdiction of Georgia DOT. 
g.  Subdivisions on major streets. Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service lanes, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
h.  Minimum curb and street radius. The centerline radius of all curvilinear streets shall not be less than 75 feet, and shall be in accordance with American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) design standards. 
i.  Permanent dead-end streets. Dead-end streets, designed to be such either permanently, or for a term longer than one calendar year from acceptance of the street by the city, shall be provided at the closed end with a cul-de-sac having a right-of-way diameter of not less than 100 feet measured to the back of the curb except where such street serves three lots or less. 
j.  All streets shall have concrete curb and guttering installed on both sides of such paved area, as defined in Table T-1, by the subdivider and/or developer of said subdivision. 
k.  Sidewalks. Sidewalk design and construction standards. 
1.  Location. 
i.  Sidewalks shall be required adjacent to at least one side of every street regardless of classification. 
ii.  Sidewalks shall be continued if the subdivision abuts property that already has existing sidewalks installed. 
iii.  Community pedestrian paths, a minimum of ten feet in width, shall be required to connect a subdivision to a school, shopping area or community recreation facility as determined by the planning commission. 
iv.  Sidewalks shall be located in front of water lines and other easements. 
2.  Setback. Sidewalk shall be located within the street right-of-way and at least two feet from the back of curb. Sidewalks in subdivisions in which street trees are provided shall be located within the street right-of-way and at least six feet from the back of curb. The area between the sidewalk and the curb shall consist of grass or landscaping. 
3.  Design standards. 
i.  Sidewalks shall be located two feet from the back of curb. Where no curbing exists, sidewalks shall be placed in a location acceptable to the city engineer. 
ii.  All new sidewalks shall match and provide a smooth transition to any existing sidewalk, with no steps. 
iii.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete and shall be a minimum of five feet in width and four full inches thick. Concrete shall be class "A", as defined by Georgia DOT, and have a strength of 4,000 PSI at 28 days. 
iv.  Curb ramps to ADA standards shall be provided at all curb termini and shall be a minimum of four feet in width, exclusive of flared sides. 
v.  Expansion joints shall be provided at all property lines and driveway crossings. Control joints shall be provided every ten feet. 
vi.  Disturbed areas resulting from sidewalk construction shall be backfilled, stabilized and grassed. 
4.  Installation deadlines. 
i.  Sidewalks shall be installed along with water, sewer and road infrastructure improvements. Any damage done to sidewalks during construction on an individual lot shall be repaired to the same standard as listed above prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy for the residence. 
ii.  Sidewalk installation will be the responsibility of the subdivision developer. 
l.  Interior streets. Interior streets within subdivisions shall be so laid out and designed that their use by through-traffic and speeding traffic is discouraged. 
m.  Street names/house numbers. All streets within a subdivision hereafter established shall be named. No name shall be used which will duplicate existing street names within the existing E-911 service area (St. Marys, Kingsland, Camden County, Woodbine). All street names shall be submitted to and approved by the planning staff. House numbers will be assigned by the planning department and shall become the permanent number for the structure/parcel unless city council determines that a revision to the number is appropriate for E911 or tax parcel purposes. 
n.  Additional right-of-way. A proposed subdivision that includes a previously platted street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this chapter shall provide for the dedication of additional right-of-way along either one or both sides of said street so that the minimum right-of-way required by this chapter can be established. If the proposed subdivision abuts only one side of said street, then a minimum of one-half the required extra right-of-way shall be dedicated or reserved by such subdivision. 
o.  Street name, markers. Street name markers shall be constructed to city approval, shall be installed at all street intersections and shall be of durable material and legible as approved by the city engineer or public works department or Georgia DOT as applicable. Georgia DOT design and construction standards shall be utilized for all street markers/poles. 
p.  Major thoroughfare plan. When the major thoroughfare plan of the community shows proposed major streets and collector streets within the proposed location of a proposed subdivision, the subdividers shall design the street system within such subdivision to conform in general with the location and arrangement of such major street, collector and minor streets. 
q.  Exemptions from this section. Subdivisions which are comprised totally of private easements for streets or roadways shall not be subject to the provisions of this section 86-32, except subsection 86-32i., "sidewalks", and subsection 86-32r., "streetlights", shall apply. However, the city shall not be responsible for the construction, maintenance or repair of such private easements and/or sidewalks and the subdivider shall put a legend on all plats of the subdivision showing in capital letters: "NO PUBLIC MAINTENANCE OF STREETS OR ROADS." City will provide limited and specific maintenance of roadway surfaces where the surface (including any base materials) have been cut for maintenance of city sewers and water mains. All other maintenance and repairs shall be by the developer or "no public maintenance" subdivision. 
r.  Streetlights. Streetlight design and location shall be approved by the City of St. Marys and comply with all local power company requirements. 
1.  The city council does hereby declare that the cost and service of providing streetlights along city streets shall be a service and not a tax, as authorized by Georgia. Const., Arts. IX, IV, II. 
2.  Streetlights must be installed within every new subdivision by the developer, approved by the city as to quantity and location, with the residential utility customers and the city being responsible for the cost of providing and maintaining streetlight service. 
3.  All current streetlights or any additional streetlights power costs will be the responsibility of any residential or commercial utility customer who are billed for utility services with the city being responsible for the remaining costs to provide and maintain streetlight service. 
4.  Residents and commercial utility customers will only be responsible for a specified amount of the monthly electricity bill as determined by a schedule approved by the city mayor and council included in the monthly utility billing. 
5.  Streetlights installed on private streets shall be furnished, installed and maintained at the developer/property association/property owner's expense. Cost for energy to operate these street lights shall be paid for by the developer/property association/property owner. 
(2)  Design specifications. 
TYPES OF STREETS - TABLE T-1 
List of Specifications Major Streets Collector Streets Minor, 
Marginal, 
Local Streets Dead-end 
of Cul-de-Sac 
(Min. diameter) 
With Curbing Subdivision 
Streets 
WithCurbing Minimum right-of-way for two-lane single roadway (three and above require additional ROW) 80 ft. 60 ft. 60 ft. 100 ft. 60 ft. Min. Pavement width: Two-lane single roadway (both lanes) 24 ft. 24 ft. 24 ft. N/A 24 ft. Min. Pavement width: Two-lane divided roadway (each lane) 12 ft. 12 ft. 12 ft. N/A 12 ft. Percent sub-base compaction, modified proctor 98% 98% 98% 98% 98% Distance between curves 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. Minimum street centerline elevation (M.S.L.) 8.0 ft. 8.0 ft. 8.0 ft. 8.0 ft. 8.0 ft. Width of shoulders 8 ft. 8 ft. 8 ft. N/A N/A  
Notes to Table T-1: 
a.  Minimum specifications: All streets established in a subdivision shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the minimum specifications noted in Table T-1. Paving is required by this chapter and it shall be done in accordance with city regulations and the city public works manual. 
b.  Right-of-way requirements to major streets: In the case of major streets, a developer shall be required to dedicate an 80-foot right-of-way. Streets larger than two lanes will require additional ROW, as determined by the public works department and the planning department 
c.  Pavement width for major streets: If the City of St. Marys determines that a pavement width of greater than 24 feet is required for major streets, the developer shall be responsible for providing such additional pavement to the same specifications as required by the city. 
d.  Pavement return radius: Shall be constructed at intersections such that vehicles turning at the intersection can do so without leaving the pavement. All return radii shall be approved by the city engineer and fire department. 
e.  Street grading and ditching: All streets, as required herein, shall, at a minimum be graded and ditched to city specifications. 
f.  Drainage: Shall be approve by the city engineer or designee. Additional right-of-way for roadside ditches may be required when needed. 
g.  Cul-de-sac: Table T-1 indicates that the dead end turnaround portion of the cul-de-sac radius shall be related to the width of the roadway leading to the dead end. All radii shall be a minimum of 50 feet, zero inches, for a two lane road, with radii for three lanes and above as determined by the St. Marys Fire Department and the Planning Department. 
(3)  Paving requirements. All local streets must be prepared and paved according to the city public works policies and specifications manual. 
Sec. 86-33. - Lots. 
    All lots which shall hereafter be established within a subdivision shall comply with the following design standards: 
(1)  General provisions. The following general requirements shall apply to all lots hereafter established within a subdivision: 
a.  Street access. Each lot shall abut on a street with a minimum of 25 feet, which shall conform to the design requirements of this chapter. 
b.  Corner lots. Corner lots for residential use shall be provided with sufficient width and depth to permit the establishment of appropriate building setback lines from both streets. 
c.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall only be permitted where it shall be found necessary to separate a development from major streets or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
d.  FEMA minimum lot elevation. The finish floor elevation (FFE) of lots within floodprone areas as defined officially by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the United States Army Corps of Engineers, shall be a minimum of 12 inches above the established 100-year flood elevation. All development within the city shall conform to the requirements established for development within the established boundaries. 
e.  Drainage slope: All building pads shall be constructed a sufficient height above the crown of the road abutting the property so as to permit a drainage slope to the street of at least one-eighth-inch, per foot or steeper. 
f.  Lot area: All lots shall have upland area equivalent to, or greater than the minimum requirements of zoning ordinance, chapter 110. 
(2)  Lot width and lot area requirements. Lots hereafter established within subdivisions shall conform to the lot area and lot width requirements set forth in the zoning ordinance, chapter 110, and this chapter. 
(3)  Building lines. Building, or "setback," lines shall be provided on all lots and delineated on all final plats and shall conform at least to the city zoning ordinance, chapter 110, pertaining to the classification in which the lots to be subdivided are located. 
Sec. 86-34. - Blocks. 
    All blocks hereafter established within a subdivision shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Block lengths. In order that there may be convenient access between various parts of a subdivision and between the subdivision and surrounding areas for the purpose of preventing traffic congestion and traffic hazards, the length of blocks on a straightaway, where feasible, shall not exceed 1,500 feet in length. 
(2)  Crosswalks. Rights-of-way for pedestrian crosswalks shall be provided when, in the opinion of the planning commission, crosswalks are necessary to give a direct pedestrian approach to schools, local shopping centers, and parks. Said rights-of-way shall not be less than ten feet in width. 
Sec. 86-35. - Easements. 
    The following easements shall be required within subdivisions: 
(1)  Utility easements. Public utility easements shall be provided where necessary and shall meet the approval of the city engineer or designee, and be a minimum of 20 feet. All utilities shall be installed within designated easements. 
(2)  Drainage. Drainage easements or rights-of-way shall be provided where necessary and be approved by the city engineer or designee, and be a minimum of 20 feet. 
(3)  Maintenance easement. Where a drainage canal is such size that it requires mechanical means for cleaning, such as a dragline, water line, sewer line, storm drain or other infrastructure requiring cleaning or maintenance, there shall be a ten-foot access easement or right-of-way on each side of the centerline of such canal or infrastructure location for access purposes. 
Sec. 86-36. - Monuments. 
    Monuments shall be placed at block intersection points of rights-of-way within a subdivision. Iron pins shall be placed at all other lot corners. Reinforced concrete monuments four inches square, 24 inches long, with a flat top shall be set at each street corner within a subdivision, and at angle points and points of curvature in each street. The top of the monument shall contain a metal pin or be scored with an indented cross to properly identify the location. Monuments shall be installed following completion of all improvements and shall be identified on the final plat. 
Sec. 86-37. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
(a)  Provisions for storm and floodwater required. The planning commission shall not recommend for approval any final plat of subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or floodwater runoff channels or basins as recommended by the city engineer. The stormwater drainage system shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm sewers, where required, shall be designed in accordance with the city public works policies and specifications manual as approved by the city engineer, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or around any intersection, for a distance of more than 300 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, then basins shall be used to intercept flow at that point. Surface water drainage patterns shall be shown for each and every lot and block. 
(b)  Nature of stormwater facilities. 
(1)  Location. The applicant may be required by the city engineer to carry away, by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the construction standards and specifications. 
(2)  Accessibility to public storm sewers. Where a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall be made for the disposal of stormwaters, subject to the specifications of the city engineer. 
(3)  Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area, whether inside or outside the subdivision. The city engineer shall approve the developer's design of the size of the facility, based on the provisions of the construction standards and specifications assuming conditions of maximum potential watershed development permitted by the zoning ordinance. 
(c)  It is strictly prohibited for any developer or property owner to connect any private downspouts, exterior drains, pool drains and other similar stormwater devices into the city public sanitary sewer system. 
Sec. 86-38. - Water supply. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a water-supply district for the purpose of providing a water-supply system capable of providing domestic water use and fire protection in accordance with the city public works policies and specifications manual and the city's adopted fire prevention codes. 
(2)  Where a public water main is accessible the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the city engineer. All water mains shall be at least six inches in diameter and be looped where possible. Dead-end runs shall be avoided, and only be permitted by approval of the city engineer and/or fire department. 
(3)  Water main extensions shall be approved by the city engineer and the environmental protection division (EPD). 
(4)  To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat, and the cost of installing same shall be included in the performance bond to be furnished by the developer. 
(b)  Individual wells and central water systems. 
(1)  In low-density zoning districts, in the discretion of the planning commission, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the health department for its approval, and individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the county health department and EPD. Copies of written orders of approval shall be submitted to the planning commission. 
(2)  The planning commission shall require that a connection to a public water main be eventually provided as a condition to approval of an individual well or central water system, and the applicant shall make arrangements for future water service at the time the plat receives final approval. Performance or cash bonds may be required to insure compliance. 
(c)  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions unless specifically exempted by action of city council. Fire hydrants shall be located in accordance with the St. Marys Fire Department Life Safety Code, latest edition. Distances shall be measured down the street centerline, and shall be approved by the applicable protection unit. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. 
Sec. 86-39. - Sewage disposal. 
(a)  General requirements. The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the local government construction standards and specifications. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, regulations, and standards of the city engineer, county health department and other appropriate agency. Plans shall be approved by the above agencies. No public sewer shall be less than eight inches in diameter. 
(b)  Medium and high-density residential and nonresidential districts. Sanitary sewerage facilities shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems. Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to grades and sizes required by approving officials and agencies. No individual disposal system or treatment plants (private or group disposal systems) shall be permitted except by specific approval of city council. Sanitary sewerage facilities (including the installation of laterals in the right-of-way) shall be subject to the specifications, rules, regulations, and guidelines of the health officer, city engineer, and appropriate state agencies. 
(c)  Low-density residential districts. Sanitary sewerage systems shall be constructed as follows: 
(1)  Where a public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably accessible, as determined by the city engineer, the applicant shall connect with same and provide sewers accessible to each lot in the subdivision. 
(2)  Where public sanitary sewerage systems are not reasonably accessible but will become available within a reasonable time (not to exceed 15 years), the applicant may choose one of the following alternatives with EPD approval: 
a.  Central sewerage system: the applicant shall furnish an approved temporary system as per this ordinance. The cost of maintenance to maintain any system noted herein shall be assessed against each property and/or party that will benefit from this temporary system. Where plans for future public sanitary sewage systems exist, the applicant shall install the sewer lines, laterals, and mains to be in permanent conformance with such plans and ready for connection to such public mains; or 
b.  Individual disposal systems: the applicant shall install sanitary sewer lines, laterals, and mains from the street curb to a point in the subdivision boundary where a future connection with the public sewer main shall be made. Sewer lines shall be laid from the house to the street line, and a connection shall be available in the home to connect from the individual disposal system to the public sewer system when the public sewers become available. Such sewer systems shall be capped until ready for use and shall conform to all plans for installation of the public sewer system, where such exist, and shall be ready for connection to such public sewer main. When connection is made to the public sewer system, the final disposition of the existing septic tank and tile field shall be by the property owner of record in accordance with the Camden County Health Department requirements. 
(3)  Where sanitary sewer systems are not reasonably accessible and will not become available for a period in excess of 15 years, the applicant may install individual systems or central sewerage or central sewerage systems in low-density residential districts only, with EPD and/or the health department's approval. 
(d)  Mandatory connection to public sewer system. If a public sanitary sewer is accessible and a sanitary sewer is placed in a street or alley abutting upon property, the owner thereof shall be required to connect to said sewer for the purpose of disposing of waste, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner or occupant to maintain upon any such property an individual sewage disposal system. 
(e)  Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and applicable county health department ordinances and percolation tests and test holes shall be made as directed by the county health officer and the results submitted to the county health department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields, or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the county health officer and/or EPD as applicable. 
Sec. 86-40. - Benchmarks. 
    A minimum number of benchmarks, not less than two, shall be established within each major subdivision. Such benchmarks shall be at opposite corners of the property being subdivided where feasible as verified by the city engineer. Developer shall note the location of any benchmarks on the approved plat. 
Sec. 86-41. - Reserved. 
Sec. 86-42. - Utilities; location. 
(a)  All utility facilities including, but not limited to, gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cable shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. 
(b)  Wherever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except where existing on a public road and/or recorded right-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the planning commission, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary use. 
Sec. 86-43 - Nonpotable reuse or reclaimed water requirements. 
(a)  Nonpotable reuse lines (NPRC). A nonpotable reuse water main shall be installed in all subdivisions located within the city council designated mapped areas indicating which areas within the City of St. Marys, may receive reuse or reclaimed water from a city waste water treatment plant meeting the effluent standards as determined by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD). The system shall include reuse or reclaimed water mains, valves, fittings, hydrants and distribution lines and shall be in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the city engineer for the City of St. Marys. The system shall be designed and installed in accordance with the City of St. Marys Public Works Manual for Nonpotable Water Reuse or Reclaimed Facilities. 
(b)  These reuse or reclaimed water facilities shall be installed on all new subdivisions located within the designated mapped areas whether reuse or reclaimed water is currently available or not. Once reuse or reclaimed water is available, it will be provided to the existing infrastructure thus installed. The requirements of this section will not apply to existing subdivisions under construction as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, or to subdivisions where the city has accepted all infrastructure improvements within that subdivision. Any completed subdivision developer, within the mapped areas, has the option to install reuse or reclaimed water lines, at their cost and to the requirements of the public works manual, to utilize the reuse or reclaimed water within their subdivision. 
(c)  The engineering plans for nonpotable reuse or reclaimed water systems shall be provided as part of the initial site engineering review along with the sanitary, water, and stormwater systems. 
Secs. 86-44-86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 86-61. - Administrative agency. 
    The city planning commission shall administer this chapter. It shall be the duty of the planning staff to inspect sketch plans and to suggest changes which should be made in the proposed design of a subdivision to insure the approval of the preliminary plat. It shall be the duty of the planning commission to inspect preliminary plats and to approve or disapprove such plat. It shall be the duty of the planning commission to inspect final plats and the information submitted within such final plats, and to recommend approval of such final plats to city council when the requirements of this chapter have been met and to recommend disapproval to city council of such final plats when the requirements of the ordinance have not been met. When the planning commission acts on the final plat it shall be forwarded to the city council for their signature. 
Sec. 86-62. - Prefiling conference and sketch plan. 
(a)  Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, the applicant is strongly encouraged to arrange for a prefiling conference with the planning department staff for the purpose of preliminary discussions. Any applicant choosing to arrange for such a conference shall prepare and submit a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision. The sketch plan need not be prepared by a professional engineer or surveyor but must be of sufficient detail to allow the planning staff to assess and discuss the proposal. 
(b)  Sketch plan specifications. The sketch plan may be a free-hand pencil sketch and it shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name. 
a.  Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision. 
b.  Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded. 
c.  Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen (this is the name by which the property is commonly known). 
(2)  Ownership. 
a.  Name and address, including telephone number of legal owner or agent of property, and citation of last instrument conveying title to each parcel of property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference. 
b.  Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
c.  Existing covenants on the property, if any. 
d.  If appropriate, the name and address of the professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of public improvements, and for surveys. 
(3)  Description. Location of property by legal description, graphic scale, north arrow, and date. 
(4)  Features. 
a.  Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, water courses, and existing wooded areas; location, width, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract; names of the adjoining property owners from the latest assessment rolls. 
b.  Existing permanent buildings and utility poles on or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way. 
c.  Approximate topography at the same scale as the sketch plat; this need not include detailed mapping, but should include approximate elevations and an indication of existing drainage patterns. 
d.  The approximate location and widths of the proposed streets. 
e.  Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewerage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface water drainage. 
f.  The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots. 
g.  The approximate location, dimensions, and areas of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision. 
h.  If appropriate, the location of temporary stakes to enable the planning commission to find and appraise features of the sketch plat in the field, if appropriate. 
i.  Whenever the sketch plat covers only a part of an applicant's contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit at the scale of no more than 200 feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the proposed subdivision area, together with its proposed street system, and an indication of the probable future street and drainage system of the remaining portion of the tract. 
j.  A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of the surrounding area. 
Sec. 86-63. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  Before work shall begin to open a subdivision, (preliminary plats are not required for minor subdivisions) an original and eight prints of a preliminary plat, showing the proposed design of the subdivision shall first be submitted to the planning commission for approval. Until the preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision has been approved by the planning commission, a developer shall not grade, scrape, or otherwise open or extend a street in the proposed subdivision, nor shall he in any other manner cause construction to actually begin in a subdivision. Clearing of underbrush sufficient for purposes of surveying or engineering is permitted. However, land disturbing activities as regulated by the city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, or in the absence thereof as regulated by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, shall not be performed without first obtaining a permit for such land disturbing activities. 
(b)  Preliminary plat requirements. The original copy of the preliminary plat shall be drawn on transparent tracing materials with either black ink or soft pencil. Such plat shall be drawn at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the inch. The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  General. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor at a convenient scale, not more than one inch equals 100 feet, may be prepared in pen or pencil and the sheets shall be numbered in sequence if more than one sheet is used and shall be of such size as is acceptable for filing in the office of the clerk of superior court, namely: a maximum of 24 inches x 36 inches, leaving one margin, two inches in width for binding purposes with the remaining margins to be one-half inch. It should be noted that the map prepared for the preliminary plat may also be used for the final subdivision plat, and therefore, should be drawn on tracing cloth or reproducible mylar; preparation in pencil will make required changes and additions easier. 
(2)  Features. The preliminary plat shall show the following: 
a.  The location of property with respect to surrounding property and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record, or names of adjoining developments; the names of adjoining streets. 
b.  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. 
c.  The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, bridges, as determined by the planning commission. 
d.  The location and width of all existing and proposed streets and easements, alleys, and other public ways, and easement and proposed street rights-of-way, and building setback lines. 
e.  The locations, dimensions, and areas of all proposed or existing lots. 
f.  The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for park/playground use, or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose thereof, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
g.  The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner, and the name of the land surveyor. 
h.  The date of the map, approximate true north point, scale, and name of the subdivision. 
i.  Sufficient data acceptable to the city engineer or designee, to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the ground; the location of all proposed monuments. 
j.  Names of the subdivision and all new streets as approved by the planning staff. 
k.  Indication of the use of any lot (single-family, two-family, multifamily, townhouse) and all uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider. 
l.  Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively through the several additions. 
m.  All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered. 
n.  All information required on sketch plat should also be shown on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be shown: 
1.  Explanation of drainage easements, if any. 
2.  Explanation of site easements, if any. 
3.  Explanation of reservations, if any. 
4.  Endorsement of surveyor or engineer verifying compliance with chapter 86 of the City of St. Marys Code of Ordinances. 
o.  Form for endorsements by the planning commission as follows: 
Approved by Resolution of the St. Marys Planning Commission. 
Chairman _____ Date__________ 
p.  The lack of information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be the cause of disapproval of a preliminary plat. 
(3)  Additional information-Construction plans. If applicable, the following information shall be provided with the preliminary plat: 
General-Construction plans shall be prepared for all required or otherwise provided improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a scale of no more than one inch equals 50 feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the preliminary plat. Construction plans shall be submitted in hard copy and in digital format as specified by the city engineer. The following shall be shown: 
a.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center lines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the center line of the existing road or roads within 100 feet of the intersection, shall be shown. Approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets shall be shown. 
b.  The planning commission may require, where steep slopes exist, that cross sections of all proposed streets at 100-foot stations shall be shown at five points as follows: On a line at right angles to the center line of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center line of the street, each property line, and points 25 feet inside each property line. 
c.  Plans and profiles showing the locations and typical cross section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, servitudes, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the location of street trees, street lighting standards, and street signs; the location, size, and invert elevations of existing and proposed sanitary sewers, stormwater drains, and fire hydrants, showing connection to any existing or proposed utility systems; and exact location and size of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or structures if provided. 
d.  Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate description of any existing facilities or utilities, including, but not limited to, existing streets, sewers, drains, water mains, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, features noted on the official map or comprehensive plan, at the point of connection to proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision, and each tree with a diameter of eight inches or more, measured four feet above ground-level. The water elevations of adjoining lakes or streams at the date of the survey, and the approximate high- and low-water elevations of such lakes or streams shall be indicated. All elevations shall be referred to the U.S.G.S. datum plane. If the subdivision borders a lake, river, or stream, the distances and bearings of a meander line shall be established not less than 25 feet back in accordance with the city's erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. 
e.  Topography at the same scale as the sketch plat with a contour interval of one foot, referred to sea level datum. All datum provided shall be in accordance with NAVD88 (North American Vertical Datum 88) and shall be so noted on the plat. 
f.  Horizontal datum shall be to the NAD83 (North American Datum 83) and shall be so noted on the plat. 
g.  All specifications and references required by the local government's construction standards and specifications including a site-grading plan for the entire subdivision. 
h.  Notation of approval as follows: 
Owner _____ Date______ 
Planning Commission Chairman 
_____ Date______ 
i.  Title, name, address, and signature of professional engineer and surveyor, and date, including revision dates. 
j.  A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan shall also be submitted for those subdivisions subject to the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. 
(c)  Filing of the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be filed with the planning commission at least 32 days prior to the regular planning commission meeting at which it is to be considered. Preliminary plats when submitted to the planning commission for review shall be accompanied by a fee as required by article IX. Planning commission staff shall issue a receipt for all fees received. Said fees shall be made payable to the City of St. Marys. 
(d)  Action on preliminary plat. If the planning commission finds that the proposed design and proposed installation of improvements of the subdivision shown on the preliminary plat complies with the requirements of this chapter, it shall approve such preliminary plat. Preliminary plat approval does not release the engineer, surveyor or developer from complying with any and all requirements of the subdivision ordinance. If the planning commission finds that the proposed subdivision shown on the preliminary plat does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, then the planning commission shall either disapprove such plat or shall approve such plat on the condition that specified violations are corrected prior to the submittal of the final plat. When the planning commission disapproves a preliminary plat, it shall give the developer the reasons for such disapproval in writing. Except where an extension of time is requested by, and authorized by the applicant for the preliminary plat review, the planning commission shall have 90 days from the public hearing date of a preliminary plat to approve, or disapprove such plat; otherwise, the preliminary plat shall be deemed to have been approved and a certificate to that effect shall be issued by the planning commission on demand. No plat shall be acted upon by the planning commission without affording a public hearing thereon. Notice of time and place of the public hearing shall be sent by mail to the address of the plat applicant not less than five days before the hearing. 
(e)  When preliminary plat approved, work may proceed. When a developer receives approval of the preliminary plat showing the design of his proposed subdivision, he may proceed with the construction of the subdivision, provided other required permits have been issued. Such construction shall conform with the design and plans submitted to and approved by the city engineer. A performance bond as defined herein shall be provided when construction work begins prior to final plat submission. 
(f)  Time limit on preliminary approval. The planning commission's approval of a preliminary plat shall be valid for one year. If work has not started on a subdivision which has been granted preliminary plat approval on or before the end of this year period, then the plat of such subdivision shall be resubmitted for preliminary approval; provided, however, that this time may be extended by the planning commission unless changes have occurred in this chapter, or in the character of the property of the proposed subdivision which makes it necessary to revise and resubmit the design of the proposed subdivision. 
Sec. 86-64. - Final plat. 
    Before a plat of a subdivision is recorded with the "Clerk of the Superior Court" of Camden County and title to the lots thereon are conveyed, four original and 12 prints of a final plat showing the final design of the subdivision shall be submitted to the planning commission for review. Until a final plat of a subdivision has been submitted to, and reviewed and approved by the planning commission, and approved and signed by the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the clerk of the superior court of the county shall not record the plat of such subdivision, nor shall the owner or agent of such subdivision transfer title to any lot within the subdivision by reference to the subdivision plat. For large subdivisions, the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the planning staff. 
(1)  Final plat requirements. 
a.  Four original copies of the final subdivision plat shall be at the same scale and contain the same information, except for any changes or additions required by resolution of the planning commission, as shown on the preliminary plat. The final plat shall also be submitted in a digital format as approved by the city engineer. The preliminary plat may be used as the final subdivision plat if it meets these requirements and is revised in accordance with the planning commission's resolution. All revision dates must be shown as well as the following: 
1.  Notation of any self-imposed restrictions, and locations of any building lines proposed to be established in this manner, if required by the planning commission in accordance with this chapter. 
2.  Listing of zoning classifications that the subdivision is part of, with all setbacks, height criteria, lot coverage, parking requirements, easements, and other restrictions noted. 
3.  Notation on the drawing of the tax parcel numbers for the parcel being approved. 
4.  Notation of the floodplain and its height and restrictions. 
5.  Endorsement of the county health department if required. 
6.  Lots numbered and street names listed as approved on the preliminary plat. 
7.  A digital submission of the final plat in accordance with the city's specified digital requirements shall be submitted. A paper copy of the final plat will not be accepted by the city unless accompanied by a digital copy of the final plat. 
8.  All monuments erected, corners, and other points established in the field in their proper places. The material of which the monuments, corners, or other points are made shall be noted at the representation thereof or by legend, except that lot corners need not be shown. The legend for metal monuments shall indicate the kind of metal, the diameter, length, and weight per lineal foot of the monuments. 
9.  Notation as to the presence of covenants and the initial term of said covenants. (Note: the actual text of the covenants need not be listed, only that there are covenants present.) The City of St. Marys will not enforce any covenants. 
10.  Clerk of courts recording block. The following recording block shall be inserted on each and every sheet being filed with the clerk of superior court: 
RECORDING DATA: 
STATE OF GEORGIA, COUNTY OF CAMDEN: 
OFFICE OF CLERK OF THE SUPERIOR COURT 
WITHIN PLAT RECORDED IN PLAT 
CABINET_____ FILE No. ____ 
THIS________ DAY OF_______ 20 . 
BY:;hg;______________________ DATE _________ 
DEPUTY CLERK 
11.  Mayor/mayor pro tempore's signature: The following signature block shall be inserted on the cover sheet (first sheet) of any set of drawings for recording: 
BY THE CITY OF ST. MARYS, GEORGIA 
BY:;hg;__________________________ DATE:__________ 
MAYOR/MAYOR PRO TEMPORE 
12.  Owner's certificate: The following signature block shall be inserted on the cover sheet (first sheet) of any set of drawings for recording: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATE: 
STATE OF GEORGIA, COUNTY OF CAMDEN 
THE OWNER OF THE LAND SHOWN ON THIS PLAT AND WHOSE NAME IS SUBSCRIBED HERETO, IN PERSON OR THROUGH A DULY AUTHORIZED AGENT, CERTIFIES THAT SAID OWNER HAS CAUSED THE SUBDIVISION OF THE LAND SHOWN HEREON BY AN ACTUAL SURVEY, AND DOES HEREBY IRREVOCABLY DEDICATE TO THE USE OF THE PUBLIC ALL ROADS AND EASEMENTS FOR THE PURPOSES THAT THEY ARE LABELED. 
BY:______________________ 
OWNER'S NAME ______________ 
DATE  
13.  Community development director's signature block: The following signature block shall be inserted on the cover sheet (first sheet) of any set of drawings for recording: 
APPROVAL OF THE ST. MARYS COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR; 
SUBDIVIDER HAS COMPLIED WITH THE SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS RELATIVE TO THE GUARANTEE OF ALL IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED BY THE CITY OF ST. MARYS SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. 
BY: ____________________________ 
 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DIRECTOR _____________________ 
DATE  
14.  Planning commission chair signature block: The following signature block shall be inserted on the cover sheet (first sheet) of any set of drawings for recording: 
APPROVAL CERTIFICATE 
RELATIVE TO THE PREPARATION AND SUBDIVISION OF THIS FINAL PLAT, ALL REQUIREMENTS OF THE ST. MARYS, GEORGIA SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS HAVE BEEN FULFILLED AND APPROVAL OF THIS PLAT IS HEREBY GRANTED. 
BY: _______________________________________   DATE: _____________ 
CHAIRMAN OF PLANNING COMMISSION 
15.  City engineer/public works director's signature block: The following signature block shall be inserted on the cover sheet (first sheet) of any set of drawings for recording: 
APPROVAL OF THE ST. MARYS CITY ENGINEER or PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR; 
SUBDIVIDER HAS COMPLIED WITH THE SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS RELATIVE TO THE GUARANTEE OF ALL IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED BY THE CITY OF ST. MARYS SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS. 
BY: _______________________________________   DATE: _____________ 
CITY ENGINEER/PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR 
b.  Preparation. The final subdivision plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor or professional engineer licensed by the state. 
(2)  Certificate from city engineer. At the time the final plat is submitted it shall be accompanied by a city engineer approved site plan or a letter from the city engineer approving the site plan, a letter from the surveyor certifying that the final plat agrees with any and all changes generated by the engineering site plan review and a certificate from the city engineer or designee, certifying that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives: 
a.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and in accordance with the design approved by the planning commission on the preliminary plat; 
b.  A performance bond or certified check has been posted, which is available without obligation or requirement to the city, and in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all improvements as required on the final plat; or 
c.  If a development is divided into constituent and sequential phases or additional subdivisions to be submitted for approval in the form of additional preliminary and final plats, approval for any subsequent phase shall not be granted to any sequential constituent phases or stages until all water, sewer, stormwater drainage and road infrastructure improvements related to the prior phase have been completed, inspected, accepted by the city engineer and dedicated to the city in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(3)  Filing the final plat. The final plat shall be filed with the not less than 32 days prior to a regular meeting of the planning commission. In the case of a final plat for a minor subdivision where the preliminary plat requirement has been waived, the filing fee, as established by article IX, shall accompany the final plat. 
(4)  Action on the final plat. If the planning commission finds that all the requirements of this chapter have been met, the final plat shall be deemed approved, and submitted to the city council. If the planning commission finds that all the requirements of this chapter have not been met, and after deficiencies have been discussed and reviewed with the sponsor, and the sponsor given a period of time which shall not exceed 90 days to take corrective action, and if he fails to take such action, then the planning commission shall disapprove the final plat and shall set forth its reasons for such disapproval in writing. Except where an extension of time is authorized by the applicant for final plat review, the planning commission shall have 90 days from the date of the submission of a final plat to take action. Unless such action is taken within such 90-day period, then such plat shall be deemed to have received the approval of the planning commission. After the final plat has been approved, the city council shall, within 30 days, at a regular meeting of city council review and vote on such plat. If no action is taken within the 30-day period, and the applicant has not requested an extension, or city council has not raised any issues that would affect said approval, such plat shall be deemed to have received an approval from the city council. 
a.  When the final plat has been approved, the director shall present the final plat to the Clerk of the Superior Court of Camden County to be recorded. The community development director shall maintain a reproducible copy of the final plat and the subdivision map book number and page number in which the subdivision has been recorded by the clerk of the superior court. All costs of the copy and such recording shall be paid by the subdivider and shall be deposited with the community development director prior to such recording. 
b.  After the final plat of the subdivision has been recorded, then all lots shown on such subdivision may be transferred or conveyed according to such plat, and such subdivision shall be entitled to all privileges and services available to other subdivisions within the city. 
(5)  Revisions to recorded plat. 
a.  Major plat revisions: The subdivider shall file with the community development department copies of any proposed revision to a recorded plat together with all supporting information as required by this chapter. Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which alter or change in any way the street and/or utility layout of said plat shall be submitted as a preliminary plat in accordance with section 86-63. 
b.  Minor plat revisions: Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which do not alter or change in any way the street and/or utility layout of said plat shall be submitted as a final plat in accordance with this section 86-64. Proposed revisions to a recorded plat which do not increase the lot quantity and which maintain the minimum zoning requirements of chapter 110 of the zoning ordinance shall be submitted on a new revised plat that shall be recorded with owner, surveyor, city engineer/public works director and community development director endorsement and do not have to be presented as a preliminary or final plat for council approval, if approved by the public works, fire, building and community development departments. 
(Ord. No. 2017-3-6-002 , 3-6-17) 
Secs. 86-65-86-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 86-81. - Completion of improvements. 
    All improvements required in this chapter shall be guaranteed. All improvements shall be dedicated to the city, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the property and public improvements thus dedicated and accepted by the city council upon completion of the one year warranty. Before the final plat is recorded by the planning director, all applicants shall be required to complete all the street, sanitary, and other improvements as required in this chapter, specified in the final subdivision plat, and as approved by the planning commission and city council. 
Sec. 86-82. - Guarantee of improvements. 
(a)  Performance bond. 
(1)  The city council in its discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat and that, as an alternative, the applicant post a bond at the time of application for final subdivision approval in an amount estimated by the applicant and approved by the city engineer as sufficient to secure to the local government the satisfactory construction, installation, and dedication of the incomplete portion of required improvements. The performance bond shall also secure all lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision as required in this chapter. Bond amount shall be in an amount not less than 150 percent of the estimate prepared by the applicant and approved by the public works department and/or city engineer. Any reduction in bond amount or partial release of bond shall only be authorized by city council. 
(2)  Such performance bond shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in this chapter. The period within which required improvements must be completed shall be specified by the city engineer and approved by the city council in the resolution approving the final subdivision plat and shall be incorporated in the bond and shall not in any event exceed two years from date of final approval unless an additional time is approved in writing by city council. 
(3)  Such bond shall be approved by the city engineer as to amount and surety and conditions satisfactory to the city attorney and city engineer. The planning commission may upon proof of difficulty, recommend to the city council extension of the completion date set forth in such bond for a maximum period of one additional year. The city council may at any time during the period of such bond accept a substitution of principal or sureties on the bond upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
(4)  There shall be no expiration date on any properly issued bonds for any project. The bonds shall be rescinded only after all improvements are completed and all required documentation received and approved by the appropriate city departments and/or city council. 
(5)  If, for any reason, the applicant's bond is revoked, such revocation will result in an immediate stop work order until such time as a replacement bond is secured. No claim for damages related to the applicant's loss of bond will be permitted. 
(b)  One year warranty/maintenance bond. Applicant shall provide a one year warranty/maintenance bond on all improvements related to the subdivision. Developer shall repair/replace any items that need maintenance work within one year of the date of final acceptance (the date the bond is released, or other agreed upon date). The city engineer shall be the sole arbiter of deficient workmanship in this one-year warranty period. Developer shall provide a maintenance bond in the amount of ten percent of the total construction cost to be valid for a period of 12 months after acceptance by the city in writing of the improvements in any public or private development. Bond shall be in favor of the City of St. Marys. 
(c)  Temporary improvements. The applicant shall build and pay for all costs of temporary improvements required by the city council and shall maintain same for the period specified by the city council. Prior to construction of any temporary facility or improvement, the developer shall file with the city a separate suitable bond for temporary facilities, which bond shall ensure that the temporary facilities will be properly constructed, maintained, and removed. There shall be no expiration date on any properly issued bonds for any project. The bonds shall be rescinded only after all improvements are completed and all required documentation received and approved by the appropriate city departments and/or city council. 
(d)  Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the applicant, at his expense, without reimbursement by the city or any improvement district therein. 
(e)  Governmental units. Governmental units to which these bonds and contract provisions apply may file in lieu of said contractor bond a certified resolution or ordinance from officers or agencies authorized to act on their behalf, agreeing to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Failure to complete improvement. In those cases where a performance bond has been posted and required improvements have not been installed within the terms of such performance bond, the local government may thereupon declare the bond to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the bond is declared to be in default. 
(g)  Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by resolution of the city council. The approval by the planning commission of a subdivision plat shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the local government of any street, easement, or park shown on said plat. The planning commission may require said plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this effect. 
(h)  Alternate improvement guarantees. If the city council finds that a developer is not able to post a performance bond, the city council may require the subdivider to use one of the following improvement guarantee techniques: 
(1)  Sequential development. Where a subdivision is to be developed in phased portions, the city council may waive the use of a guarantee on the initial portion, provided that such portion may not contain more than 25 lots, or 50 percent of the total number of lots proposed for the subdivision, whichever is less. The city council may grant final plat approval to only one portion at a time, with the plat approval for each succeeding portion being contingent upon completion of all contracted improvements in each preceding portion, and acceptance of those improvements by the city council. Completion of improvements in the final portion of the subdivision, which must include at least 25 lots or 50 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision, whichever is less, must be guaranteed through the use of a performance bond as defined herein or letter of credit as noted herein. 
(2)  Letter of credit. Subject to the approval of the city council, the subdivider shall provide a nonrevokable letter of credit from a bank or other reputable institution or individual. This letter shall be deposited with the city council and shall certify the following: 
a.  That the creditor guarantees funds in an amount equal to 150 percent of the estimated cost, as estimated by the subdivider and verified by the city engineer and approved by the city council, of completing all required improvements. 
b.  That if the subdivider fails to complete the specified improvements within the required period, the creditor will pay to the city immediately, and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter. 
c.  That this letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until released by the city council. 
Sec. 86-83. - Inspection of improvements. 
(a)  General procedures and fees. The city council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction and insure their satisfactory completion. The applicant shall pay to the City of St. Marys an inspection fee of one percent of the amount of the performance bond or the estimated cost of required improvements, and the subdivision plat shall not be recorded by the planning director unless such fee has been paid at the time of application. These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the city and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued until all fees are paid. If the city engineer finds upon inspection that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for completing the improvements. Wherever the cost of improvements is covered by a performance bond, the applicant and the bonding company shall be severally and jointly liable for completing the improvements according to specifications. 
(b)  Release or reduction of performance bond. 
(1)  Certificate of satisfactory completion. The city council will not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release, nor reduce a performance bond, until: 
a.  The city engineer has submitted a letter stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed; and 
b.  The applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the city engineer, through detailed "as built" survey plat of the subdivision, indicating location, dimensions, materials, and other information required by the planning commission or city engineer that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision. Follow the requirements of the public works manual. All as builts, shall be submitted in digital and paper form. All field notes that created the as builts shall be attached to this submission and become the property of the City of St. Marys; and 
c.  That a title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the city attorney indicating that the improvements shall have been completed, are ready for dedication to the city and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. 
Upon such approval and recommendation, the city council shall either accept the improvements and release the performance bond or reject the improvements within 45 days of such certifications by the city engineer. 
(2)  Reduction of performance bond or other improvement guarantee. A performance bond shall be reduced upon actual dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the public improvement dedicated bears to the total public improvements for the plat. In no event shall a performance bond be reduced below ten percent of the principal amount, nor shall other improvement guarantee be reduced below ten percent. 
Secs. 86-84-86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EXEMPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 86-101. - Exemptions. 
    The following types of subdivisions shall not be defined as subdivisions and shall be exempted from the procedural requirements of this chapter: 
(1)  The subdivision of land for cemetery lots in an approved cemetery. 
(2)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased or decreased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards set forth in this chapter and in chapter 110. These types of plats shall be submitted for administrative approval to the planning director with four original Mylars with signatures of the owner and engineer and a check/cash sufficient to cover administrative costs and the costs of filing at the Clerk of Superior Court for Camden County. 
(3)  In the case of conflict between this section, and section 86-5, the terms provided by this section shall control. 
Sec. 86-102. - Exemptions from paving requirements. 
    There shall be no exemption from paving requirements for any parcel or project constructed within the City of St. Marys. 
Sec. 86-103. - Reserved. 
Sec. 86-104. - Variances. 
    When a peculiar shape of the topography of a tract of land, or other unusual condition, makes it impractical for a developer to comply with the literal interpretations of the design requirements of this chapter, the planning commission shall be authorized to vary such requirements provided, however, that in so doing the extent and purposes of this chapter are not violated. 
Secs. 86-105-86-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PENALTIES 

Sec. 86-121. - Violation a misdemeanor. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by law for other misdemeanors. 
Sec. 86-122. - Other penalties. 
    Unless a subdivision hereafter established shall be designed, developed, and recorded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, then: 
(1)  The city shall not accept the dedication of any street within such subdivision, nor shall the city improve, maintain, grade, pave, or light any street within such subdivision unless such street or streets shall have received the status of public streets prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(2)  The city shall not assume any responsibility for drainage problems within such subdivision unless city owned and maintained drainage structures already exist in such subdivisions. 
(3)  The city shall not issue a building permit within such subdivision. 
(4)  No unit of local government or public utility shall be authorized to extend any publicly operated service or utility into such subdivision. 
(5)  No property or parcels can be sold, transferred or conveyed to any other party. 
Secs. 86-123-86-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 86-141. - Procedure. 
    This chapter may be amended from time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed or shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall submit its report to city council within 30 days after receiving an amendment proposal, otherwise said amendment proposal shall be deemed approved by the planning commission. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon, notice of which shall be published at least ten days prior to such hearing in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
Secs. 86-142-86-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SCHEDULE OF PLAT FILING FEES 

Sec. 86-151. - Preliminary plat filing fees. 
    Preliminary plats, when submitted to the planning commission in accordance with article IV, shall be accompanied by a fee as determined from a city council approved fee schedule. 
Sec. 86-152. - Final plat filing fees. 
    A final plat filing fee, when submitted to the planning commission in accordance with article IV, shall be accompanied by a fee as determined from a city council approved fee schedule. An engineering review fee as determined from a city council approved fee schedule is due upon submittal of the final plat. The engineering review fee may be adjusted if subsequent reviews are required and these additional review fees exceed the initial fee paid as determined from the approved fee schedule and these additional fees are due upon notification. Any additional fees will equal the amount of additional fee charged to the city for subsequent engineering reviews. Applicant shall also submit with the Mylars a check/cash sufficient to cover the filing costs at the Camden County Clerk of Superior Court. 
Sec. 86-153. - Administrative plat filing fees. 
    Plats submitted for administrative review when submitted to the planning director in accordance with subsection 86-101(2) shall be accompanied by a fee as determined from a city council approved fee schedule. 
Secs. 86-154-86-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - APPEALS 

Sec. 86-161. - Administrative appeals. 
    Appeals of planning director decisions shall be made to the planning commission. 
Sec. 86-162. - Appeals of planning commission decisions. 
    Appeals of planning commission decisions shall be made to the city council. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the planning director within 15 days of the decision of the planning commission. The city council decision is final. 
Sec. 86-163. - Powers of the planning commission. 
    The powers of the planning commission shall be to hear and decide appeals where an error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the planning director in the enforcement of any section or article adopted in this chapter. 
Sec. 86-164. - Powers of the city council. 
    The powers of the city council shall be to hear and decide appeals on any action or ruling of the planning commission pursuant to this chapter so long as any such appeal is filed within 15 days after the planning commission has rendered its decision. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the planning director and the appellate body. If the appeal is not filed within the 15-day period, the decision of the planning decision shall be final. If the appeal is filed, the city council shall receive a report and recommendation thereon from the planning commission and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. 
    In exercising the above powers, the city council may reverse, affirm or modify the orders or requirements, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue the necessary permit. 
Sec. 86-165. - Court review of city council action. 
    Any person(s) aggrieved by any decision of the city council may make an appeal to the superior court. Said appeals to the superior court shall be as defined in O.C.G.A. 5-4-3. The appeal must be made to the superior court within 30 days after the city council decision otherwise the decision of city council is final. 
Chapter 87 - ST. MARYS ENTERPRISE ZONE 

Sec. 87-1. - Satisfaction of criteria. 
    In the geographic area known as the St. Marys Enterprise Zone and as herein described in Exhibit A, a copy of which is attached to Ordinance No. 2013-029 and hereby incorporated by reference, in compiiance with O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6 and as subsequently amended, that the city finds the area meets the qualification of the Act by meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Pervasive poverty. The enterprise zone is located in portions of Census Tract 106.011 and 106.013. Within these two census block groups, the percent of the total population below the poverty level is 18.49 and 22.82, according to the Georgia Department of Community Affairs American Community Survey, 2006-2010 Poverty Estimate. 
2.  Unemployment. Unemployment shall be evidenced by significant job dislocation was experienced at 1000 Osborne Street with the closure of Durango Paper Company, formerly known as Gilman Paper Company. The City of St. Marys has suffered greatly with the close of the mill. Countless supporting businesses in St. Marys including hardware stores, restaurants, retail establishments, and service companies have closed as a result of mill's closure. At the time of the mill's closure 850 full-time jobs were lost. 
(3)  General distress. The City of St. Marys Enterprise Zone area suffers from general distress and adverse conditions as evidenced by abandoned or dilapidated structures, deteriorated infrastructure, and substantial population decline. The nominated area, once primarily a center of paper manufacturing in nature, shows significant loss of business with a need for new employment opportunities to utilize the existing vacancies. Consequently, the area shows evidence of creeping blighted conditions that although scattered throughout the area, potentially pose a threat of future disinvestments creating a diminishing tax base within the area. Although most areas in St. Marys have increased or maintained their population, the population of the distressed sites has decreased as witnessed by the vacant storefronts. 
(4)  Underdevelopment. The Planning and Development Department for the City of St. Marys has amassed data showing that over the past five years there have been fewer building permits and land disturbance permits issued in the geographic area known as the St. Marys Enterprise Zone, and that the department collects less development fees, capital recovery fees, and other similar fees from the area as compared to other areas of the city. The City of St. Marys Planning Department has also amassed data that shows that there are less business license fees collected and less business licenses issued within the nominated area than within the local governing body's jurisdiction overall. 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Sec. 87-2. - Establishment of St. Marys Enterprise Zone. 
    In order to alleviate the above conditions the council hereby designates the area described in Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance No. 2013-029 and incorporated by reference herein, as an enterprise zone to be known as the "St. Marys Enterprise Zone". 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Sec. 87-3. - Abatement of ad valorem taxes. 
    The council exempts any qualifying business enterprise or qualifying service enterprise as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-3 from municipal ad valorem property taxes (excluding property taxes imposed by school districts) in an amount not to exceed those set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-8(a), as may be subsequently amended, provided said qualifying business or service enterprises meet the qualifying criteria outlined in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4 and in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  One hundred percent abatement of post assessed rehabilitation property taxes shall be exempt for the first five years. 
(2)  Eighty percent of post assessed rehabilitation property taxes will be exempt for year six. 
(3)  Sixty percent of post assessed rehabilitation property taxes will be exempt for year seven. 
(4)  Forty percent of post assessed rehabilitation property taxes will be exempt for year eight. 
(5)  Twenty percent of post assessed rehabilitation property taxes will be exempt for year nine. 
(6)  Zero percent abatement will begin at year ten. 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Sec. 87-4. - Abatement of other fees. 
(a)  The council may grant other incentives, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 36-88-7 and O.C.G.A. § 36-88-9. Such incentives will be negotiated by the mayor and council on a case-by-case basis and may include, but not limited to, exemptions from any or all of the following: occupation taxes, regulatory fees, building inspection fees, and other fees that would otherwise have been imposed on qualifying businesses or service enterprises. 
(b)  The council may make determinations of eligibility for each qualifying business or service enterprise for abatement of additional fees based on the quality and quantity of such additional economic stimulus as may be created within the City of St. Marys. That qualifying business or service enterprises shall be defined a "business enterprise" meaning retail, manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, research and development, new residential construction and rehabilitation. "Service enterprise" means finance, insurance, or real estate activities. Criteria for consideration may include, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The value of the business to the economic health and well-being of St. Marys and its citizens; 
(2)  Capital investment or reinvestment by the business equal to or greater than the amount of ad valorem tax abated over the first five years of the tax incentive; 
(3)  Locating in a vacant or historic building; 
(4)  Demolishing an obsolete, abandoned and/or deteriorating pre-existing structure; 
(5)  Enhancing the area by incorporating elements such as significant landscaping, area-compatible facade materials and exclusion of billboards on premises; 
(6)  Assembling multiple tracts of land for one project; 
(7)  Creating jobs above the state threshold; and 
(8)  Creating jobs for residents of the enterprise zone and surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Sec. 87-5. - Economic development director. 
    The council further directs and designates the economic development director for the City of St. Marys to be appointed by the city manager to serve as liaison for communications with the Georgia Department of Community Affairs, the Georgia Department of Economic Development; the business community; and all others to oversee enterprise zone activities and administration, and communication with qualified business and qualified service enterprises as outlined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Sec. 87-6. - Contracts for compliance. 
    The council has the power to administer, require, and enforce compliance with the provisions of the ordinance and such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereinafter by way of contract, resolution including, but not limited, to reports and data information from businesses within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this chapter and state, and other means. Any qualifying business shall enter into a contractual agreement that outlines the incentives offered to the business and a guideline for the recapture, revocation, or reimbursement. Should the terms of the contract be violated by the target qualifying business or service enterprise the council may withdraw the qualifying enterprise designation of the business which will automatically reimpose any fees or subsequent taxes which had been abated. 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Sec. 87-7. - Qualifying enterprises. 
    All development in the enterprise zone which is deemed eligible for tax incentives must be initiated and developed by "qualifying business" or "qualifying service" enterprises (each of which are sometimes called "qualifying enterprises") which meet the criteria established herein (O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4). Criteria established for the enterprise zone includes that the qualifying business provides "economic stimulus" meeting the following criteria: 
(1)  Creation of five full-time jobs; 
(2)  When possible, ten percent of new employees shall be low-and moderate income individuals; or 
(3)  Exemptions apply to any entity within the zone, for either residential and/or rehab of an existing structure where value of improvements is greater than 500 percent of land value. 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Sec. 87-8. - Relationship to state law. 
    In the event of a conflict between the provision of this and the "Enterprise Employment Zone Act of 1997" (the "Act"), the provision of the Act shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 2013-024 , 10-21-13) 
Chapter 90 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Ad valorem tax, § 5-101; sanitary tax, § 5-102; occupation and business taxes, § 5-103; excise tax on alcoholic beverages, § 5-105; insurance premiums taxes and licenses, § 5-106; service charges for water, sewer, sanitary and health services, § 5-107; special assessment for street and sidewalk construction, § 5-108; other taxes, § 5-109. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; businesses, ch. 22. 
Related laws reference- Homestead exemption, art. II; stabilized tax program, art. III. 
State Law reference- Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 4, par. 1; limitation on taxing power of municipalities, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 8; ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-2; municipal taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq.; specific business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 90-1-90-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES 

Sec. 90-36. - Opening, closing of books for collection. 
(a)  The day of opening the books, each year, for the collection of city taxes shall be the date of billing. 
(b)  The books for the collection of city taxes without penalty shall close on December 31 or 60 days from the date of billing, whichever is the later date. 
(Ord. of 10-14-91, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 10-12-92, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 90-37. - Issuance of delinquent notice. 
    The finance director and tax collector shall issue a delinquent notice to the owner of each piece of property on which taxes have not been paid at the time fixed for the closing of the tax books. 
(Ord. of 10-14-91, § 3; Ord. of 10-12-92, § 3; Ord. of 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 90-38. - Issuance of fi fa notice. 
    The finance director and tax collector shall issue a fi fa against the owner of each piece of property along with a notice of such on which taxes have not been paid by the 60 th day from the date of closing. 
(Ord. of 10-14-91, § 4; Ord. of 10-12-92, § 4; Ord. of 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 90-39. - Expenses of advertising, other legal expenses added to tax. 
    The expense of advertising and other legal expenses connected with the collection of taxes, on any property, shall be added to, and collected with, the taxes on the property. 
(Ord. of 10-14-91, § 5; Ord. of 10-12-92, § 5) 
Sec. 90-40. - Penalty and interest. 
    From the date of issue of each tax bill the following fees shall be applied, when applicable, beginning on the 61st day from the date of billing: 
(1)  Interest at the rate of 12 percent (annual rate) or one percent per month to be computed on the day the tax bill is paid from the closing date. 
(2)  Penalty for each delinquent notice at the rate of $10.00 or ten percent, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Fi fa fee on each fi fa issued at the rate of $15.00. 
(Ord. of 10-14-91, § 6; Ord. of 10-12-92, § 6) 
Sec. 90-41. - No special privileges; sale of property upon exhaustion of other means of collection; amount of tax sale. 
    There will be no special privileges given to any taxpayer in paying his tax bills and any legal means in which to collect the taxes will be used and if all other means have been exhausted in collecting the taxes, a property sale will be conducted with proper notice given to each owner of the property. No sale for taxes shall be held unless the aggregate amount of taxes owed on a property exceeds $10.00. 
(Ord. of 10-14-91, § 7; Ord. of 8-15-16 ) 
Sec. 90-42. - Issuance of executions. 
    All executions in favor of the city for the enforcement and collection of any fine, forfeiture, assessment or tax shall be issued by the city clerk or finance director and shall be directed to the chief of police or any of his deputies, and shall state for what issued. Such executions shall state the purpose for which they are issued and shall be made returnable to the mayor and council 90 days after their issuance. 
(Ord. of 12-3-81, § 1; Ord. of 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 90-43. - Advertisement of sale of property; conduct of sale. 
    It shall be the duty of the finance director or collecting officer to advertise the sale of such real estate or personal property as may have been levied upon by him to satisfy the execution in the same manner respectively as sheriffs' sales of real property or constables' sales of personal property are required by law to be made. All of the sales shall be made at the place and within the usual hours of sale that sheriffs' and constables' sales are made, and under the same rules and regulations governing sheriffs' sales and constables' sales of similar property. The time, place and manner of sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due, shall be the same as provided by law for sales under execution for state and county taxes. Whenever any land is sold for taxes, the owner thereof shall have the privilege of redeeming it within one year by paying the purchaser the amount thereof, with ten percent premium thereon. 
(Ord. of 12-3-81, § 2; Ord. of 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 90-44. - Acquisition of property by city. 
    Whenever at such sales no one present shall bid for the property put up for sale as much as the amount of such execution and all costs, and after such property shall have been cried for a reasonable time, then any duly appointed or authorized agent of the city, the city attorney, the city clerk, the mayor or any councilmember, may bid off such property for the city, and the chief of police or such other officer making the sale shall make the city a deed to the property so sold and deliver it, and the title thus acquired by the city shall be perfect and valid after the period provided for redemption by the owner has expired and all other requirements of the law shall have been met. The chief of police or other officer making the sale shall put the city in possession of the property. 
(Ord. of 12-3-81, § 3) 
Sec. 90-45. - Execution docket; return to clerk's office upon satisfaction. 
    The city clerk shall enter on an execution docket all executions, giving the date, amount of each, and to whom delivered, and all proceedings thereunder. The execution shall be returned to the office of the city clerk after being satisfied. All sales and conveyances made under execution as provided in this article shall have all of the force and effect of sales and conveyances made by sheriffs of this state, and the officer making the sale shall have the same power as the sheriff to put purchasers in possession of property sold by them. 
(Ord. of 12-3-81, § 4) 
Sec. 90-46. - Costs, fees associated with sale. 
    For levy, advertising, sales and other duties of like kind in the sale of property for the city taxes, fines, forfeitures, and assessments, the finance director shall be allowed the same costs and fees as are now allowed the sheriffs in this state for performing similar duties, together with all other costs incurred by the city in preparing for and conducting the sale. 
(Ord. of 12-3-81, § 5; Ord. of 8-1-16 ) 
Sec. 90-47. - Due date for payment. 
    The due date for payment of all ad valorem property taxes for the city shall be 60 days from the date of mailing of tax bills by the city. 
(Ord. of 12-3-81, § 6) 
Sec. 90-48. - Remedies, rights allowed for collection and payment. 
    Any remedy or right allowed by law for the enforcement of the collection and payment of state property taxes, either by the commissioner, tax commissioner or tax collector, may be used for the enforcement of the collection and payment of municipal property taxes by the city. 
(Ord. of 7-3-84) 
Sec. 90-49. - Tax lien enforcement provisions. 
(a)  Adoption of O.C.G.A., title 48, article 5 by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-76(a), O.C.G.A. §§ 48-44-77 through 48-4-81 are hereby adopted by reference as an alternative and supplemental method and remedy for the enforcement of ad valorem tax liens by the city. 
(b)  Supplemental effect. It is the intention of the mayor and council in the passage and enactment of this section that its provisions shall be supplemental and alternative to existing city ordinances relating to delinquent tax collections and that this section shall not be interpreted or construed so as to expressly or implied repeal other existing city ordinances dealing with the same subject matter embraced herein. 
(Ord. of 10-23-95, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted March 10, 1997(1), provided for the inclusion of the provisions of an ordinance adopted Oct. 23, 1995, as § 90-49 of the Code. 
Secs. 90-50-90-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCISE TAX ON LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq.; operators of hotels, inns and roadhouses, O.C.G.A. § 43-21-1 et seq. 

Sec. 90-71. - Levy. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51 et seq., there is hereby levied and imposed an excise tax of six percent upon the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodging, or accommodations furnished by any person or legal entity licensed by, or required to pay business or occupation taxes to the city for operating a hotel, motel, inn, lodge, tourist camp, tourist cabin, or any other place in which rooms, lodgings, or accommodations are regularly furnished for value. 
(Ord. of 9-22-86; Ord. of 4-13-92; Ord. of 6-13-05, § 1) 
Sec. 90-72. - Payment of tax. 
(a)  Filing of report. Each business or establishment subject to the levy and collection of the hotel-motel tax shall, on or before the 20th day of each month, prepare and file with the city finance director a hotel-motel occupancy tax report on all taxes due for the preceding month. Such report shall be in the form as prescribed by the city finance director. If the 20th day of the month falls upon a weekend or upon a city or national holiday the report shall be filed on the next business day following such weekend or city or national holiday. 
(b)  Due date. The excise tax due to the city shall be paid at the time of the filing of the report. 
(c)  Credit. Each business or establishment subject to the levy and collection of the tax shall be entitled to a credit against such tax as a vendor's collection fee of three percent of the total tax provided the return and tax due is not delinquent. 
(Ord. of 5-9-94(1), § (A)) 
Sec. 90-73. - Delinquent payment; penalty for failure to make report or pay full amount. 
(a)  The tax imposed by this article shall become delinquent for each month after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. The city clerk may, when any tax becomes delinquent under this article, issue a fi fa or tax execution for the collection of such tax, interest, and penalty from each delinquent taxpayer or establishment subject to the tax. 
(b)  When any establishment or taxpayer fails to make any report or to pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed the following penalties and interest: 
(1)  A penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the report and payment of tax is delinquent with an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof, following the 20th of the month during which the delinquency continues. 
(2)  Interest upon all delinquent taxes imposed by this article shall be due the city as the rate of one percent of the unpaid tax and penalties per month from the date delinquent until paid to the city. 
(Ord. of 9-22-86, § 2; Ord. of 5-9-94(1), § (B)) 
Sec. 90-74. - Exemptions. 
    The tax levied by this article shall not apply to those charges for the furnishings for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodgings, or accommodations which are exempt from taxation under applicable state law. 
(Ord. of 9-22-86, §§ 3, 4; Ord. No. 2015-016 , 5-18-15) 
Sec. 90-75. - Use of proceeds. 
    The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)4(f). 
(Ord. of 6-13-05, § 2) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of an ordinance adopted June 13, 2005, deleted former § 90-75 of the Code in its entirety and added new provisions to the Code as § 90-75. Former § 90-75 of the Code pertained to the tax rate and derived from ordinances adopted Sept. 22, 1986, and April 13, 1992. 
Secs. 90-76-90-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 90-101. - Levy. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93 there is hereby levied an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations, state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of .25 percent of the gross receipts of the institutions as defined. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institutions pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 12-20-83, § 1) 
Sec. 90-102. - Calculation of gross receipts. 
    For purposes of this article "gross receipts" shall mean the total amount of revenue generated from the sources itemized below during the calendar year immediately preceding the date on which the tax imposed by this article is due: 
(1)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to banks are as follows: 
a.  Interest and fees on loans, less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold and serviced for others. 
b.  Interest on balances with other depository financial institutions. 
c.  Interest on federal or correspondent funds sold and securities purchased under agreements of resale. 
d.  Interest on other bonds, notes, and debentures, excluding interest on obligations in the state or its political subdivisions and obligations on the United States. 
e.  Dividends on stocks. 
f.  Income from direct lease financing. 
g.  Income from fiduciary activities. 
h.  Service charges on deposit accounts. 
i.  Other service charges, commissions, and fees. 
j.  Other income. 
(2)  Items to be included in the calculation of gross receipts with respect to savings and loan associations are as follows: 
a.  Interest on mortgage loans less any interest collected on those portions of loans sold in service for others. 
b.  Interest on mortgages, participations, or mortgage-backed securities. 
c.  Interest on real estate sold on contract. 
d.  Discounts on mortgage loans purchased. 
e.  Interest on other loans, excluding interest on obligations of the state or its political subdivisions and obligations of the United States. 
f.  Interest and dividends on investments and deposits. 
g.  Loan fees. 
h.  Loan servicing fees. 
i.  Other fees and charges. 
j.  Gross income from real estate owned operations. 
k.  Gross income from office building operations. 
l.  Gross income from real estate held for investment. 
m.  Net income from service corporations and subsidiaries. 
n.  Miscellaneous operating income. 
o.  Profit on sale of real estate owned, investment securities, loans, and other assets. 
p.  Miscellaneous nonoperating income. 
(3)  The following items shall be deducted from gross receipts calculated pursuant to subsection (1) or (2) of this section: 
a.  An amount equal to the amount of interest paid on all liabilities for the period. 
b.  An amount equal to income derived from the authorized activities of any domestic international banking facility operating pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 7, ch. 1, art. 5(a). 
c.  An amount equal to any income arising from the conduct of a banking business with persons or entities located outside of the United States, its territories or possessions. 
d.  An amount equal to a depository financial institution's gross income which is taxed under the tax laws of a state other than Georgia. 
e.  To the extent that any deductions are made pursuant to subsections (3)b, c and d of this section, any deductions taken under subsection (3)a of this section shall be reduced by the same proportion that the deductions in subsections (3)b through d of this section bear to the gross receipts of the depository financial institution as calculated before making any deductions pursuant to subsections (3)a through d above. 
(Ord. of 12-20-83, § 2) 
Sec. 90-103. - Due date; filing of return. 
    Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. The returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Ord. of 12-20-83, § 3) 
Secs. 90-104-90-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSURERS' LICENSE FEES AND TAXES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- County and municipal corporation tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 90-131. - Insurer license fees. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $75.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 90-132, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $75.00. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company, which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 10-4-83(1); Ord. of 7-13-92, § 1; Ord. of 11-12-01, § 1) 
Sec. 90-132. - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $26.25 per location for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. of 10-4-83(1); Ord. of 7-13-92, § 2; Ord. of 11-12-01, § 2) 
Sec. 90-133. - Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 90-131, in the amount of $40.00 for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-4-83(1); Ord. of 7-13-92, § 3) 
Sec. 90-134. - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 90-131. 
(Ord. of 10-4-83(1); Ord. of 7-13-92, § 4; Ord. of 11-12-01, § 3) 
Sec. 90-135. - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, doing business within the State of Georgia in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 90-131. 
(Ord. of 10-4-83(1); Ord. of 7-13-92, § 5; Ord. of 11-12-01, § 4) 
Sec. 90-136. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 90-131 and 90-132 shall be due and payable on the first day of 2002 and on the first date of each subsequent year. 
(Ord. of 10-4-83(1); Ord. of 7-13-92, § 6; Ord. of 11-12-01, § 5) 
Secs. 90-137-90-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX ON TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 90-156. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Recurring local service revenues means: 
(1)  Monthly charges for local exchange service, including: 
a.  Charges for additional listings and joint users. 
b.  The guarantee portion of the charge for semipublic pay station services. 
c.  Charges for local message rate service, including mobile service local messages. 
d.  Subscriber station revenues from teletypewriter exchange service. 
(2)  Charges for Morse transmission, signaling, data transmission, remote metering and supervisory control, where both terminal points are within the city limits. 
(3)  All charges for local private line services (except audio and video program transmission services) where both terminals of the private line are within the city limits. 
(4)  Nothing in the definition shall preclude the charging of a separate franchise fee for the transmission of audio or video programs to customers by CATV companies. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2), § 2) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-157. - Levy. 
    Each telephone company operating in the city shall pay an occupational license tax in the amount of three percent of the recurring local service revenues received by such company from subscribers located within the city. The occupational license tax shall be paid in quarterly installments, each of which shall be due on or before the last day of the second month following the end of each calendar quarter and shall be based on recurring local service revenues billed during such calendar quarter. The first payment under this article shall be based on revenues billed between the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives and the end of the calendar quarter in which such effective date falls. Any amount of license tax previously paid and absorbed by a telephone company which is applicable to any period subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be credited against the amounts imposed herein or by subsequent ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2), § 1) 
Secs. 90-158-90-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SENIOR CITIZEN'S HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION 

Sec. 90-171. - Homestead ad valorem taxation exemption. 
    Those persons 65 years of age or older and who otherwise meet the qualifications and criterion specified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-47(b) shall be entitled to a senior citizen's homestead ad valorem taxation exemption upon the terms and conditions as set forth in the afore-cited section of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-10-97(2), § 1) 
Secs. 90-172-90-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DISABLED VETERAN'S HOMESTEAD AND VEHICLE AD VALOREM TAXATION EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 90-181. - Homestead exemption from municipal ad valorem taxation. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48, any disabled veteran meeting the definition, qualifications and criterion set forth therein shall be entitled to the homestead exemption from municipal ad valorem taxation upon the terms, conditions, and requirements set forth in such section of the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-10-97(2), § 2) 
Sec. 90-182. - Vehicle ad valorem taxation exemption. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-478, any disabled veteran who meets the qualifications and criterion set forth therein shall be entitled to exemption from all ad valorem taxation upon the vehicle he owns and on which he actually places the free HV motor vehicle license tag he receives from the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 3-10-97(2), § 2) 
Chapter 94 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Open containers, § 10-46 et seq.; courts, ch. 38; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; vehicles for hire, ch. 106. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const., art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3(a)(4); Uniform Rules of the Road, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Adoption by reference. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. ch. 6, title 40, §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, and §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this municipality with like effect as if fully recited herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 9-25-95, §§ 1, 2) 
Editor's note- Section 3 of an ordinance adopted Sept. 25, 1995, repealed an ordinance adopted Oct. 4, 1983, § II of which had been included within the Code as § 94-1. Sections 1 and 2 of the ordinance adopted Sept. 25, 1995, enacted similar new provisions which have been included herein as § 94-1. 
Sec. 94-2. - No parking areas. 
    It shall be illegal to park within the city in all areas that are marked "no parking". 
(Ord. of 9-4-84) 
Sec. 94-3. - Two-hour parking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful in the following designated areas to permit, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., any vehicle to remain parked in an on-street parking space for a consecutive period of more than two hours. 
(b)  This prohibition shall apply to the following locations: 
(1)  Osborne Street from the intersection of Bryant Street south to St. Marys Street. 
(2)  St. Marys Street from the intersection of the east right-of-way of Osborne Street to the intersection of Wheeler Street. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, the term "vehicle" shall mean any vehicle or wheeled conveyance including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles and bicycles. 
(d)  Violation of this section shall be punishable by: 
(1)  The towing-away and impoundment of the violating vehicle, with the cost of such towing and impoundment to be paid by the violator; and/or 
(2)  A fine of $25.00. 
(Ord. of 5-11-92) 
Sec. 94-4. - Stopping, standing or parking. 
(a)  The stopping, standing or parking of vehicles is prohibited within the limits of the area described as follows: 
That segment of roadway on both sides of State Route 40 Spur beginning 75 feet south of the south driveway at the Crooked River Elementary School, mile post 3.44, then north for a distance of 900 feet, mile post 3.61. 
(b)  Signs are to be erected by the department of transportation maintenance forces. 
(c)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-12. This section shall become effective when appropriate signs are erected. 
(Ord. of 1-11-93; Ord. of 4-26-93) 
Sec. 94-5. - Speed zones. 
(a)  Pursuant to an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law, the following are determined and declared to be reasonable and safe maximum vehicle speed limits within the zones or areas described, to wit: 
ON-SYSTEM ROADWAYS 
State Route Within the 
City/Town Limits 
of and/or 
School Name From Mile 
Point To Mile 
Point Length 
in 
Miles Speed 
Limit S.R. 40 St. Marys 0.66 mi. east of CS 565 Lakemont Dr. (W. St. Mary's City Limits) 19.10 CS 532 St. Marys Rd. 19.35 0.25 50 S.R. 40 St. Marys CS 532 St. Marys Rd. 19.35 CS 401 Wheeler St. 23.24 3.89 45 S.R. 40 
* School Zone St. Marys 
St. Marys Middle School 0.13 mi. west of S.R. 40 Spur No Name 21.07 CS 457 Martha Dr. 21.44 0.37 35 S.R. 40 St. Marys CS 401 Wheeler St. 23.24 End of S.R. 40 CS 416 Church St. 23.88 0.64 35 S.R. 40 Spur St. Marys S.R. 40 Osborne St. 0.00 CS 545 Colerain Rd. 1.24 1.24 45 S.R. 40 Spur 
* School Zone St. Marys 
St. Marys Middle School S.R. 40 Osborne St. 0.00 CR 74 First St. 0.27 0.27 35 S.R. 40 Spur St. Marys CS 545 Colerain Rd 1.24 0.25 mi. south of CS 532 St. Marys Rd. 1.87 0.63 50 S.R. 40 Spur St. Marys 0.25 mi. south of CS 532 St. Marys Rd. 1.87 CS 521 Plantation Dr. 4.33 2.46 45 S.R. 40 Spur 
* School Zone St. Marys 
Crooked River Elementary School 0.43 mi. south of CR 78 Winding Rd. 3.35 0.23 mi. south of CS 521 Plantation Dr. 4.10 0.75 35 S.R. 40 Spur St. Marys CS 521 Plantation Dr. 4.10 0.30 mi. South of CR 116 Mush Bluff Rd. (N. St. Marys City Limits) 6.20 1.87 55 Signs to be erected by the department of transportation for all state routes  
OFF-SYSTEM ROADWAYS 
Road Name Within the 
City/Town Limits 
of and/or 
School Name From To Length in miles Speed Limit Acorn St. Marys Catherine St. Miller St. 0.30 25 Admirals Walk Dr. St. Marys Pt. Peter Rd. Cul-de-sac 0.50 25 Alexander St. St. Marys Norris St. W. Marsh 0.90 25 Ann St. St. Marys Dillingham St. Meeting St. 0.50 25 Ashley St. St. Marys Norris St. Bartlett St. 0.50 25 Ashley St. St. Marys Bailey St. Borrell Blvd. 0.30 25 Bailey St. St. Marys Conyers St. Ashley St. 0.50 25 Barkentine St. St. Marys Pt. Peter Rd. E. End 0.50 25 Bartlett St. St. Marys St. Marys St. Gallop St. 1.00 25 Baytree Rd. St. Marys Borrell Blvd. Borrell Blvd. W. 0.30 25 Bealey St. St. Marys Mahan St. Dilworth St. 0.30 25 Bishop St. St. Marys Dilworth St. Dilworth St. 0.30 25 Borrell Blvd. St. Marys Ashley St. Borrell Creek Brd. 0.50 25 Borrell Blvd. St. Marys Borrell Creek Brd. Park St. 0.43 30 Borrell Blvd. St. Marys Park St. S. Julia St. 0.35 35 Borrell Blvd. St. Marys S. Julia St. City Smitty 0.34 35 Bowen St. Ext. St. Marys Durden St. George St. 0.29 25 Bowen St. Ext. St. Marys George St. Durden 0.30 25 Bryant St. St. Marys Marsh Lane Bartlett St. 0.50 25 Camden Crossroads Blvd. St. Marys Kings Bay Rd. End 0.30 25 Carrack Dr. St. Marys Barkentine St. End 0.50 25 Chambray Circle St. Marys Plantation Dr. Plantation Dr. 0.30 25 Cherry Point Dr. St. Marys Plantation Village Dr. Plantation Village Dr. 0.40 25 Church St. St. Marys Ready St. Dilworth St. 0.90 25 City Smitty St. St. Marys Borrell Blvd. Hwy. 40 0.30 30 Colerain Rd. St. Marys Hwy. 40 Spur Sugarmill Blvd. 0.50 25 Colerain Rd. St. Marys Sugarmill Blvd. St. Marys Rd. 0.65 30 Colerain Rd. 
* School Zone St. Marys 
Mary Lee Clark 
Elementary 500' S. of Mickler Dr. 500' N. of Mickler Dr. 0.19 25 Colerain Rd. St. Marys St. Marys Rd. Kings Bay Rd. 0.90 45 Colerain Rd. St. Marys Kings Bay Rd. N. City Limit 1.10 50 Conyers St. St. Marys Marsh Ln. Dilworth St. 0.80 25 Dandy St. St. Marys S. Dead End (RR) N. Dead End (AP) 0.60 25 Devon Dr. St. Marys Borrell Blvd. Borrell Blvd. 0.50 25 Dillingham St. St. Marys Marsh Ln. Seagrove St. 0.50 25 Dillworth St. St. Marys Margaret St. Hwy. 40 1.50 35 Doris St. St. Marys Florence St. Hwy. 40 Spur 0.30 25 Douglas Dr. St. Marys Palmetto St. Palmetto St. 0.90 35 Douglas Dr. St. Marys Hwy. 40 Spur Palmetto St. 0.80 35 Douglas Dr. St. Marys East end of Palmetto St. Sloan 0.50 30 Dufour Rd. St. Marys Point Peter Rd. Cul-de-sac 0.40 25 Dunbar Dr. St. Marys Old Mill Dr. Old Mill Dr. 0.25 25 Elbow Lane St. Marys Gatehouse Dr. Gate Lane 0.30 25 Fairfield Dr. St. Marys Plantation Village Dr. Plantation Village Dr. 0.40 25 Finley St. St. Marys Woodyard Gate Hwy. 40 0.50 30 Flamingo Dr. St. Marys Wild Grape Dr. Mill Creek Dr. 0.44 25 Florence St. St. Marys Douglas Dr. Davis St. 0.30 25 Gallop St. (S) St. Marys Hwy. 40 Margaret St. 0.50 25 Gunter St. St. Marys Dilworth St. Bowen St. 0.35 25 Hall St. St. Marys Marsh Lane Dilworth St. 0.90 25 Hallowes Dr. St. Marys Mclntosh Dr. Bachlott Dr. 0.50 25 Harbor Pines Dr. St. Marys Palmetto St. Lisa Lane 0.40 25 Hunt Club Rd. St. Marys Mickler Dr. Dead End 0.37 25 Industrial Dr. St. Marys Point Peter Rd. Point Peter Rd. 0.80 35 Julia St. St. Marys S. Dead End Laura St. 0.90 25 Kings Bay Rd. St. Marys Hwy. 40 E. City Limit 2.50 45 Lake Shore Dr. St. Marys Kingsbay Rd. End of pavement 0.20 25 Longwood Rd. St. Marys Shadowlawn Dr. Marsh Lane 0.30 25 Mahan St. St. Marys Weed St. Hall St. 0.50 25 Margaret St. St. Marys St. Marys St. Gallop St. (S) 1.00 25 Martha Dr. St. Marys Hwy. 40 Douglas Dr. 0.60 30 Martha Dr. 
* School Zone St. Marys 
St. Marys Middle School 0.11 miles north of SR 40 0.36 miles north of SR 40 0.25 25 McDowell St. St. Marys S. Dead End (RR) Hwy. 40 0.30 25 Mclntosh Dr. St. Marys Marianna Dr. End 0.30 25 Mclntosh Dr. St. Marys Marianna Dr. Sugarmill Blvd. 0.55 25 Meeting St. St. Marys S. Marsh Hwy. 40 0.30 25 Mickler Dr. St. Marys Colerain Rd. W. Dead End 0.40 25 Miller St. St. Marys S. Dead End Hwy. 40 0.40 35 Moeckel Lane St. Marys Shadowlawn Dr. Shadowlawn Dr. 0.30 25 Myrtle St. St. Marys W. Dead End Martha Dr. 0.30 25 N. Osborne St. St. Marys Liberty St. Union St. 0.30 25 N. River Causeway St. Marys Point Peter Rd. E. Dead End 2.10 40 Nancy Drive St. Marys Borrell Blvd. Borrell Blvd. 0.40 25 New Point Peter Rd. St. Marys N. River Causeway Lands End 1.50 30 Norris St. St. Marys Weed St. Meeting St. 0.70 30 Oak Stump Circle St. Marys N. Cul-de-sac Shadowlawn Dr. 0.40 25 Old Mill Dr. St. Marys Sugarmill Blvd. End 0.40 25 Osborne St. St. Marys St. Marys St. Church St. 0.60 25 Osborne St. 
* School Zone St. Marys 
St. Marys Elementary School Church St. Dillingham St. 0.20 25 Palmetto St. St. Marys Douglas Dr. Douglas Dr. 0.90 30 Park St. St. Marys Borrell Blvd. Borrell Blvd. 0.40 25 Pine St. St. Marys Florence St. Hwy. 40 Spur 0.30 25 Pinedale Dr. St. Marys Plantation Village Dr. Plantation Village Dr. 0.40 25 Plantation Circle St. Marys Plantation Dr. Plantation Dr. 0.40 25 Plantation Dr. St. Marys Hwy. 40 Spur Cul-de-sac 0.50 25 Plantation Village Dr. St. Marys Hwy. 40 Spur W. Dead End 0.80 25 Point Peter Rd. St. Marys Hwy. 40 NSB St. Marys Gate 1.80 40 Ready St. St. Marys St. Marys St. Meeting St. 0.90 25 Regal Rd. St. Marys Somerset Rd. Cul-de-sac 0.30 25 School House Creek Dr. St. Marys Sugarmill Blvd. Mickler Dr. 0.32 25 Seagrove St. St. Marys Church St. Gallop St. 0.40 25 Seagrove St. St. Marys Gallop St. N. Union St. 0.50 25 Shadowlawn Dr. St. Marys SR 40 Cul-de-Sac 1.10 25 Sloan St. St. Marys Point Peter Rd. W. Dead End 0.50 25 Somerset Rd. St. Marys Shadowlawn Dr. Regal Rd. 0.40 25 St. Marys Rd. St. Marys Haddock Rd. S. City Limit 0.70 45 St. Marys Rd. St. Marys SR 40 Spur 1320 Ft. W. of SR 40 Spur 0.25 45 St. Marys Rd. St. Marys 1320 Ft. W. of SR 40 Spur Haddock Rd. 5.05 55 St. Marys St. St. Marys Ready St. Margaret St. 0.60 30 Stable Alley St. St. Marys Ready St. Seagrove St. 0.30 25 Sugarmill Blvd. St. Marys St. Marys Rd. S. Dead End 1.00 25 Sugarmill Blvd. St. Marys St. Marys Rd. Colerain Rd. 0.70 25 Sunnyside Dr. St. Marys Plantation Village Dr. Plantation Village Dr. 0.40 25 Timaran St. St. Marys Barkentine St. End 0.50 25 Watts St. St. Marys Hwy. 40 Spur Douglas Dr. 0.40 25 Weed St. St. Marys Cole St. Mahan St. 0.70 25 Westgate Circle St. Marys Plantation Village Dr. Plantation Village Dr. 0.45 25 Wheeler St. St. Marys St. Marys St. Gallop St. S 1.00 25 Wheeler St. St. Marys Hwy. 40 Union St. 0.30 25 Wild Grape Dr. St. Marys Sugarmill Blvd. Flamingo Dr. 0.70 25 Winding Rd. St. Marys Colerain Rd. Hwy. 40 Spur 2.40 35 Winding Road 
* School Zone St. Marys 
Sugarmill Elementary School 500' S. of West Dr. 500' N. of East Dr. 0.28 35 Woodland Dr. St. Marys Plantation Village Dr. Village Dr. 0.40 25 Signs to be erected by the city  
Note-  * School Zones are effective: 
a.m. from 45 minutes prior to commencement time to 15 minutes after commencement time. School days only. 
p.m. from 30 minutes prior to dismissal time to 30 minutes after dismissal time. School days only. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 6-10-96, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 9-11-97; Ord. of 9-18-00; Ord. of 5-23-05; Ord. of 7-11-07; Ord. of 7-13-09) 
Sec. 94-6. - Colerain Road load limit prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a bimodal semitrailer, combination of vehicles, trailer, semitrailer, truck tractor or any other motor vehicle having a gross weight in excess of 15,000 pounds or more upon that city street or roadway known as "Colerain Road" between the intersection of Colerain Road and Georgia Spur 40 and the intersection of Colerain Road and the Kings Bay Road cut, in either direction. 
(b)  This section, however, shall not prohibit the operation of any vehicle to a destination upon such section of Colerain Road or any side street or roadway connected thereto, nor shall it prohibit the operation thereon of emergency vehicles, vehicles owned and operated by the city, any public utility, the county board of education, or the county board of commissioners. 
(c)  For the purposes of the construction, application and prosecution of this section, the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1 and 32-6-24(a)(1) are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if the same were fully set forth herein. 
(d)  Warning and enforcement signs shall be posted on Colerain Road at its intersections with Kings Bay Road, St. Marys Road and Georgia Spur 40 at intervals not to exceed one-quarter mile. Such signs shall meet the specifications and requirements contained in the U.S. Department of Transportation's Uniform Code of Traffic Devices (as revised). 
(e)  Any person in violation of this section of the Code of Ordinances shall be conclusively presumed to have damaged the said section of Colerain Road. 
(f)  Any person in violation of the provisions hereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. 
(Ord. of 10-26-98, § 1) 
Sec. 94-7. - Waterfront-St. Marys Street parking restrictions. 
(a)  No person who owns or has possession, control or custody of any vehicle shall park that vehicle for more than 36 continuous hours in the parking spaces designated and maintained on the south side of St. Marys Street from the point of intersection of the southernmost right-of-way of said street with the westernmost right-of-way of Margaret Street (as extended), to the intersection of the said southernmost right-of-way of said St. Marys Street and the easternmost right-of-way of Osborne Street (as extended). 
(b)  The changing of the position of a vehicle from one point directly to another point within the above-described area shall be deemed one continuous parking period. 
(c)  Any person or persons cited for a violation of this section shall be deemed to be charged with a noncriminal infraction and shall be cited to appear before the municipal court of the city. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00. 
(d)  Whenever any vehicle is found parked in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this section, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take any other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form approved by the chief of police, for the driver to answer to the charge against him/her at the time and place specified in the notice. 
(e)  At any hearing of the case involving illegal parking in which the owner of the vehicle is being tried under this section, it shall be sufficient evidence on which the court may rely to establish the name of the registered owner of such vehicle if a police officer, or a designee of the city shall state on oath that he/she has made inquiry of the Georgia or any state's department of motor vehicles and has been advised by such department of the identity of the registered owner. However, if the person on trial denies that he/she is the registered owner, and such fact cannot be otherwise established, the court may defer the final determination of the case until a certified record or appropriate certificate can be obtained from the office of the appropriate department of motor vehicles showing the record in that office on the date in question. 
(f)  At any hearing of a case involving illegal parking in which the owner of the motor vehicle is being tried under this section, the judge may, in his/her discretion, allow any person, whether the registered owner or not, to testify or otherwise give evidence if the person admits under oath or affirmation to have parked the vehicle at the time and place of the alleged offense. 
(g)  Temporary parking for loading and unloading vehicles has been designated for use by persons using the Cumberland Island ferry from the Osprey II dock off Ready Street. The parking spaces affected by this temporary ordinance provision include all parking spaces on the southbound side of Ready Street, between Stable Alley and St. Marys Street, and designated parking spaces on the east end St. Marys Street. The provisions for the uses of these parking spaces are as follow: 
(1)  Parking is only authorized for a duration not to exceed 15 minutes. 
(2)  Enforcement of this parking requirement will be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. daily. 
(3)  Vehicles that are found to be in violation of this requirement are subject to being towed at the owner's expense by the St. Marys Police Department. 
(4)  Over-night parking in the designated parking spaces is forbidden at all times. 
(5)  Subsection (g) and all of its contents will remain in effect until November 6, 2019 unless otherwise determined by the St. Marys City Council. 
(6)  All affected parking spaces will be plainly designated by proper signage. 
(Ord. of 8-9-99, § 1; Ord. No. 2017-11-6-003 , 11-6-17) 
Sec. 94-8. - Establishment of four-way stop intersections and three-way stop intersections. 
(a)  The following city street intersections shall be four-way stop intersections, to wit: 
(1)  Intersection of South Julia Street and Borrell Boulevard; 
(2)  Intersection of Gunter Street, Bowen Street and Durden Street; 
(3)  Intersection of Plantation Drive and Cherry Point Drive; 
(4)  Intersection of McIntosh Drive and McQueen Circle; 
(5)  Intersection of Shadowlawn Drive and Longwood Road; 
(6)  Intersection of Miller Street and Borrell Boulevard; 
(7)  Intersection of Finley Street and Seagrove Street; and 
(8)  Intersection of Silver Fox Drive and Avondale Drive. 
(b)  The following city street intersection shall be a three-way stop intersection, to wit: 
(1)  Intersection of McIntosh Drive and Bachlott Road. 
(c)  Additional four-way or three-way stop intersections shall be established and designated by way of an ordinance duly enacted by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 8-13-01, § 1) 
Sec. 94-8.1. - Water-borne vessel registration and use of waterfront docks. 
(a)  All water-borne vessels over 12 feet in length shall either be registered with the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR), License and Boat Registration Unit, Wildlife Resources Division; or carry valid registration from another state or country; or carry valid proof of ownership (except for canoes, kayaks, prams, etc. that do not have a mechanical form of propulsion, or sailing vessels which are less than 12 feet in length). This data must be visible and/or accessible and available for inspection when requested by any law enforcement officer of Georgia. 
(b)  All water-borne vessel operators are required to obey laws that regulate the water-borne vessels registration, operation and comply with water-borne vessel education. 
(c)  The registration number and validation decal must be displayed in a manner as defined in the Georgia DNR rules. Owners of water-borne vessels not displaying the required numbers, or where the numbers displayed are not listed on the current listing of valid Georgia registrations, may be cited for non-registration as well as for docking not in compliance with this section. 
(d)  No person who owns or has possession, control or custody of any water-borne vessel shall tie up to the docks as designated below for more than the time noted below and/or on the dock. 
(1)  DNR-owned wooden kayak dock - no more than 30 minutes per four-hour period. No overnight docking. 
(2)  City-owned concrete "fireworks" dock connected to the DNR kayak dock - no more than six hours in a 12-hour period. No overnight docking. 
(3)  City-owned wood/concrete Wheeler Street ramp and dock - no more than 30 minutes per four-hour period. No overnight docking. 
(4)  City-owned concrete pavilion fishing dock - no water-borne vessel tie up for any reason. 
(5)  City-owned wood Gateway dock - no more than eight hours per 12-hour period. No overnight docking. 
(6)  DNR-owned concrete Miller Street dock and ramp - no more than 30 minutes per four-hour period. No overnight docking. 
(7)  DNR wooden fishing dock at Gilman Park - no water-borne vessel tie up for any reason. 
(8)  City-owned wooden Marsh Walk - no water-borne vessel tie up for any reason. 
(e)  The moving of a water-borne vessel from one mooring point on a dock to another mooring point on the same dock will make up one continuous docking period. 
(f)  Any owner of any water-borne vessel overstaying the limits as noted above and as noted on the dock and/or ramp, will - upon notification by the appropriate designated official of the City of St. Marys - immediately relocate the water-borne vessel as required to comply with this section. If so moved, the water-borne vessel and its owners shall not be charged with a violation. 
(g)  If the owner of a water-borne vessel fails to comply with the requirements to move the water-borne vessel that is in violation of this section, the owner or occupant of the water-borne vessel may be cited for a violation of this section. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300.00 per occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 2013-019 , 6-17-13) 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF LOW SPEED MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 94-9. - Short title. 
    This [article] shall be known as the "St. Marys Low Speed Motor Vehicle Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1) 
Sec. 94-10. - Definition. 
    Low-speed motor vehicle (LSMV): means any four-wheeled electric vehicle or gas-powered vehicle, whose top speed attainable in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour, but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface, and which is manufactured in compliance with those federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles set forth in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500 and in effect on January 1, 2001. 
    Motorized cart: means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of 1,300 pounds or less, and which cannot operate at more than 20 miles per hour. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1; Ord. of 4-14-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 94-11. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Those persons who are 16 years of age and older possessing a current state license to operate a motor vehicle, may drive a LSMV or motorized cart on the streets and those areas accessible by the public of the City of St. Marys, unless such person has had his or her license to operate a motor vehicle suspended or revoked by the state which issued said license, in which case such person shall not be permitted to operate a LSMV or motorized cart on the LSMV or motorized cart streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city during the time of suspension or revocation. 
(b)  Those persons who are 15 years of age but not yet 16 years of age, may drive a LSMV or motorized cart on the streets and those areas accessible by the public of the city provided he or she has in his or her possession a valid instructional permit issued by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-5-24, as may be amended, and has not had his or her instructional permit suspended or revoked, and he or she shall be accompanied in the front seat by a person at least 18 years of age who holds a valid motor vehicle driver's license. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1; Ord. of 4-14-08(2), § 2) 
Sec. 94-12. - LSMV registration. 
(a)  Before any LSMV may be used or operated within the corporate limits of the City of St. Marys, as a public conveyance for hire, or as a rental vehicle, it shall be registered with the St. Marys Police Department and receive a decal from that department signifying its regulation. 
(b)  There shall be a fee of $100.00 for registration and such decal shall be attached and displayed on all registered LSMV's so as to be plainly visible. 
(c)  Registration shall be accomplished by means of an LSMV registration application in a form prescribed by the Chief of the St. Marys Police Department and shall be accompanied, when filed, with evidence of public liability insurance coverage in the following specified limits for such occurrence: 
Bodily injury liability $500,000.00 Property damage 
liability $500,000.00 Automobile bodily 
injury $500,000.00 each person Liability $1,000,000.00 Automobile property 
damage $500,000.00  
(d)  All operators of LSMV's shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. 
(e)  LSMV's shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(f)  LSMV's may be operated over those streets, and those areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(g)  Every person operating a LSMV shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the rules of the road and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter except as to special regulations in this part and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(h)  All LSMV's are entitled to full use of a lane, and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any low-speed vehicle of the full use of a lane. 
(j)  The operator of an LSMV shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(k)  No person shall operate an LSMV between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
(l)  LSMV's shall not be operated two or more abreast in a single lane. 
(m)  LSMV's shall be operated only on any street where the posted speed limit does not exceed 35 miles per hour. The operator of a LSMV shall not operate such vehicle on any street where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour except to cross this street at or near a 90-degree angle. 
(n)  No individual or group operating or driving LSMV's shall engage in hazardous activities on the streets and those areas accessible by the public. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(o)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city also apply to operators of LSMV's. 
(p)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the LSMV. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the LSMV. 
(q)  During civic activities, festivals and parades, LSMV's shall not be permitted unless specially authorized to do so, to operate within areas where motor vehicle operation is restricted or prohibited. 
(r)  Before any LSMV may be operated upon city streets or public areas of the city, it shall have installed thereon: 
(1)  An emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall conform to those standards and specifications adopted by slow-moving vehicles by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers in December 1966, and contained within such society's standard ASAE S276.1, or shall be an emblem of the same shape and size painted on such vehicle in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at the height of three feet to five feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(2)  An amber strobe light as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. 
(s)  Each person operating an LSMV is liable for his or her own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies and each person operating an LSMV on city streets or within public areas shall maintain liability insurance coverage and each person operating an LSMV shall, upon request by law enforcement personnel, very such coverage. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1; Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1; Ord. of 4-14-08(2), § 2) 
Sec. 94-13. - LSMV "not for hire" regulations. 
(a)  All operators of LSMVs shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. 
(b)  LSMVs shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  LSMVs may be operated over those streets, and those areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours unless such LSMVs are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(d)  Every person operating a LSMVs shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the rules of the road and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter except as to special regulations in this part and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(e)  All LSMVs are entitled to full use of a lane, and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any LSMV of the full use of a lane. 
(f)  The operator of a LSMV shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(g)  No person shall operate a LSMV between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
(h)  LSMV shall not be operated two or more abreast in a single lane. 
(i)  LSMVs shall be operated only on any street where the posted speed limit does not exceed 35 miles per hour. The operator of a LSMV shall not operate such vehicle on any street where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour except to cross this street at or near a 90 degree angle. 
(j)  No individual or group operating or driving LSMVs shall engage in hazardous activities on the streets and those areas accessible by the public. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(k)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city also apply to operators of LSMVs. 
(l)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the LSMV. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the LSMV. 
(m)  During civic activities, festivals and parades, LSMVs shall not be permitted unless specially authorized to do so, to operate within areas where motor vehicle operation is restricted or prohibited. 
(n)  Before any LSMV may be operated upon city streets or public areas of the city, it shall have installed thereon: 
(1)  An emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall conform to those standards and specifications adopted by slow-moving vehicles by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers in December 1966, and contained within such society's standard ASAE S276.6, or shall be an emblem of the same shape and size painted on such vehicle in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective, red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at the height of three feet to five feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(2)  An amber strobe light as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. 
(o)  Each person operating an LSMV is liable for his or her own actions. Liability insurance coverage varies and each person operating an LSMV on city streets or within public areas shall maintain liability insurance coverage and each person operating an LSMV shall, upon request by law enforcement personnel, verify such coverage. 
(Ord. of 4-14-08(2), § 3) 
Editor's note- Ord. of April 14, 2008(2), §§ 3, 5, renamed § 94-13 as set out herein. Former § 94-13 pertained to penalties. See § 94-15 for penalty provisions. 
Sec. 94-14. - Motorized cart regulations. 
(a)  All operators of motorized carts shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic when using the streets and those areas accessible by the public in the city. 
(b)  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(c)  Motorized carts may be operated over those streets, and those areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights and taillights. 
(d)  Every person operating a motorized cart shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the rules of the road and duties applicable to the driver of any other vehicle under this chapter except as to special regulations in this part and except as to those provisions of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(e)  All motorized carts are entitled to full use of a lane, and no motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any motorized cart of the full use of a lane. 
(f)  The operator of a motorized cart shall not overtake and pass in the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken. 
(g)  No person shall operate a motorized cart between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles. 
(h)  Motorized carts shall not be operated two or more abreast in a single lane. 
(i)  Motorized carts shall be operated only on any street where the posted speed limit does not exceed 35 miles per hour. The operator of a motorized cart shall not operate such vehicle on any street where the posted speed limit exceeds 35 miles per hour except to cross this street at or near a 90 degree angle. 
(j)  No individual or group operating or driving motorized carts shall engage in hazardous activities on the streets and those areas accessible by the public. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include, but are not limited to the following: 
(1)  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city; and 
(2)  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(k)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city also apply to operators of motorized carts. 
(l)  All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during the operation of the motorized cart. No person may sit on the operator's lap during the operation of the motorized cart. 
(m)  During civic activities, festivals and parades, motorized carts shall not be permitted unless specially authorized to do so, to operate within areas where motor vehicle operation is restricted or prohibited. 
(n)  Before any motorized cart may be operated upon city streets or public areas of the city, it shall have installed thereon: 
(1)  An emblem as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4. The emblem shall conform to those standards and specifications adopted by slow-moving vehicles by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers in December 1966, and contained within such society's standard ASAE S276.6, or shall be an emblem of the same shape and size painted on such vehicle in a bright and conspicuous retro-reflective, red-orange paint. Such emblem shall be mounted on the rear of such vehicles, in the approximate horizontal geometric center of the vehicle, at the height of three feet to five feet above the roadway, and shall be maintained at all times in a clean and reflective condition. 
(2)  An amber strobe light as required by O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. 
(o)  Each person operating a motorized cart is liable for his or her own actions. 
(Ord. of 4-14-08(2), § 4) 
Sec. 94-15. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the terms of this article, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $50.00. 
(2)  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $100.00. 
(3)  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a motorized cart or LSMV, the penalty will be determined following the provisions of section 1-12 of this Code. In addition the registered owner's LSMV registration (if public conveyance for hire) shall be revoked. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a LSMV (for public conveyance for hire) for use in the city for a period of two years following the third conviction. 
(4)  Multiple offenses within the first offense will be fined as a first offense. Multiple offenses within the second offense will be fined as a second offense. Multiple offenses within third or subsequent offenses will be fined per section 1-12 of this Code. 
(b)  Any violation by an operator of a motorized cart or LSMV shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 40, and this Code. Any violation by an owner of a motorized cart or LSMV shall be charged against the owner according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 40, and this Code. 
(Ord. of 3-22-04, § 1; Ord. of 4-14-08(2), § 5) 
Chapter 98 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The City of St. Marys Public Works Policies and Specifications Manual is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of such manual is on file in the city clerk's office. 
Charter reference- Service charges for water, sewer, sanitary and health services, § 5-107. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-211 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 26; environment, ch. 46; floods, ch. 54; historical preservation, ch. 62; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; zoning, ch. 110. 
State Law reference- Power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 3.; dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2; Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; adoption of ordinances, rules and regulations relating to payment for street improvements and construction of water, gas and sewer connections; payment of costs of connections, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-7; city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; Resource Recovery Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-63-1 et seq.; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for public purposes, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-20 et seq.; executions for collection of assessments for laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Purpose. 
    The city has experienced considerable growth over the past several years. In order to continue to provide water and sewer service to the citizens of the city and those individuals whose property is located outside the corporate city boundaries who formally request and are granted water and sewer service, the mayor and council of the city, in the interest of maintaining and protecting the health, sanitation, public safety and welfare of the general public, declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform rate schedule for water, sewer and garbage service. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § I; Ord. of 6-24-96, § I; Ord. of 7-13-98, § I; Ord. of 6-12-00, § I; Ord. of 8-13-01, § I) 
Sec. 98-2. - Application for water and sewer service. 
(a)  The consumer shall make application for water and sewer service at the city hall water department and at the same time shall make a security deposit of $100.00 and a nonrefundable $35.00 service turn on fee for water and sewer service. Failure to submit a complete application (Social Security number, date of birth, driver's license) will result in collection of a deposit in the amount of $250.00. 
(b)  Upon the expiration of 12 months following the posting of the water and sewer security deposit, the deposit shall be returned to the applicant through a credit to the existing account provided: (i) a request for such credit is made by the applicant; and (ii) all bills rendered by the city for the 12-month period have been paid in full on a timely basis. In the event the applicant has not paid such bills on a timely basis, such applicant shall be entitled to a refund only after the expiration of 12 months from the last late payment was due and provided all payments within the ensuing 12-month period have been made in full on a timely basis. 
(c)  In the event that a water and sewer security deposit has been refunded by the city and service is thereafter terminated for nonpayment, service may only be restored upon payment in full of the current bill. Following the expiration of 12 months, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b), above. 
(d)  A monthly base rate of $35.00 plus water and sewer usage charges, shall apply for temporary water and sewer services required for a time period of up to 30 days for uninhabited properties. Commercial businesses, such as rental management companies, real estate companies, inspection companies, etc., will be allowed to have this continuous temporary service with monthly renewals. This monthly charge shall apply up and until a service is requested to be disconnected for a period of up to 12 months. All service under the same commercial business name can be terminated for nonpayment on one account. Service may only be restored upon payment in full of all accounts. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all monthly charges plus usage until service is disconnected or a new occupant applies for service. 
(e)  All new construction projects, residential and commercial, will be required to pay only for actual water used after a water meter has been installed until receipt of a certificate of occupancy or actual occupancy by a resident or commercial business owner. Upon receipt of a certificate of occupancy or actual occupancy of a structure, the standard water-sewer fees will apply as described in this chapter. 
(f)  The landlord shall make application for water and sewer service at the city hall water department and at the same time shall make a security deposit of $100.00 and a one-time account establishment charge of $35.00 for water and sewer service when the account is first established. The standard water/sewer fees will apply as described in this chapter. 
(g)  Customers whose account has a past due balance after disconnection who are referred to a collection agency or an attorney for collection shall be required to pay for postage, costs of additional notices, collection fees, court fees, and attorney fees which city is charged for any collection activity after such disconnection. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-02, § V; Ord. of 4-25-05, § 1; Ord. of 3-12-07, § 1; Ord. of 4-9-07, §§ 1-4; Ord. of 6-11-07(4); Ord. of 4-27-09; Ord. of 3-21-11(3); Ord. of 5-2-11(3); Ord. No. 2014-043 , 9-15-14) 
Sec. 98-3. - City's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  The city shall run a line from its distribution lines to the property line where the service line exists or is to be constructed, if the line runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. 
(b)  The basic connection shall be for a service line not exceeding 100 feet from the city's distribution lines. 
(c)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for the extensions of its distribution lines as may be required to render such service. 
(d)  The city may install its meter or connection at or near the property line at the city's option. 
(e)  The city reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer's lines or pipes are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connections of backflow. 
(f)  Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any anticipated interruptions of service by the city. 
(g)  The city shall run a line from its collection line to the property line where the service line exists if the line runs immediately adjacent and parallel to the property to be served. The basic connection fee shall be for a service line not exceeding 100 feet from the city's collection lines. 
(h)  The city may make connections to service other properties not adjacent to its lines upon payment of reasonable costs for extensions of its collection lines as may be required to render such service. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-02, § V) 
Sec. 98-4. - Consumer's responsibility and liability. 
(a)  Water furnished by the city shall be used for consumption by the consumer, and employees only. The consumer shall not sell water to any other person or permit any other person to use said water. Disregard for this rule shall be sufficient cause for refusal and/or discontinuance of service. 
(b)  When a meter or meter box has been placed for service, it must be unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader. 
(c)  The consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on the consumer's side of the meter. 
(d)  The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained by the consumer at the consumer's expense, in a safe and efficient manner, and in accordance with the sanitary regulations of the state health department. 
(e)  In order to be received as a customer and entitled to receive water from the city's water system, all applicants must offer proof that any private wells located on their property are not physically connected to the lines of the city's water system. All applicants by becoming consumers of the city shall agree that so long as they continue to be consumers of the city they will not permit the connection of any private wells on their property to the city's water system. 
(f)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (h) sanitary sewer service furnished by the city shall not be for wastewater generated only by the city water system. With the exception of situations as set forth in subsection (h), no wastewater from private wells, storm drains, roof drains, or similar sources shall be discharged into the system. 
(g)  The consumer's sewer piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained at the consumer's expense. All contractors or plumbers installing water/sewer system service lines shall be registered at city hall and approved by the city. All such connections and service line work shall be done in accordance with city specifications, and all work shall be inspected and approved by the city prior to the piping being connected. 
(h)  In the event that water service is not reasonably available, in the determination of the city manager, upon written recommendation of the public works director, the requirement of subsection (f) may be waived by the city. If such a waiver is granted, the consumer shall be required within six months of availability of sewer service to connect to the city's sewer lines upon payment of the tap fee in effect at that time. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V; Ord. of 1-12-01, §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 98-5. - Access to premises and extensions of system. 
(a)  Duly authorized agents of the city shall have access at all hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing city property, inspecting piping, reading and testing meters, or for any other purpose in connection with the water service and it facilities. 
(b)  Extensions to the system shall be made only when the consumer shall grant or convey, or shall cause to be granted or conveyed, to the city a permanent easement of right-of-way across any property traversed by the water and sewer lines. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V) 
Sec. 98-6. - Change of occupancy. 
    Not less than three days' notice must be given in person or in writing, at the city hall water department of the city to discontinue water and sewer service or to change occupancy. The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is longer. If the disconnect date is disputed, the consumer must show proof of said date from another utility. The new occupant shall apply for service before occupying the premises. Failure to do so will result in disconnection of service until said deposits are paid, and will make him/her liable for paying for all the water consumed since the last meter reading. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V) 
Sec. 98-7. - Meter reading; billings; collections. 
(a)  Bills to customers for water and sewer service shall be mailed out on such day or days of each month as may be determined as desirable by the city. Bills must be paid by 5:00 p.m. on the due date at the water department of the city to avoid late charges. Payments may also be mailed to the city hall water department; however, we do not check postmarks on payments received by mail. Failure to receive bills shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent, nor relieve the consumer from payment of same. The failure of water and/or sewer users to pay charges duly imposed shall result in the automatic imposition of the following penalties: 
(1)  Bills must be paid by 5:00 p.m. on the due date. Nonpayment of bill by this time shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the delinquent account. 
(2)  Nonpayment within 30 days from the due date will result in the water being shut off from the water user's property. 
(3)  Nonpayment for 40 days after original due date will allow the city, in addition to all other rights and remedies, to terminate agreement, and in such event, the customer shall not be entitled to receive, nor the city obligated to supply, any water under this agreement. 
(b)  Service disconnected for nonpayment of bills will be restored only after bills are paid in full, and any additional security deposit that may be required. A service charge of $30.00 will be applied to each account if it appears on the disconnect list. Water meters may be turned off or on by a city employee only, there is a fine of $100.00 to any individual or company that tampers with the meter. When a tamper fee is determined by a city employee, the fee shall be paid before water is restored. 
(c)  When consumers have paid by check for services, and the check has been returned by the bank for insufficient funds, a $30.00 service charge will be added to the total due. If there was a bank error, upon notification from the bank in writing, the NSF fee will be waived. All NSF checks must be picked up and replaced with cash or a money order. We will not send an NSF check back through the bank for a second approval. If the NSF check was for the customer's security deposit, the water will be disconnected. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 8-24-99, § 1; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V; Ord. of 6-11-07(4); Ord. of 2-11-08, § 1; Ord. of 4-27-09) 
Sec. 98-8. - Suspension of service. 
(a)  When water and sewer is discontinued and all bills are paid, the security deposit shall be refunded to the consumer by the city. 
(b)  Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bills, the security deposit may be applied by the city toward settlement of the account. Any balance will be refunded to the consumer; however, if the security deposit is insufficient to cover the bill, the city may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by the law for collection of debts. 
(c)  The city reserves the right to discontinue its service without notice for the following additional reasons: 
(1)  To prevent fraud or abuse. 
(2)  Consumer's willful disregard of the city's rules. 
(3)  Emergency repairs. 
(4)  Legal processes. 
(5)  Direction of public authorities. 
(6)  Insufficiency of water supply due to circumstances beyond the city's control. 
(7)  Strike, riot, fire, flood, hurricane, unavoidable accidents. 
(8)  Incomplete water/sewer application or tap application. 
(9)  Nonsufficient funds (NSF) check given. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V) 
Sec. 98-9. - Transfers. 
(a)  There is a transfer fee of $30.00 for transferring from one address to another within the city's water system. This will be added to the consumer's bill at the time the transfer occurs. Any utility bills that are due must be paid in full before service will be transferred. 
(b)  Upon the disconnection of an account that has a landlord agreement; the account will be transferred immediately into the name of the landlord. All monthly charges will apply per section 98-53. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V; Ord. of 6-11-07(4); Ord. of 4-27-09; Ord. of 5-2-11(3)) 
Sec. 98-10. - Complaints, adjustments. 
    If the consumer believes his/her bill to be in error, he/she shall present his/her claim, in person, at the city hall water department, before the bill becomes delinquent. Such claim, if made after the bill becomes delinquent, shall not be effective in preventing discontinuance of service as provided in this article. The consumer must pay such bill under protest although said payment shall not prejudice his claim. 
(1)  The city will make a special water meter reading at the request of the consumer for a fee of $25.00; provided, however, that if such a special reading discloses that the meter was over-read, no charge will be made. 
(2)  Water meters will be tested at the request of the consumer upon payment to the city of the actual costs of making the test; provided, however, that if the meter is found to over-register beyond three percent of the correct volume, no charge will be made. 
(3)  The city is not responsible for personal injuries or property damage resulting from or relating water and sewer service. Adjustments to service bills due to broken water lines and similar problems may be made by the city manager in his discretion upon written request by the customer and after appropriate investigation. All such requests must be received by the city no later than 15 days from the date of the bill. 
(4)  If the seal of a meter is broken by someone other than the city's representatives or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for any cause, the consumer shall pay an amount estimated from proper data. Such data shall consist of a calculated average of the last six months bills paid. 
(5)  The city will not give sewer adjustments for filling any type of pool, nor will they allow fire hydrants to be used for filling any type of pool; this is the sole responsibility of the consumer. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V; Ord. of 4-25-05, § 2; Ord of 4-27-09) 
Sec. 98-11. - Time limitation for connections. 
(a)  When basic water and/or sewer connection fees have been paid by an individual, the subscriber will have 12 months to connect to the system without additional charges. If actual connection does not occur during the 12-month period, the subscriber shall be required to pay any increases in the basic fee or fees that may have been adopted by the mayor and council by amendment to this article. 
(b)  Both water and sewer fees shall be for a specific location only and such permits shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 7-10-00; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V; Ord. of 4-45-04, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 5-2-11(3)) 
Sec. 98-12. - Backflow prevention. 
(a)  The city water and sewer department is authorized to discontinue water service when necessary to prevent contamination of the public water system due to possible cross-connections when requested to do so by the city water and sewer department or the city planning and building department or when it is necessary to protect the water system or individual properties from emergency cross-connection or backflow situations. 
(b)  The city water and sewer department is further authorized to install or require to be installed suitable backflow prevention devices at the customer's service connection or other areas as needed to prevent contamination or the risk thereof for the public water system. 
(Ord. of 10-10-94, § 1) 
Sec. 98-13. - Deposit required for developers and builders. 
(a)  The city hereby requires real estate developers and builders to pay a deposit of $40.00 for the use of the city's water and sewer service during the time of the construction, building and improving of real estate. 
(b)  The planning and building clerk is directed to collect the deposit at the time a building permit is issued. 
(c)  Any amounts not utilized during the construction phase of the real estate improvement will be credited to the first bill issued by the water and sewer department. 
(Ord. of 3-23-87, §§ 1-3) 
Sec. 98-14. - Separate water and sewer connections required. 
    In order to encourage and promote conservation of the city's water resources and discourage wasteful or unnecessary use of the limited capacity of the city's sewage treatment plant and wastewater collection system, a separate water meter and sewer connection will be required for each and every family dwelling unit, apartment, house, mobile home, condominium or commercial establishment located within the city when water or sewer connections are requested for such locations and can be provided by the city. This section shall not affect any location which is currently connected to the city water and sewer systems or for which connection fees for both systems have been paid prior to April 5, 1979. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(1)) 
Secs. 98-15-98-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RATE SCHEDULES 

Sec. 98-51. - Water and sewer system capital recovery fees. 
(a)  The rate schedule for all new water and sewer system capital recovery fees shall be determined from a city council approved fee schedule. 
(b)  A separate tap can be issued for an irrigation system. An irrigation connection to the city's water system will be installed by the city based on time and material, at the expense of the customer. The customer will be responsible for connection to the meter and responsible for installing a reduced pressure zone back flow preventer. A $100.00 deposit will be required to establish service. 
(c)  There will be no tap fees for fire protection systems. Fire protection taps may only be used for a fire protection sprinkler system. Any domestic, agricultural, gardening or any other use utilizing water from a fire protection tap is prohibited and violations of any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-12. 
(d)  In all cases of new multiple type users (i.e., apartments, etc.) subscribing for water and/or sewer service, the city will make the determination as to the installation of either a master meter(s) or individual meters for each unit. Any residential unit capable of being sold shall install an individual water meter for each unit. Each commercial unit capable of supporting a separate business shall install an individual water meter for each unit. 
(e)  As used in this article II of chapter 98 - Utilities, the term "senior citizen" shall mean persons who are 65 years of age or older. The term "veteran" shall mean a person who served in the active military service of the United States of America and who was discharged or released under conditions other than dishonorable. The disability of any veteran shall be as adjudicated by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § II; Ord. of 6-24-96, § II; Ord. of 7-13-98, § II; Ord. of 6-12-00, § II; Ord. of 8-13-01, § II; Ord. of 6-12-06(1); Ord. of 12-11-06, § 1; Amend. of 8-20-12(2); Ord. No. 2013-001 , 1-7-13; Ord. No. 2017-7-17-001 , 7-17-17) 
Sec. 98-52. - Special capital recovery fee. 
    The city offers an extended payment plan for the capital recovery fee for up to five years for single-family residences of the then existing capital recovery fee. In order to qualify for the special capital recovery fee, the consumer must provide a copy of the legal description of the property. A lien will be placed on the property until the capital recovery fee is paid in full. Only one special capital recovery fee per family is allowed. The account must stay in the name of the person that applied for the tap until said tap is paid in full. This capital recovery fee will be added to the customer's water bill on a monthly basis up to 60 months. Upon application for this capital recovery fee, the customer must make an initial payment for meter equipment, first month's capital recovery fees, a $100.00 security deposit and a nonrefundable $35.00 service turn on fee. There will be a lien placed on the property until the capital recovery fee has been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96 § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 7-10-00; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V; Ord. of 4-25-05, § 3; Ord. of 5-2-11(3)) 
Sec. 98-53. - Existing and new users. 
    The following rate schedule for use of city water and sewer services shall apply to each existing user and all new users. This rate schedule is applicable to each user, whether actually connected to the system or the availability exists. Availability exists when the city's infrastructure is within 200 feet of consumer's property line. However, charges will not apply unless service abuts the property: 
WATER AND SEWER RATE SCHEDULE 
Inside City Rates Amount of
Water Used Rate Per Month (1) Residential   
0-6,000 
6,000 and over $ 40.90 (base fee) 
 5.72/tgal (variable fee) 
 6.56/tgal (2) Commercial I includes buildings such as laundries, laundromats, dry cleaners, restaurants, bottling plants service stations, garages, car washes, manufacturing facilities, hospitals, clinics and schools   
0-6,000 
6,000 and over $ 40.90 (base fee) 
 5.72/tgal (variable fee) 
 6.56/tgal Hotels with restaurants will receive two base rates plus variable fees (3) Commercial II, III and Industrial: 
Commercial II includes buildings returning only domestic sewage, such as office buildings, churches, hotels, (without restaurants), warehouses (for storage only), retail sales, community centers and recreational buildings   
0-6,000 
6,000 and over $ 40.90 (base fee) 
 5.72/tgal (variable fee) 
 6.56/tgal (4) Commercial III includes users discharging less 70 percent of metered water into sewage system such as commercial docks, (except florists) as in nurseries and greenhouses   
0-6,000 
6,000 and over $ 40.90 (base fee) 
 5.72/tgal (variable fee) 
 6.56/tgal (5) This will apply to apartments, condominiums, trailer parks, duplexes, or any other multifamily dwelling unit with one water meter. Their bills will be calculated by multiplying the number of units by the base fee of $20.00 plus the variable fee listed above. (6) Irrigation meters wil pay a monthly base rate of $20.45 plus a variable rate of:   
  
0-6,000 gallons 
6,000 gallons and over $ 2.86  
$ 3.28 * Senior citizens and certain disabled American veterans will receive a 20 percent discount on the base fee and variable fee for residential use. Any veteran who presents proof that he/she has was discharged under honorable conditions and has been adjudicated by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs as being 100 percent totally disabled and entitled to receive service connected benefits shall qualify for this discount. No person shall receive more than one 20 percent discount. 
** Sewer only users inside city limits will be charged $37.55 per month. (base fee + 6,000 gal variable fee)  
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § III; Ord. of 6-24-96, § III; Ord. of 7-13-98, § III; Ord. of 6-12-00, § III; Ord. of 8-13-01, § III; Ord. of 12-13-04, § III; Ord. of 6-12-06(2); Ord. of 6-11-07(1); Ord. of 6-9-08(2), § 1; Ord of 4-27-09; Ord. of 5-10-10(1); Ord. of 10-25-10(2); Ord. of 5-2-11(3); Ord. No. 2013-001 , 1-7-13) 
_____
Sec. 98-54. - Water and sewer availability. 
(a)  The minimum charge as provided in the rate schedule, shall be made for such availability. The fixed base rate will be $20.45 for water and $20.45 for sewer. "No free service" or use of facilities will be permitted and all connections will be metered. Senior citizens will receive a 20 percent discount. 
(b)  Availability exists when the city's infrastructure is within 200 feet of consumer's property line. However, charges will not apply unless service abuts the property. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § III; Ord. of 6-24-96 § III; Ord. of 7-13-98, § III; Ord. of 6-12-00, § III; Ord. of 8-13-01, § III; Ord. of 12-13-04, § III; Ord. of 6-12-06(2); Ord. of 6-11-07(1); Ord. of 6-9-08(2), § 2; Ord of 4-27-09; Ord. of 5-10-10(1); Ord. of 5-2-11(3)) 
Sec. 98-55. - Solid waste collection. 
(a)  Initial service fee for solid waste collection. 
Initial fee: 
Residential/commercial\$25.00 
(b)  Garbage fees for weekly pick-ups are as follows: 
Fee (per month): 
Residential/commercial, 90 gallons\$16.96 
Senior citizens and 100 percent disabled veterans will receive a 20 percent discount. 
(c)  A $30.00 service fee will be charged for accounts that are two months delinquent and trash can will be picked up. 
Senior citizens will receive a 20 percent discount. 
(Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § IV; Ord. of 6-24-96, § IV; Ord. of 7-13-98, § IV; Ord. of 6-12-00, § IV; Ord. of 8-13-01, § IV; Ord. of 6-14-04, § IV; Ord. of 6-12-06(2); Ord. of 6-11-07(1); Ord. of 4-27-09; Ord. of 5-2-11(3); Ord. No. 2013-016 , 6-3-13; Ord. No. 2017-7-17-001 , 7-17-17) 
Sec. 98-56. - Review by city council. 
    The water, sewer and garbage rate schedules will be reviewed at least annually by the mayor and council. They will revised as needed to provide for the receipt of adequate revenues to meet the requirements of debt service, operation and maintenance and the establishment of required services. 
(Ord. of 2-12-90(1); Ord. of 11-13-95(2), § V; Ord. of 6-24-96, § V; Ord. of 7-13-98, § V; Ord. of 6-12-00, § V; Ord. of 7-10-00; Ord. of 8-13-01, § V) 
Sec. 98-57. - Aid-to-construction fees. 
(a)  In order to connect to the City of St. Marys water and/or wastewater utility system, all residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or any other structure requiring water and/or wastewater utility services, shall pay an aid-to-construction fee in addition to any fees required by ordinance prior to connecting to the city water and/or wastewater system. 
(b)  The aid-to-construction fee will be based upon improvements needed for the water or wastewater infrastructure and construction or expansion of the water or wastewater treatment facilities serving the city. The city currently has two wastewater treatment facilities. The current wastewater treatment plants are known as the Point Peter Plant and the Scrubby Bluff Plant. Each aid-to-construction fee will be based on the expansion or construction needed for any and all improvements or expansions of the water and wastewater plants serving the city. These fees will only be used for the improvement or expansion of the water and wastewater treatment facilities located within the city. 
(c)  The aid-to-construction fee for commercial subdivisions and/or structures, and residential subdivisions and/or structures shall be calculated based on the estimated average daily water consumption of each type of structure or unit as outlined in Table 98-57.1, multiplied by the estimated construction cost per gallon, as listed in the fee ordinance, then multiplied by the number of units. If the proposed use is not included in Table 98-57.1, then the daily average water consumption rate shall be determined by the city manager and/or their designee. 
    Owner/developer of any structure shall have the option of providing an Earthcraft or LEED certified facility that may modify the daily average water consumption rate as listed in Table 98-57.1. The aid-to-construction fee shall be the lower of the figures derived from using either the figures from Table 98-57.1, or the Leed or Earthcraft certified figures. The city will only accept certified LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) or Earthcraft figures from a current Georgia registered professional engineer or current Georgia registered architect. 
    For example: For a 2011 development with 50 units of one-bedroom apartments the fee would be GPD (Table 98-57.1) x Cost Per Gallon x Unit Total = Aid-to-Construction Fee or 150 x $12.58 x 50 = $94,350.00 would be the aid-to-construction fee. 
(d)  Aid-to-construction fees for commercial or residential projects that do not require subdivision review and approval shall be paid with submittal of a request for a building permit. Aid-to-construction fees for commercial or residential subdivisions shall be paid prior to the receipt of a building permit for any structure. 
(e)  Additions and renovations made to existing structures shall pay an aid-to-construction fee based on the number of fixtures to be added. The fee shall be calculated based on ten units per fixture and then multiplied by the current estimated construction cost per gallon. 
    Earthcraft and LEED certification may also be used for existing structures. The relocation of one or more fixtures within the same existing building envelope will not require an aid-to-construction fee. 
Table 98-57.1 
Structure Type Water Usage In Gallons Per Day Airport 2 per passenger plus 14 per employee Assembly hall 2 per seat Barber shop/beauty parlor 55 per chair Boarding house 60 per room Boarding house with laundering services 60 per room, plus 500 per washing machine Boarding house w/dishwashing machine 60 per room, plus 50 per dishwashing machine Bowling alley 75 per lane Car wash with wand wash 200 per bay Car wash with hand wash 700 per location Car wash with drive-thru automated wash 3,500 per site Call center 5 per 100 square feet of building Clinic-Medical/surgical/outpatient 150 per exam room Clinic-Psychiatric-non-exam See office listing Correction institution/prison/jail 125 per bed, plus 10 per employee Club-Nonresidential recreation facility Consumption per member to be determined by review of type and capacity by designated staff Club-Residential recreation facility Consumption per member to be determined by review of type and capacity by designated staff Day care 10 per employee Dental office 150 per chair Department store-Retail 5 per 100 square feet of building Drug store 300 per store Factory/manufacturing facility 15-35 per person per shift as determined by review of process not including water/sewer needed for the process used Funeral home 10 per 100 s.f. Highway rest areas Gpd per person per day based on engineering criteria for size of building and anticipated use factors as submitted by GaDOT and reviewed and approved by the city manager or designated staff member Hospital 100 per bed Hotel/motel no kitchens 60 per room for 2 person - each extra person add 25 gpd Hotel/motel plus food service 60 per room, plus food service as listed above House of worship 1 per seat House of worship with day care or school 1 per seat, plus 10 each school personnel House of worship fellowship hall with kitchen 25 per seat, plus 50 per seat for dishwashing Kennel 15 per cage Kindergarten, no meals 10 per person Kitchen for day care or kindergarten 10 per person Laundry, self-service 200 per machine Laundry, commercial 1,000 per machine Manufactured home park 300 per site Marina without bathhouse 10 per boat slip Multifamily - one bedroom 100 per unit Multifamily - two bedrooms 150 per unit Multifamily - three bedrooms or more 200 per unit, plus 50 per additional bedroom Nursing home 150 per bed Office (except medical or dental) 15 per person Parks - Day use with flush toilets Consumption per member to be determined by review of type and capacity by designated staff not to exceed 5 per person Picnic areas (with flush toilets) Consumption per member to be determined by review of type and capacity by designated staff not to exceed 5 per person Physician's (medical) office 10 per outpatient procedure room, plus 10 per exam room Residential, one bedroom 150 per unit Residential, two bedrooms 200 per unit Residential, three or more bedrooms 300 per unit, plus 50 per additional bedroom Restaurant - less than 24-hour service 25 per seat - Add 500 to each use for a laundering service and add 500 to each use for an automated dishwashing service Restaurant - 24-hour service 50 per seat - Add 500 to each use for a laundering service and add 500 to each use for an automated dishwashing service Restaurant - Drive-in 30 per car space - Add 500 to each use for a laundering service and add 500 to each use for an automated dishwashing service Restaurant - Carry-out only 35 per 100 square feet of building - Add 500 to each use for a laundering service and add 500 to each use for an automated dishwashing service Retail 400 per toilet room Schools - day, no showers or cafeteria 15 per student and staff Schools - day with cafeteria 20 per student and staff Schools - day with showers and cafeteria 25 per student and staff Service station, full-service (fuel and convenience items) 25 per 100 s.f. Service station, with garage repairs 100 per pump Shopping centers .16 per s.f. Speculative buildings .1 per s.f. adjusted upon occupancy Stadium 2 per seat Storage - Mini warehouse 1.5 per 100 s.f. (gross) Swimming pools except residential pools 10 per user based on legal code occupancy Tavern, bar, lounge, no meals 15 per seat Tavern, bar, lounge, with meals 15 per seat plus food service, plus usage for "restaurant - less than 24-hour service", as listed above Travel trailer (RV) park 150 per space Theater - Drive-in 3 per car Theater (inside fixed seating) 3 per seat Veterinarian Office 20 per 100 s.f. (gross) Warehouse 400 per toilet room Construction not described above Water/sewer usage costs as determined by the city manager and/or staff member as designated by the city manager. Fees calculated over $100,000.00 shall be submitted to the mayor and city council for review and approval  
(Ord. of 1-8-07, § 1; Ord. of 3-26-07, §§ 1, 2; Ord. of 1-14-08(2), §§ 1-4; Ord. of 2-25-08(1), §§ 1, 2; Amend. of 3-19-12; Ord. No. 2013-002 , 2-3-13; Ord. No. 2013-024 , 9-16-13; Ord. No. 2014-027 , 6-16-14; Ord. No. 2017-9-21-002 , 9-21-17) 
Secs. 98-58-98-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and stormwater or surface water. 
    Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and serving of foods. 
    Industrial wastes means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams, per liter of solution. Neutral water, for example, has a pH value of 7 and a hydrogen-ion concentration of 10 7 . 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public utility. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwaters, stormwaters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Sewage means the spent water of a community. The preferred term is "wastewater". 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and or performance of the wastewater treatment works. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means a drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted water from any source. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of wastewater facilities and/or of wastewater treatment works and/or of water pollution control of the city, or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids means total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or is in suspension in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and referred to as nonfilterable residue. 
    Unpolluted water means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    Wastewater facilities means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent. 
    Wastewater treatment works means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes and sludge. Sometimes used as synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or "water pollution control plant". 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-77. - Unlawful disposal of waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or objectionable waste. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-78. - Discharges to natural outlet. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-79. - Privies, septic tanks, etc., prohibited generally. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-80. - Toilet facilities-Connection to sewer required when available. 
    The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 200 feet (30.5 meters) of the property line. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2); Ord. of 5-2-11(3)) 
Sec. 98-81. - Same-Use of private disposal system where city sewer not available. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 98-80, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Secs. 98-82-98-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PRIVATE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 

Sec. 98-101. - Permit required; application. 
    Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent or building official. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent or building official. A permit and inspection fee of $2.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-102. - Inspection, approval prior to permit becoming effective. 
    A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent or building official. The superintendent or building official shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent or building official when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 12 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent or building official. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-103. - Specifications. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of natural resources of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 7,500 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-104. - Abandonment upon connection to public sewer. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in section 98-103, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in compliance with this article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-105. - Operation, maintenance. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-106. - Additional requirements imposed by state. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the department of natural resources of the state. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Secs. 98-107-98-125. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 98-126. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent or building official. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-127. - Costs, expenses borne by owner; indemnification of city. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-128. - Separate sewer required for each building; exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-129. - Use of old sewers in new buildings. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent or building official to meet all requirements of this division. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-130. - Specifications. 
    The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the AWWA Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-131. - Connection of roof downspouts, drains, etc. 
    No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved by the superintendent or building official for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-132. - Connection to public sewer. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the AWWA Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the superintendent or building official before installation. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-133. - Inspection, supervision of connection and testing. 
    The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent or building official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or building official or his representative. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-134. - Excavations; safety precautions, restoration. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Secs. 98-135-98-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 98-156. - Discharge of stormwater, runoff, etc., to sanitary sewer. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sewer, except stormwater runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times and may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the superintendent or building official. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-157. - Discharges to storm sewers, natural outlets. 
    Stormwater other than that exempted under section 98-156 and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent or building official and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent or building official to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-158. - Prohibited discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(2)  Any waters containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any waste treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the wastewater works. 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the wastewater facilities such as, but not limited to, ashes, bones, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-159. - Restricted substances. 
    The following described substances, materials, waters or waste shall be limited in discharges to municipal systems to concentrations or quantities which will not harm either the sewers, wastewater treatment process or equipment, will not have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or will not otherwise endanger lives, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. The superintendent or building official may set limitations lower than the limitations established in the regulations below if in his opinion such more severe limitations are necessary to meet the above objectives. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability, the superintendent or building official will give consideration to such factors as the quantity of subject waste in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of construction of the sewers, the wastewater treatment process employed, capacity of the wastewater treatment plant, degree of treatability of the waste in the wastewater treatment plant, and other pertinent factors. The limitations or restrictions on materials or characteristics of waste or wastewaters discharged to the sanitary sewer which shall not be violated without approval of the superintendent or building official are as follows: 
(1)  Wastewater having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius). 
(2)  Wastewater containing more than 25 milligrams per liter of petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oils, or product of mineral oil origin. 
(3)  Wastewater from industrial plants containing floatable oils, fat or grease. 
(4)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded (see section 98-76). Garbage grinders may be connected to sanitary sewers from homes, hotels, institutions, restaurants, hospitals, catering establishments or similar places where garbage originates from the preparation of food in kitchens for the purpose of consumption on the premises or when served by caterers. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances to such degree that any such material received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent or building official for such materials. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing odor-producing substances exceeding limits which may be established by the superintendent or building official. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent or building official in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(8)  Quantities of flow, concentrations, or both which constitute a slug as defined herein. 
(9)  Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the wastewater treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the wastewater treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(10)  Any water or wastes which, by interaction with other water or wastes in the public sewer system, release obnoxious gases, form suspended solids which interfere with the collection system, or create a condition deleterious to structures and treatment processes. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-160. - Authority of city to reject wastes, require pretreatment, etc. 
(a)  If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in section 98-159, and which in the judgment of the superintendent or building official may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the superintendent or building official may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes. 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers. 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge. 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer changes. 
(b)  When considering the above alternatives, the superintendent or building official shall give consideration to the economic impact of each alternative on the discharger. If the superintendent or building official permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent or building official. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-161. - Interceptors. 
    Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent or building official, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable grease in excessive amounts as specified in section 98-159(3), or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent or building official, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. In the maintaining of these interceptors the owner shall be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates, and means of disposal which are subject to review by the superintendent or building official. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed waste disposal firms. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-162. - Maintenance of treatment or flow-equalizing facilities. 
    Where pretreatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided or required for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-163. - Required structures, appurtenances to be provided. 
    When required by the superintendent or building official, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent or building official. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-164. - Authority to require information from user. 
    The superintendent or building official may require a user of sewer services to provide information needed to determine compliance with this division. These requirements may include: 
(1)  Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time period. 
(2)  Chemical analyses of wastewaters. 
(3)  Information on raw materials, processes, and products affecting wastewater volume and quality. 
(4)  Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent, or other materials important to sewer use control. 
(5)  A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and pretreatment facility location. 
(6)  Details of wastewater pre-treatment facilities. 
(7)  Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials through spills to the municipal sewer. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-165. - Measurements, tests, analyses. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this division shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of AWWA published by the AWWA. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis subject to approval by the superintendent or building official. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-166. - Special agreements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-167. - Damaging, tampering with facilities. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-168. - Right of entry. 
    The superintendent or building official and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the community system in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-169. - Withholding of confidential information. 
    The superintendent or building official or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question might result in an advantage to competitors. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-170. - Observance of safety rules by city officials, employees. 
    While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in section 98-81 the superintendent or building official or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees, and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands, for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in section 98-163. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Sec. 98-171. - Easements. 
    The superintendent or building official and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. 
(Ord. of 4-5-79(2)) 
Secs. 98-172-98-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER USE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 98-251-98-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OUTDOOR WATER USE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted July 26, 2004, added new provisions to the Code as ch. 55, "Outdoor Water Use", §§ 55-1-55-6; for classification purposes, the provisions of said ordinance have been redesignated as art. IV, div. 2, §§ 98-301-98-306, of this chapter at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 98-301. - Definitions. 
    When used in this division: 
    Address means the "house number" (a numeric or alphanumeric designation) that, together with the street name, describes a physical location of a specific property. "Even numbered address" means a house number ending with the numbers 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, or no house number. "Odd numbered address" means a house number ending with the number 1, 3, 5, 7, 9. 
    Declared drought response level means one of four levels of drought that can be declared based on the severity of drought conditions, with one being the least severe and four being the most severe. 
(Ord. of 7-26-04, § 1(55-1)) 
Sec. 98-302. - Applicability of division. 
    These rules apply to any property or address located within the city limits of the City of St. Marys and to any user or customer of the City's water system who uses treated City water for outdoor uses. 
(Ord. of 7-26-04, § 1(55-2)) 
Sec. 98-303. - Outdoor water use schedule during non-drought periods. 
    Outdoor water use other than exempted activities shall occur only as follows: 
(1)  Odd-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)  Even-numbered addresses: outdoor water use is allowed on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(Ord. of 7-26-04, § 1(55-3)) 
Sec. 98-304. - Outdoor water use schedule during declared drought response levels. 
(a)  The mayor for the city is authorized to make drought declarations, consistent with the declaration of drought response level made by the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(b)  During declared drought conditions outdoor water use, other than exempted activities, shall occur only during scheduled hours on the scheduled days. 
(c)  Declared drought response level one: Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days with the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(3)  Use of hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing is prohibited. 
(d)  Declared drought response level two: Outdoor water use may occur on scheduled days within the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. 
(1)  Scheduled days for odd-numbered addresses are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays. 
(2)  Scheduled days for even-numbered addresses and golf course fairways are Mondays, Wednesdays, and Saturdays. 
(3)  The following uses are prohibited: 
a.  Using hydrants for any purpose other than firefighting, public health, safety or flushing. 
b.  Washing hard surfaces, such as streets, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, except when necessary for public health and safety. 
c.  Filling installed swimming pools except when necessary for health care of structural integrity. 
d.  Washing vehicles, such as cars, boats, trailer, motorbikes, airplanes, golf carts. 
e.  Washing buildings or structures except for immediate fire protection. 
f.  Non-commercial fundraising, such as car washes. 
g.  Using water for ornamental purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools, and waterfalls except when necessary to support aquatic life. 
(f)  Declared drought response level four: No outdoor water use is allowed, other than for exempted activities, or as the mayor may order. 
(Ord. of 7-26-04, § 1(55-4)) 
Sec. 98-305. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This rule shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and re-use of cooling system condensate or storm water in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  Re-use of gray water. 
(b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules for this rule: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Georgia EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(c)  Newly (in places less than 30 days) installed landscapes are subject to the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during the allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
(2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions apply. 
(d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the Georgia EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of non-drought and declared drought response level one. 
(3)  Irrigation of tees during times of non-drought and declared drought response levels one, two and three. 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this rule: 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers: During installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2)  Irrigation contractors: During installation and as need for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(3)  Sod producers. 
(4)  Ornamental growers. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(6)  Retail garden centers. 
(7)  Hydro-seeding. 
(8)  Power-washing. 
(9)  Construction sites. 
(10)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(11)  Car washes. 
(12)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(13)  Watering-in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Ord. of 7-26-04, § 1(55-5)) 
Sec. 98-306. - Penalties. 
    Willful violation of this division shall be punished as provided in section 1-12 of the City Code. 
(Ord. of 7-26-04, § 1(55-6)) 
Secs. 98-307-98-349. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GREASE INTERCEPTORS, INSTALLATION AND DISPOSAL OF WASTE 

Sec. 98-350. - Purpose, policy, and administration. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is the regulation of the generation and disposal of grease interceptor waste for the protection of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) and the environment. 
(b)  The objective of this article is to reduce the operational and maintenance costs of maintaining the POTW by preventing the accumulation of grease within the collection system lines. 
(c)  Another objective of this article is to assure that the sludge and byproducts removed from commercial waste treatment systems are transported and disposed of in accordance with Chapter 391-3-6-.24 of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
(d)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who, by contract or agreement with the city, are users of the city's POTW. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-351. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the city manager, the planning director, and the director of public works, under the authority and supervision of the mayor and city council shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of the article. 
(b)  The city manager, the planning director, and the director of public works, and persons designated and under the instruction and supervision of any of them, may investigate compliance of this article. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-352. - Specialized definitions. 
    Unless otherwise expressly stated or the context clearly indicates a different intention, the following terms shall, for the purpose of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    Adequately sized grease interceptor shall mean an interceptor that does not allow a discharge of oil and grease in excess of 300 milligrams per liter (mg/l) concentrations, or otherwise has not been found by the authority having jurisdiction to be contributing grease in quantities sufficient to cause POTW line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the POTW in order to keep line stoppages from occurring. 
    Approved shall mean accepted as satisfactory under the terms of this article and given formal and official sanction by the controlling authority. 
    Authority having jurisdiction shall mean the city manager (or another official designated by the city manager) or his duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Biological pretreatment service shall mean the application of any additive or enzyme or the use of any other biological means to digest waste in an interceptor that discharges into a public sewer system within the city. 
    Discharge shall mean the introduction of waste into a POTW. 
    Disposal shall mean the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing of any solid or semi-solid grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, and/or sewage into or on any land or water so that such waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including ground waters. 
    Disposal facility shall mean a facility at which liquid waste, including, but not limited to, grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, and sewage is received, processed, or treated in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
    Disposal facility operator shall mean an individual who is authorized to accept or reject liquid waste at a disposal facility, and who is authorized to sign a trip ticket, regardless of actual title. 
    Disposal site shall mean a permitted site or part of a site at which grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, or seepage is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations, and at which site said waste will remain after closure. 
    Emulsifiers and/or de-emulsifiers shall mean any substance or substances which, when added or placed into a grease trap or grease interceptor, will form an oily substance to a milky fluid in which the fat globules are in a very finely divided state and are held in suspension, giving it the semblance of a solution; as the homogenization of milk emulsifies the fat with the whey forming a smooth milk product. 
    Existing facility shall mean any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which started before the adoption of this article. 
    Fats shall mean substances that are primarily fatty acid esters of the alcohol glycerol, also called acylglycerols, neutral fats, natural fats, or glycerides. They are the major components of depot, or storage, fats in plant and animal cells, especially in the adipose (or fat) cells of vertebrates. This term may include any synthesized substance of a like nature. 
    Food courts shall mean areas predominantly found in shopping centers or amusement parks and festivals where several food preparation establishments having different owners may be sharing seating space and/or plumbing facilities. 
    Food service establishment shall mean any facility that cuts, cooks, bakes, prepares or serves food, or which disposes of food-related wastes and/or which has a local, state, and/or federal food service permit. 
    Garbage grinder shall mean a device, which shreds or grinds up solid or semi-solid waste materials into smaller portions for discharge into the POTW. 
    Generator shall mean a facility that causes, creates, generates, stores, or otherwise produces waste from on-site process operations, whether domestically or commercially generated, or as a byproduct of some domestic or nondomestic activity. The generator is responsible for assuring that the produced waste is disposed of in accordance with all federal, state and local disposal regulations. 
    Grease shall mean fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils and certain other nonfatty material from animal or vegetable sources, or from hydrocarbons of petroleum origins, commonly found in wastewater from food preparation and food service. Grease may originate from, but not be limited to, discharges from scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashing machines, soup kettles and floor drains located in areas where grease-containing materials may exist. 
    Grease interceptor or interceptor shall mean a water-tight receptacle utilized by commercial or industrial generators of liquid waste to intercept, collect, and restrict, the passage of grease and food particles into the POTW to which the receptacle is directly or indirectly connected, and to separate and retain grease and food particles from the wastewater discharged by a facility. 
    Grease interceptor waste shall mean any grease, food particles, or organic or inorganic solid or semi-solid waste collected and intercepted by a grease interceptor, usually in layers of floatable, suspended, and settleable substances, which are ultimately removed from a grease interceptor for proper disposal. All layers must be removed for disposal. 
    Incompatible wastes shall mean wastes that have different processing, storage or disposal requirements, or whose mixture would inhibit the proper disposal or treatment of each type of waste, or wastes that if mixed may cause a dangerous chemical or physical reaction, including, but not limited to, grease interceptor waste and grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste and septic tank waste, seepage and hazardous waste, or any combination or combinations thereof. 
    Inspection port shall mean openings, with easily opened covers, designed to allow inspectors quick access to the inlet flow control device, each compartment of the grease interceptor, and the effluent from the interceptor. A monitoring port is an inspection port large enough to allow temporary installation of monitoring devices such as samplers, strip recorders, flow meters, or other such measuring and/or monitoring devices. 
    Inspector shall mean the planning director, building inspector, code enforcement officer, or the director of public works, and person or persons designated and under the instruction and supervision of any of them, who are assigned to investigate compliance and detect violations of this article. 
    Living quarters shall mean a facility, or an area of a facility, where a person or family has a distinct living area, which includes individual kitchen and bath facilities, utilized solely by that single person or family. 
    Manager shall mean the person, regardless of actual title, immediately on-site at a location conducting, supervising, managing, or representing the activities of a generator, a transporter or a disposer. 
    May not shall prohibit. 
    New facility shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the adoption of this article, provided that: 
a.  The building structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing course; 
c.  The production processes or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered; or 
d.  Any remodeling or modification that results in a new facility as determined by the planning and building department. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1) above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
    NPDES shall mean National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System as administered by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    Oil and grease shall mean any material, but particularly biological lipids and mineral hydrocarbons, recovered as a substance soluble in an organic extracting solvent using an appropriate analytical method approved under 40 CFR 136. It also includes other material extracted by the solvent from an acidified sample and not volatilized during the extraction procedure. 
    Permit to operate a vacuum truck cleaning service shall mean the formal written control document required and issued by the city to a transporter, which authorizes and entitles the transporter to collect and transport, or transport and dispose of, grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, seepage, and other liquid wastes at a permitted or registered treatment storage, or disposal site or facility, and regulates such activities. 
    Permittee shall mean a person issued a permit under this article, including any agent, servant, or employee of the permittee. 
    POTW shall mean publicly owned treatment works. 
    Reasonable hours shall mean any time during which a facility is open for business to the public. It shall also include those times when a facility is closed to the public when a manager, employees, and/or contractors are present at the facility and involved in cleanup or food preparation, or any other business activity. 
    Sewage shall mean the liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated. The terms "waste" and "wastewater" shall be deemed as sewage by definition. 
    Shall not shall prohibit. 
    Spill shall mean the unpermitted, accidental or intentional loss or unauthorized discharge of grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste, seepage, any other liquid waste, a chemical (hazardous or nonhazardous), or any other material that has the potential to contaminate any surface or groundwater or in any other manner such that the waste is not duly and legally disposed. 
    Shopping center shall mean a group of architecturally unified commercial establishments built on a site that is planned, developed, owned, and managed as an operation unit for sale or lease, with on-site parking in definite relationship to the types and sizes of stores at the site. 
    Strip mall shall mean a line of stores fronted by uniform parking spaces or a small common parking lot. For the purposes of this article, strip malls and shopping centers are considered to be the same. 
    Transporter shall mean a user who transfers waste from the site of a generator to an approved site for disposal or treatment. The transporter is responsible for assuring that all federal, state and local regulations are followed, including Chapter 391-3-6-.24 of the Rules and Regulations of the State of Georgia, Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division regarding waste transport and disposal. 
    Trip ticket shall mean the written, multi-part form used as documentation and required to be in the possession of the generator, transporter, and disposer to document the generation, receipt, transportation, and disposal of grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste, seepage, and other liquid wastes enabling legal and proper disposal of hauled grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste, and seepage at a permitted or registered disposal site, and specifying the identity of the generator, transporter, and disposal facility operator of liquid wastes and the volume of grit interceptor waste, grease interceptor waste, seepage, and other liquid wastes disposed. 
    Under the sink grease interceptor shall mean a device placed under or in close proximity to sinks or other fixtures likely to discharge grease in an attempt to separate, intercept or hold grease waste to prevent its entry into the POTW. The inspection division of the planning and building department shall approve such "under the sink grease interceptors" and documentation shall be provided for the disposal of waste. Refer to section 98-353 below for applicability of this form of grease interceptor. 
    Waste shall mean the liquid and water-carried domestic or industrial wastes from dwellings, commercial establishments, industrial facilities and institutions, whether treated or untreated. The term's "sewage" and "wastewater" shall be deemed as waste by definition. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-353. - Applicability. 
(a)  Waste, which contains grease, shall be discharged into the POTW system only under the conditions of this article. The following facilities shall discharge all waste from sinks, dishwashers, drains, and any other fixtures through which grease may be discharged, into an adequately sized, properly maintained and functioning grease interceptor before the discharge enters the POTW, as well as providing a grease interceptor inlet flow control device inspection port and a grease interceptor effluent monitoring port: 
(1)  Every commercial food preparation and food service facility, including but not limited to, bakeries, boardinghouses, butcher shops, cafes, clubhouses, commercial kitchens, delicatessens, fat rendering plants, ice cream parlors, hospitals, meat packing plants, restaurants, schools, slaughter houses, soap factories, and similar facilities, especially where meat, poultry, seafood, dairy products or fried foods are prepared or served; 
(2)  All shopping centers that have food processing facilities; 
(3)  All food courts; 
(4)  All other facilities discharging grease in amounts that, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction, will, alone or in concert with other substances from the discharges of other facilities, have a reasonable chance to impede or stop the flow in the POTW. 
(b)  All new areas of intensified dwelling, including, but not limited to; apartment homes, apartment complexes, or multi-family residential dwellings consisting of four or more units, adult day care facilities, assisted living facilities, convalescent homes, day nursing and childcare facilities, in which food preparation occurs as defined in subsection (a)(4), homes for the mentally challenged, hotels, maternity homes, motels in which there is a commercial food preparation service, nursing homes, retirement and life care communities and homes, and truck stops with commercial food service, shall be required to have grease interceptors. Modifications to existing facilities that do not add new buildings or new grease generating activities are exempt from this requirement. All such existing facilities may be so required, as determined by subsection (a)(4), of this section. 
(c)  Interceptors shall not be required for existing single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes, quadplexes, or apartment complexes, unless the city first determines there are discharges from the property that will create problems in the POTW. The determination shall be made based upon an investigation of the property and a comparison of the content and amount of discharge from the property with the discharges of other properties similar in size and use. Upon a determination that the discharges will create problems in the POTW, the authority having jurisdiction may require the installation of a sufficiently sized grease interceptor to treat the discharges. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-354. - Compliance date. 
(a)  On or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, an existing facility (excepting those existing facilities described in subsection 98-353(c), above) shall be required to install an approved, adequately sized, and properly operated and maintained grease interceptor when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  It is found by the authority having jurisdiction to be contributing grease in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the sanitary sewer collection system (POTW) in order to keep main line stoppages from occurring. 
(2)  It is remodeling the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing facilities in such a manner to be subject to a permit issued by the planning and building department. 
(3)  Its interceptor allows a discharge of oil or grease in excess of 300 mg/l. 
(b)  Existing facilities determined by this or other applicable ordinances to be equipped with an undersized grease interceptor shall, within 12 months of the effective date of this article, install an adequately sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(c)  Existing facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor not equipped with a grease interceptor shall, within 12 months of the effective date of this article, install an adequately sized grease interceptor in accordance with the specifications of this article. 
(d)  New facilities required by this or other applicable ordinances to maintain a grease interceptor shall install such a unit prior to commencement of discharge to the POTW. 
(e)  Any requests for extensions to installation dates must be made in writing to the authority having jurisdiction, at least 30 days in advance of the compliance date. The written request shall include the reasons for the grease generator's failure or inability to comply with the compliance date set forth, the additional time needed to complete the remaining work, and the steps to be taken to avoid future delays. The authority having jurisdiction shall determine the date for compliance. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-355. - Discharge criteria. 
    The following prohibitions shall apply: 
(1)  Where oil and grease are a byproduct of food preparation and/or cleanup, reasonable efforts shall be made to separate waste oil and grease into a separate container for proper disposal. Except as contained in byproducts of food preparation and/or cleanup, waste oil and grease shall not be discharged to any drains or grease interceptors. Such waste shall be placed in a container designed to hold such waste and either utilized by industry or disposed of at suitable locations. 
(2)  None of the following agents shall be placed directly into a grease interceptor, or into any drain that leads to the interceptor: 
a.  Emulsifiers, de-emulsifiers, surface active agents, enzymes, degreasers, or any type of product that will liquefy grease interceptor wastes; 
b.  Any substance that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; or 
c.  Any substance capable of passing the solid or semi-solid contents of the grease interceptor to the POTW. 
(3)  The influent to interceptors shall not exceed 140 degrees Fahrenheit. The temperature at the flow control device inspection port shall be considered equivalent to the temperature of the influent. 
(4)  Toilets, urinals, and other similar fixtures shall not discharge through a grease interceptor. 
(5)  All waste shall only enter the grease interceptor through the inlet flow control device, then the inlet pipe. 
(6)  Where food-waste grinders are installed, the waste from those units shall discharge directly into the building drainage system without passing through a grease interceptor. Living quarters, as defined in this article, are exempted from this requirement. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-356. - Requirements for grease interceptors. 
(a)  All commercial and industrial facilities dealing with grease shall, at the permittees' expense and as required by the authority having jurisdiction: 
(1)  Provide an adequately sized grease interceptor. Requirements for grease trap sizing and the design criteria are provided in subsection (b). 
(2)  Locate the interceptor in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection. 
(3)  Obtain a written interceptor service agreement with a licensed transporter for a term of at least one year, or for the duration of the operation of the establishment, whichever is less, to maintain the interceptor in effective operating condition. A service agreement must be in effect as long as the facility has a grease trap permit. 
(4)  Unless otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction, service the interceptor every 30 days and maintain backup copies of trip tickets and a service log, on the premises of the facility, for at least three years. 
(5)  Report to the authority having jurisdiction monthly as defined in section 98-362. 
(6)  Allow demand inspection of the facility and of records by inspectors during reasonable hours. 
(b)  Requirements for grease trap sizing and design criteria. 
(1)  Introduction: Information contained within this document is based on standard industry practices and guidance found in both, the 2006 International Plumbing Code (IPC) Commentary, or latest edition, and the 2000 Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC), or latest edition, Appendix H. Size, type, and location of grease traps shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and the requirements of the City of St. Marys Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Applicability: These requirements are applicable to all commercial food service establishments, including those that are undergoing: 
a.  New construction. 
b.  Interior remodeling to accommodate expansion or operational modifications. 
c.  Changes of ownership/occupancy. 
d.  Facilities, which may be experiencing difficulty in achieving compliance with maintenance and/or wastewater discharge limitations. 
(3)  Sizing requirements: Sizing methods described herein are intended as guidance in determining grease trap/interceptor sizes that will afford the city's sanitary sewer system (POTW) a minimum degree of protection against grease and other obstructing materials. Sizing determinations are based on operational data provided by business owners or their contractors. In approving a customer's plumbing or grease interceptor design, the city does not accept liability for the failure of a system to adequately treat wastewater to achieve effluent quality requirements specified under this article. It is the responsibility of the generator and/or contractors to insure the appropriate level of treatment necessary for compliance with environmental and wastewater regulations. Minimum acceptable grease trap/interceptor sizing shall be accomplished as follows: 
a.  Sizing according to formulas found in subsection (b)(4) below. 
b.  Where sizing formulas result in determination of a grease trap less than 1,000 gallons in capacity, this minimum size is recommended. However, under no circumstances should exterior grease traps less than 1,000 gallons be utilized. 
c.  In the circumstance of "single service kitchens" with no food preparation (heat/serve only), and which use only paper service items, a minimum 50 gallon per minute (gpm) flow rated, or 100 pound grease retention, mechanical grease trap may be used. In these instances, the grease trap is to be installed in an area separate from food handling area, and the trap must be readily accessible for cleaning and maintenance. (See subsection 98-356(b)(6), below.) 
(4)  Grease trap sizing formulas: It is the responsibility of the generator and his/her contractors to ensure that the wastewater discharged from their facility is in compliance with the city's discharge limitations. For the purpose of plans review, a general assessment of grease trap/interceptor design and size will be performed using the following formulas. (These formulas have been demonstrated as industry standards capable of achieving the city's discharge criteria when systems are maintained in proper conditions.) 
Method 1: Uniform Plumbing Code, Appendix H 
Number of meals x waste flow x retention x storage = Size requirement 
Per peak hour (1) rate (2) time (3) factor (4) (liquid capacity) 
Factors: 
(1)  Number of meals served at peak operating hour (seating capacity) x peak factor: 
a.  Where peak factor for fast food restaurant is ..... ..... 1.33 
b.  And, peak factor for all other food service types is ..... ..... 1.00 
(2)  Waste flow rate: 
a.  With dishwasher ..... ..... 6 gallon flow 
b.  Without dishwasher ..... ..... 5 gallon flow 
c.  Single service kitchen ..... ..... 2 gallon flow 
d.  Food waste disposer ..... ..... 1 gallon flow 
(3)  Retention times: 
a.  Commercial kitchen waste/dishwasher ..... ..... 2.5 hours 
b.  Single service kitchen/single serving ..... ..... 1.5 hours 
(4)  Storage factors: 
a.  Fully equipped commercial kitchen 8 hr operation ..... ..... = 1 
b.  16 hr operation ..... ..... = 2 
c.  24 hr operation ..... ..... = 3 
d.  Single service kitchen ..... ..... = 1.5 
Uniform Plumbing Code includes a built-in safety factor that can yield very large grease trap size specifications. At this time, the city is not requiring traps larger than 4,000 gallons. However, the decision to use a trap smaller than that specified by the formula and calculations above is to be addressed in the plan submission. 
Method 2: Five hour detention/peak flow 
A.  Gallons of water used per hour of operation 
B.  A x 0.75 = average "gray water" flow per hour 
C.  B x 1.9 peak flow factor 
D.  C x 5 hours detention = volume trap 
Required volume of trap = A x B x C x D 
(5)  Alternate sizing formulas/proposals. Facilities that propose the use of alternate sizing techniques and/or procedures that result in specifications that differ from calculated requirements (or are less than the minimum 1,000 gallon recommendation), must submit formulas and other bases to support proposed grease trap size/installation. Submission should also provide documentation of ability to meet effluent quality requirements. This proposal must be signed by a licensed plumbing contractor or engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(6)  Construction/installation: All permitting, construction, and inspection activities must be completed in accordance with the St. Marys Subdivision Ordinance (No. 86) and Zoning Ordinance (No. 110). Additionally, the following specifications must be incorporated into grease trap design: 
a.  The grease interceptor shall be constructed with a minimum of two chambers or shall have a minimum of two tanks in series. If two chambered, the dividing wall must extend to within one foot of the bottom of the tank and within two inches of the top and be securely fastened to both sides. 
b.  There must be inlet and outlet tees made of schedule 40 PVC installed. The inlet tee should extend down approximately one-third the depth of the trap from the top and the outlet tee should be located 12 to 18 inches off of the bottom of the trap. 
c.  Grease traps are to be installed at a minimum distance of ten feet from sinks and dishwashers to allow for adequate cooling of wastewater. Water temperatures must be less than 140 degrees F, prior to entering grease trap. 
d.  All grease bearing waste streams should be routed through an appropriate grease trap/interceptor, including: three-compartment sinks, pot/pan sinks, soup kettles, handwashing sinks, dishwashers, mop sinks and floor drains. 
Notable exceptions: Drains that receive "clear waste" only, such as from ice machines, condensate from coils and drink stations, may be plumbed to the sanitary system without passing through the grease interceptor with the condition that the receiving drain is a "hub" type that is a minimum of two inches above the finished floor. 
e.  All exterior or recessed grease traps and interceptors are to be installed with an effluent sampling well, equivalent to: a. Parks Equipment Services Sample Well SWB-9; b. American Industrial Pre-Cast Products Test Well; or c. Uopnor Sample Well. Sample wells will have a 15-inch diameter access cover and a minimum four-inch drop from inlet to outlet piping through the sampling well. Mechanical grease traps and interceptors that are installed above ground must be equipped with an influent flow regulator and an effluent valve assembly that allows for sample collection. 
(7)  Customer (generator) responsibilities: It is the responsibility of the customer (waste generator) to insure compliance with the city discharge limitations. 
a.  Hazardous wastes, such as acids, strong cleaners, pesticides, herbicides, paint, solvents, or gasoline should not be disposed of where they would go through grease or grit traps. If commercial dishwashers are discharged through a grease interceptor, care must be taken in system design. Dishwashers use detergents and elevated water temperatures that will melt grease. If the interceptor is either too small or too close to the commercial dishwasher, grease may pass through the interceptor and into the collection system. 
b.  Generators are responsible for maintaining grease traps in continuous proper working condition. Further, generators are responsible for inspecting, repairing, replacing, or installing apparatus and equipment as necessary to ensure proper operation and function of grease traps and compliance with discharge limitations at all times. 
c.  The generator must have a grease trap/grease interceptor service contract (for pumping, cleaning, and inspection) by a city permitted vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler, at a minimum frequency of every 30 days to ensure proper function. The trap shall be maintained more frequently if needed to meet the city's discharge criteria. Records of maintenance are required to be submitted to the city monthly for inspection and maintained on-site for three years. (30-day maintenance frequency assumes proper sizing and installation consistent with this guidance). 
d.  Enzymes, solvents, and emulsifiers are not permitted, as they will only change the form of grease, allowing it to be carried out of the trap with the wastewater and deposited in the collection system (POTW). Biological treatment systems must be pre-approved by the authority having jurisdiction. These systems will not alleviate the necessity for inspection and proper maintenance. 
e.  It is the responsibility of the waste generator to assure that the commercial waste removed from the generators facility is properly treated and discharged to the sewer system, wastewater, sludge and byproducts are transported by a permitted transporter, and disposed of at an EPD approved commercial waste processing and disposal facility. The generator of commercial waste shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current waste transporter permit issued by the City of St. Marys. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-357. - Grease interceptor construction. 
(a)  Any person responsible for discharges requiring a grease interceptor shall, at his own expense and as required by the city, provide plans and specifications for equipment and facilities of a design type and design capacity approved by the inspection division of the planning and building department of the city. The grease interceptor must be in compliance with the current applicable city plumbing codes. The person shall locate the interceptor in a manner that provides easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection and maintain the interceptor in effective operating condition. The inspection division of the planning and building department shall inspect the interceptor during construction and upon completion. All interested parties, including the inspection division of the planning and building department and the authority having jurisdiction shall make a final inspection before any service connections are made. 
(b)  Construction of items listed herein in accordance herewith or in accordance to the city's specifications shall not constitute a defense to unlawful discharge and shall not limit the generator's liability for any surcharge stated in this article. 
(c)  If the authority having jurisdiction determines that there is a need for installation or upgrading of sample ports or grease interceptors on an existing establishment, the authority having jurisdiction may order the installation or upgrading of such interceptors on that existing establishment. If the authority having jurisdiction orders such installation, then the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of such order upon the grease generator. Within ten days of receipt of such order, the grease generator may demand a hearing to review such order, in which case the authority having jurisdiction shall schedule a hearing to review such order within 30 days of receiving the demand for review from the grease or grit generator. If a hearing to review the order is scheduled, the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of the hearing to review such order upon the grease generator at least ten days before the date of such hearing. At the hearing to review the order, the grease generator may present evidence, and the authority having jurisdiction may make new findings and issue new orders concerning the subject of the original hearing. After receiving notice of the order to install or upgrade ports or interceptors on an existing establishment, it shall be unlawful for a grease generator to allow or cause any discharge into the sanitary sewer not in compliance with such order. 
(d)  Where the process wastewaters are generated in only part of the facility, the process wastewaters may, at the option of the authority having jurisdiction, discharge into a grease interceptor servicing only those areas that provide a suitable sampling port. 
(e)  The authority having jurisdiction may waive the requirement for a grease interceptor provided the grease generator can verify that only domestic sewage is being discharged, with no floor drains or process water. The authority having jurisdiction may require testing by the user in connection with this request, with all costs for this testing being at the users expense. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-358. - Service/inspection ports and monitoring ports. 
(a)  Except for "under the sink grease interceptors", each interceptor shall be located outside of a building or structure in an area accessible for service, and so installed and connected that it shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection, and for cleaning and removal of the intercepted waste. Inlet flow control inspection ports, interceptor inspection ports, and effluent monitoring ports shall be in areas where vehicles may not temporarily block access to inspection. The use of ladders or the removal of bulky equipment or stored materials in order to inspect inlet flow control devices, inspect or service interceptors, or sample interceptor effluent shall constitute a violation of accessibility. Inspection ports and monitoring ports shall be located so as to allow inspectors quick and easy access to the inlet flow control device, each compartment of the interceptor, and the effluent from the interceptor. An interceptor shall not be installed in any part of a building where food is handled. The location of all interceptors, inspection ports, and monitoring ports shall meet the approval of the authority having jurisdiction and shall be shown on the approved building plans. 
(b)  An inspection port shall be provided for the flow control device regulating flow into the interceptor. 
(c)  A one-piece removable metal plate covering the entire interceptor shall be preferred as an interceptor inspection port, though at the discretion of the authority having jurisdiction, standard manhole ports may be installed over each divider in the interceptor, but in either case all parts of the interceptor shall be easily accessible for cleaning and visual inspection. 
(d)  A monitoring port shall be provided for ease in sampling the treated effluent from the interceptor and shall be as close as possible to the connection with the city POTW within the bounds of the facility property. The port shall be installed according to the specifications of the authority having jurisdiction. The port shall be installed and maintained at the user's expense. A generator shall properly place, monitor, and maintain the monitoring port so that wastewater samples taken from the monitoring port are representative of wastewater leaving the interceptor. It shall be unlawful for a grease generator to divert sewage around a monitoring point into the POTW. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-359. - Under the sink grease interceptors. 
(a)  In the event that an outside grease interceptor is not practicable, an "under the sink grease interceptor" may be installed subject to the approval of the inspection division of the planning and building department. In addition to the regular requirements of grease interceptors, "under the sink grease interceptors" are subject to the additional requirements. 
(b)  General requirements. 
(1)  The location of such interceptors shall be in as close proximity to the source of wastewater as physically possible. 
(2)  The lid shall be secured to the body with a single bolt. No wing nuts or screws shall be permitted. 
(3)  Baffle systems and all other internal pieces shall be removable to facilitate cleaning and replacement, but must be in place at all other times. 
(4)  The lid shall cover the deep seal trap. The deep seal trap shall be constructed so as to eliminate the possibility of sewer gas entering the kitchen area. 
(5)  The interceptors shall be constructed with bottom supports so that the body of the interceptor does not corrode by coming into contact with the floor. 
(6)  The interceptor shall be coated with a powder-coated electrostatically applied cathodic epoxy coating so as to be resistant to corrosion. 
(7)  The interceptor shall be equipped with a flow control fitting. 
(c)  Installation requirements. 
(1)  The interceptor may be set on the floor, partially recessed in the floor with top flush with the floor, or fully recessed below the floor to suit piping and structural conditions, as acceptable by the inspection division of the planning and building department. 
(2)  There shall be sufficient clearance for the removal of the interceptor cover for cleaning. 
(3)  Unless specifically approved by the inspection division of the planning and building department, runs of pipe exceeding 25 feet between fixture and interceptor shall not be permitted. 
(4)  The interceptor shall not be installed in a waste line from a garbage grinder. Any garbage grinder waste shall bypass the interceptor. 
(5)  A suitable flow control fitting shall be installed ahead of the interceptor in the waste line beyond the fixture and as close as possible to the underside of the lowest fixture. When wastes of two or more sinks or fixtures are combined to be used by one interceptor, a single flow control fitting shall be used. 
(6)  Air intake for flow control either shall terminate under the sink drain board as high as possible to prevent overflow, or shall terminate in a return bend at the same height and on the outside of the building. 
(7)  To retain water and prevent siphoning, all interceptors shall have a vented waste, sized in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. 
(8)  With the approval of the inspection division of the planning and building department, one interceptor may be used to serve multiple fixtures if the fixtures are located close together and the interceptor is sized to meet the combined flow of all the fixtures. 
(d)  Maintenance requirements. 
(1)  Interceptors shall be serviced at least every week by a permitted vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler. After accumulated grease and waste has been removed, the interceptor shall be thoroughly inspected to make certain that inlet, outlet, and air relief ports are clear of obstructions. 
(2)  Grease and other waste removed from the interceptor shall not be introduced into any drain, sewer, or natural body of water. The waste shall be placed in proper containers for proper disposal. It shall not be mixed with "edible" grease. Grease and waste removed from an interceptor shall not be disposed of in such a matter so as to become food for animals or humans. 
(3)  The grease generator shall maintain adequate documentation that the interceptor is appropriately cleaned and inspected. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-360. - Interceptor maintenance. 
(a)  Interceptor maintenance service contract. 
(1)  All grease generators having interceptors shall perform all business transactions relating to interceptor pumping, cleaning, and servicing, and to liquid waste collection, transportation and/or disposal on a contractual basis via a written contract having duration of at least one year, and provide copies of all such contracts to the authority having jurisdiction. Any modifications or changes to the contract must be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction within ten working days of the change or modification. It is a violation for a grease generator to discharge through an interceptor without a service contract. 
(2)  A contract shall include at a minimum: 
a.  From the customer: 
1.  Contain the customer name, address and telephone number, and the name, address, and telephone number of the facility to be serviced if different. 
2.  Contain the name of a primary and secondary contact person for the facility. 
3.  Contain the grease interceptor permit number of the facility. 
4.  Indicate the size of each interceptor. 
5.  Indicate the precise and unambiguous location of the interceptor or interceptors to be serviced, including a diagram if necessary. 
6.  Indicate the frequency of pumpage required. 
7.  Be signed and dated by an authorized representative indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract. 
b.  From the vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler: 
1.  Contain the vacuum truck cleaning service/waste hauler company name, address, and telephone number. 
2.  Contain the name of a primary and secondary contact person. 
3.  Provide the city vacuum truck cleaning service occupation tax certificate number. 
4.  Be signed and dated by an authorized representative indicating acceptance of the terms of the contract. 
5.  The name, address, and telephone number of the disposal site. 
6.  The registration number of the disposal site. 
7.  Additionally, the transporter shall provide a: 
i.  Certificate of insurance. 
ii.  Certificate of assurance. 
iii.  Certificate of indemnification. 
c.  Other. Contain a statement of the duration of the contract, to be not less than one year, or for the duration of the operation of the facility, whichever is less. 
(b)  Required pumping frequency. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specified by the authority having jurisdiction, each interceptor in active use shall be cleaned at least once every month or more frequently as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the POTW, unless it can be demonstrated to the authority having jurisdiction that the pumping frequency can be performed at greater intervals. The authority having jurisdiction may specify cleaning more frequently when monthly pumping is shown to be inadequate. Additional pumping may be required during time periods where increased loading is anticipated. Any grease generator desiring a schedule less frequent than monthly shall submit a request to the authority having jurisdiction along with testing (as required by the authority having jurisdiction) and copies of the cleaning records for the last four interceptor cleanings, including measurements of the thickness of the surface scum/grease layer. 
(2)  At any time if an inspection finds the interceptor to be full, immediate steps shall be taken by the grease generator to pump out and clean it as soon as is practicable. The inspector shall make an evaluation of the advisability of allowing discharge to continue, and may at his or her discretion order an immediate cessation of all discharge from the facility. In any case, the wastewater discharge permit of the facility may be amended so as to compel more frequent pumping and cleaning of the interceptor. 
(c)  All interceptors shall be maintained by the grease generator at the grease generator's expense. 
(d)  Requirement for increased pumpage or servicing. If the authority having jurisdiction finds that a change in pumpage or servicing of an interceptor is necessary for an establishment to meet the discharge limits stated in this article, the authority having jurisdiction may order a change in pumpage or servicing of an interceptor. If the authority having jurisdiction orders a change in the pumpage or servicing, then the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of such order upon the generator. Within ten days of receipt of such order, the generator may demand a hearing to review such order, in which case the authority having jurisdiction shall schedule a hearing to review such order within 30 days of receiving the demand for review from the generator. If a hearing to review the order is scheduled, the authority having jurisdiction shall serve notice of the hearing to review such order at least ten days before the date of such hearing. At the hearing to review the order, the generator may present evidence, and the authority having jurisdiction may make new findings and issue new orders concerning the subject of the original hearing. After receiving notice of an order by the authority having jurisdiction to change the frequency and/or methods of pumpage or servicing, it shall be unlawful for a generator to allow or cause any discharge into the sanitary sewer (POTW) not in compliance with such order. 
(e)  Interceptor maintenance log. 
(1)  Every generator having an interceptor shall maintain an interceptor maintenance log indicating each pumping for the previous 12 months. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler and disposal site, and shall be kept in a conspicuous location on the premises of the facility for inspection. Food service establishments shall keep the log posted with their Camden County Environmental Health Food Permit. Said log shall be made immediately available to any authorized city inspector. 
(2)  The information required in the maintenance log must be submitted to the authority having jurisdiction annually. The reporting period shall be January 1 through December 31 of each year. The report shall be submitted within 30 days after the end of the reporting period to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(f)  Cleaning procedures. 
(1)  The owner or an employee of the facility shall supervise the interceptor cleaning, and shall be physically present and observe the entire cleaning operation. 
(2)  A generator shall cause the liquid waste hauler, transporter, or any other person cleaning or servicing an interceptor to completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, and bottom sludges and solids, of all grease and/or grit interceptors and other interceptors during servicing. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the interceptor or use of any method that does not remove the entire contents of the collection device is prohibited. The suction of the floating materials shall be done prior to removal of other contents. After complete evacuation, the walls, top, and bottom of the interceptor shall then be thoroughly scraped and the residue removed. The interceptor shall then be steam cleaned and the residue removed. Upon completion of the servicing, the manager of the facility shall make an inspection of the interior of the interceptor and then personally sign the trip ticket. The manager shall make an appropriate entry in the facility interceptor maintenance log, and post the generator section of the trip ticket in a conspicuous place with the log on the premises. Food service establishments shall keep all trip tickets posted with their Camden County Environmental Health Food Permit. Said trip tickets and maintenance logs shall be made immediately available to any authorized city inspector. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for a generator to allow, the discharge of liquid, semi-solids, or solids back into an interceptor during and/or after servicing. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the interceptor from which the waste was removed or any other interceptor, for the purpose of reducing the volume to be disposed, is prohibited. 
(4)  Each interceptor pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the interceptor volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the interceptor is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period following the transporter's inability to fully evacuate the interceptor. 
(g)  Disposal of interceptor pumpage. All waste removed from each interceptor shall be disposed of at a facility permitted and authorized to receive such waste in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any private or public portion of the POTW, without prior written approval from the authority having jurisdiction, nor may it be returned to any portion of the POTW not specifically designated by the public works superintendent. Additionally, grease removed from an interceptor shall not be recycled so as to become a food product or part of a food product for animal or human consumption. 
(h)  Vacuum truck cleaning service. It shall be unlawful for a grease or grit generator to allow grease or grit interceptor waste to be removed from his premises by a transporter who does not have all applicable federal, state, or local permits or registrations, including at a minimum a vacuum truck cleaning service occupation tax certificate from the authority having jurisdiction, and a Georgia EPD waste hauler's permit. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-361. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any facility to discharge effluent from a grease interceptor without authorization from the authority having jurisdiction. Authorization shall be given in the form of a "grease interceptor permit." Application for a permit shall be made to the authority having jurisdiction. If, after examining the information contained in the grease interceptor permit application, it is determined by the authority having jurisdiction that the proposed discharge does not conflict with the provisions of this article, or any other federal, state, or local requirement or regulation, and the permit fee is paid, a permit shall be issued allowing the facility to discharge into the POTW. Each grease interceptor permit shall be issued for a time not longer than one year from the date of the permit. The grease generator shall apply for permit reissuance prior to the expiration of the grease generator's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the authority having jurisdiction at any time during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements as identified in this chapter are modified or other just causes exist. The grease generator shall be informed of any proposed changes in the issued permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change(s). Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(b)  A commercial waste transporter permit is required by the city for all vehicles involved in the transport of commercial waste to a disposal facility. However, prior to obtaining a commercial waste transporter permit from the city, the transporter must first register as a transporter of commercial waste with the EPD and obtain a transporter registration number. This registration number must be included in the permit number issued by the city. 
(c)  A transporter permit fee will be assessed on an annual basis at a rate of $250.00 for the first truck and $100.00 for each additional truck, payable to the City of St. Marys. Any commercial waste transporter permit issued by a local governing authority for operation of a tank truck shall be valid throughout the state. 
(d)  As a condition precedent to the granting of a permit, the permittee under this section will agree to hold harmless the city and the city's employees from any liabilities arising from the permit holder's operations under this permit. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-362. - Required reporting. 
    All permitted interceptor waste generators shall, at a frequency and time determined by the authority having jurisdiction, but in no case less than once per year, submit to the authority having jurisdiction: 
(1)  Copies of all manifests made by liquid waste transporters servicing their grease interceptor during the reporting period; 
(2)  A copy of the interceptor maintenance log; 
(3)  A copy of the interceptor service contract; and 
(4)  Any other information required by the grease interceptor permit, including analysis of the discharge to the POTW of such pollutants as the authority having jurisdiction may require. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-363. - Grease interceptor treatment products. 
(a)  Use of grease interceptor treatment products, including bacteria, designed to digest grease, is specifically prohibited without prior written consent of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  Acceptance of such products for use may be considered only where a valid screening test, showing the product's ability to treat the waste and to produce an influent in compliance with this article, has been performed in accordance with methods outlined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(c)  Screening tests for such grease interceptor treatment products shall be designed by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(d)  The results of screening tests shall be subject to technical review by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(e)  All costs of screening tests shall be borne by the facility whether or not the product is accepted for use. 
(f)  If a product is accepted for use, each facility shall obtain written permission from the authority having jurisdiction to use the product. 
(g)  Complete descriptions of the chemical composition of all products must be disclosed to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(h)  The authority having jurisdiction may revoke permission to use such products where the effluent from the interceptor or basin in which the product is used fails to meet the requirements of the ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-364. - Mobile treatment processes. 
    Any person wishing to make use of a mobile treatment process or of an on-site process to clean or service grease interceptors or grit interceptors shall demonstrate the process to the satisfaction of the authority having jurisdiction. Included with the demonstration shall be a written explanation of the treatment process. Any costs to the city associated with the demonstration, such as, but not limited to, sampling and analysis, shall be recovered. Complete descriptions of the chemical composition of all products must be disclosed to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-365. - Facility closure. 
    When a facility with a grease interceptor closes for business, and is subsequently: 
(1)  Razed or demolished, then any grease interceptor or interceptors or traps shall be either: 
a.  Physically removed; or 
b.  Have all effluent pumped out, a straight line plumbed from the inlet to the outlet, and the remainder of the tank filled with soil or sand. 
(2)  Remodeled such that the grease interceptor will not be used, then the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps may be left in place, however: 
a.  The grease interceptor or interceptors or traps shall have all effluent pumped out, the trap cleaned thoroughly, and the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps left dry and empty; and 
b.  Be replumbed as to bypass the existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps, either by straight through or by bypassing methods, while leaving the empty trap and in place for possible future utilization by another business; or 
(3)  Replaced with a type of business that will not utilize the grease interceptor, then that business may have any existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps: 
a.  Physically removed; 
b.  Replumbed as to bypass the existing grease interceptor or interceptors or traps, either by straight through or by bypassing methods, while leaving the empty trap and in place for possible future utilization by another business; or 
c.  Replumbed with a straight line plumbed from the inlet to the outlet, and the remainder of the grease interceptor or interceptors or traps filled with soil or sand. 
In all instances, the owner of the premises shall appropriately inform the authority having jurisdiction and perform the closure at such a time so as to permit an inspector to be physically present during the removal or filling of the interceptor. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-366. - Monitoring, inspection and entry. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a grease generator, whether or not the grease generator possesses a grease interceptor permit, to refuse to allow inspectors to enter their premises during reasonable hours to determine whether the grease generator is complying with all of the requirements of this article and permit or order issued hereunder. A grease generator shall allow the inspectors access to all parts of the premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of additional duties. Arrangements for the immediate access of the authority having jurisdiction or his designate representative shall have been made ahead of time, and such failure to make adequate arrangements shall not be considered a legitimate reason to refuse admittance of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  In cases where a facility includes private living quarters, the right of access shall extend to all common areas, and any other area or areas a facility employee, including the manager and/or owner, may enter without expressed permission of the residents of such a facility. 
(c)  Search warrants. If the authority having jurisdiction has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the authority having jurisdiction may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-367. - Confidentiality and proprietary information. 
    Information and data on a grease generator, or any other entity, obtained from reports, surveys, grease interceptor permits, and monitoring programs, and from the authority having jurisdiction's inspection and sampling activities, and any other information submitted to the authority having jurisdiction pursuant to this article, shall be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-368. - Timing. 
    All written reports, applications, and any other such material required by those regulated under this article will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For material, which is not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-369. - Fees. 
    The city may adopt, by separate ordinance, charges, surcharges, and fees for application, operation, enforcement, administration, and reimbursement of costs incurred pursuant to this article. 
Fees: 
(1)  The authority having jurisdiction, with the approval of the city council shall establish permit fees under this article which shall be included in the plumbing permit fee as set in the St. Marys Land Development Ordinance. 
(2)  The fees for such permits shall be for a permit issued for a period of one year. The authority having jurisdiction may prorate the amounts for permits with shorter durations. All permits will expire at 12:00 midnight on the date specified on the permit as determined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-370. - Violation. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any grease generator to discharge into the POTW in any manner that is in violation of this article, or of any condition set forth in this article. Additionally, a person commits an offense if the person causes or permits the plugging or blocking of, or otherwise interferes with or permits the interference of a grease interceptor or the POTW, including alteration or removal of any flow constricting devices so as to cause flow to rise above the design capacity of the interceptor. 
(b)  No person, and/or facility shall discharge grease in excess of 300 mg/l to the POTW. If such discharge occurs, the person or facility shall be considered in violation of this article and subject to the remedies described herein. This includes nonpermitted facilities. 
(c)  The authority having jurisdiction and/or city may suspend water or sewer service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the authority having jurisdiction; in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which: 
(1)  Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment; 
(2)  Causes stoppages or excessive maintenance to be performed to prevent stoppages in the sanitary sewer collection system; 
(3)  Causes interference to the POTW; or 
(4)  Causes the city to violate any condition of its environmental protection division permit. 
(d)  Any person notified of a suspension of the water or sewer service shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of water or sewer service and/or revocation of the city business license, and/or city certificate of occupation (CO), to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or sewer connection or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the water or sewer service and/or city business license, and/or city certificate of occupation (CO), when such conditions causing the suspension have passed or been eliminated. A detailed written statement submitted by the grease generator describing the cause(s) of the harmful discharge and the measure(s) taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(e)  In addition to prohibiting certain conduct by natural persons, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, association, LLC, LLP or PS legally responsible for prohibited conduct performed by an agent acting in behalf of a corporation or association and within the scope of his office or employment. 
(f)  Any person, operator, or owner who shall violate any provision of this article, or who shall fail to comply with any provision hereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 and not more than 12 months confinement for each violation and for each day a violation continues, up to a maximum of $2,500.00 for each violation, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(g)  A permittee is liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned by the city for reason of appropriate cleanup and proper disposal of said waste materials. Additionally, an administrative fee equal to one-half of assessed cleanup costs shall be levied by the city against the guilty party. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-371. - Authorization. 
    The authority having jurisdiction is authorized to promulgate such rules and regulations as shall be reasonable and necessary to carry out the provisions of this article according to its terms and intent. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Sec. 98-372. - Nonexclusivity. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The authority having jurisdiction may take any legally authorized actions against a noncompliant permittee or generator. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(2), § 1) 
Chapter 102 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 46; health and sanitation, ch. 58; historical preservation, ch. 62; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 102-1-102-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TREES AND SHRUBS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance (2) adopted Feb. 26, 2007, § 1, amended Art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. II, §§ 102-26-102-39, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from §§ 1-12 of an ordinance adopted Oct. 18, 1983; an ordinance adopted Feb. 21, 1984; and § 1 of an ordinance adopted July 24, 2006. 

Sec. 102-26.A - Purpose and intent. 
    The city deems it necessary and desirable in the interest of public health, safety and welfare to enact an ordinance for the conservation, planting and replacement of trees and to prevent the indiscriminate removal of trees in the city without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. The importance of trees is recognized for their shade, cooling, noise and wind reduction, soil erosion prevention, oxygen production, dust filtration, carbon dioxide absorption, aesthetic and economic enhancement of all real property, and their contribution to the general well being and quality of life of the citizens of St. Marys. Consistent with the expressed purpose of this article, all persons shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and retain certain existing, self-supporting trees as defined herein. It is also the intent of this article that all applicable sites within the city maintain or obtain a 50 percent minimum tree canopy, as defined and explained herein. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-26.B - Applicability. 
    The provision of this article shall apply in all areas of the city except those areas of the city which are presently developed as single-family and multifamily residential. Areas that fall into the historic district must still comply with the regulations that cover this area. 
    Other than property in the historic district, lots owned by individuals shall not be governed by this article after development of the residential subdivision or commercial subdivision is complete and the owner has a warranty deed granted to the owner. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-27. - Minimum canopy requirements. 
(a)  A basic condition of the City of St. Marys Tree Management Ordinance is that all applicable sites maintain a minimum tree canopy of 50 percent. Applicable sites for this section are land upon which: 
(1)  A residential subdivision of more than five lots (including planned developments) is being developed; 
(2)  A commercial subdivision of more than five lots (including planned development) is being developed; 
(3)  Any activity requiring issuance of a land disturbance permit is carried out; 
(4)  Public land. 
The canopy requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development or disturbance of the applicable site. The canopy may be achieved by preserving existing trees, by planting new trees according to the minimum standards in this article or by a combination of the two. Minimum tree canopy shall be calculated and established pursuant to the formula and analysis set forth in section 102-44 to this article. Any existing tree of not less than six inches DBH left in good growing condition on the property is eligible to be counted toward the minimum required canopy and has to be protected. The property owner shall be subject to the minimum tree canopy requirement set forth in this section. The property owner shall base the canopy calculation on the gross site area. 
(b)  Trees replanted to achieve canopy requirements are to be selected species from the City of St. Marys Tree Species Selection List set forth in sections 102-48 through 102-50, (which will list values of canopy coverage in square feet for various groups of trees and minimum area for planting), on file with the city. In addition, replanting shall be at the ratio of not less than one overstory tree for every three understory trees. Canopy credit may be met by planting all overstory trees, but not by planting only understory trees. No more than 40 percent of any one genus may be included in any replanting plan. All replacement trees will be maintained properly to ensure their survivability. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-28.A - Trees approved for removal. 
(a)  Canopy recovery for development plans. 
(1)  Development plans shall include a canopy recovery plan for replacement of trees and vegetation approved for removal. A canopy recovery plan shall include the following: 
a.  Areas to be cleared and areas preserved; 
b.  The number of trees required for replacement, to achieve 50 percent canopy. 
(2)  In order to promote diversity, no more than 15 percent of the replacement trees shall be of the same species; 
(3)  Where the planning director and tree board determines that a site cannot sustainably support the required replacement, due to the size and shape and/or structures and/or other viable site constraints, a fee shall be paid to the City of St. Marys Tree Fund. This fee shall be the actual and verified cost of the required tree replacement and shall be submitted prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit or building permit; and 
(4)  If a property owner has preserved extensive overstory trees and clusters of native trees and vegetation, in such a manner as to provide extensive shading within the built environment, value shall be 100 percent of the drip line area of groupings. An exhibit depicting the aforementioned shall be submitted that calculates the canopy spread based on DBH and species of a tree. (See Diagram 1 illustration). 

Diagram 1. Illustration of Extensive Shading 
  
A.  Average lot size = 1/6 acre. 
B.  Limits of shading covers a 1/3 minimum area on each lot. 
C.  Includes understory vegetation. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1; Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 2) 
Sec. 102-28.B - Heritage tree. 
(a)  The City of St. Marys residents have long enjoyed an abundance and diversity of trees and forests. These have served as resources for shelter and products, shaded homes and streets, and immeasurably added to the aesthetic character of towns and neighborhoods. Many urban trees have been associated with historic events or sites or have been planted by individuals or groups commemorating special events or community leaders. 
(b)  The City of St. Marys Heritage Tree Register will recognize noteworthy trees or groves of trees and acknowledge the significance selected individual trees or stands have had to our communities. It is the intent of this section that this process of identifying and publicly noting significant (heritage) trees and maintaining the register listings with accurate historical and current data should result in appropriate maintenance and adequate consideration being given to the status of trees as urban assets of particular vulnerability in changing urban areas. 
(c)  Heritage trees are individual trees or groves of trees of any size or species that are specially designated as heritage because of their historical, commemorative, or horticultural significance. The list of designated heritage trees remains open for new designations and provides useful information to the planning and zoning staff regarding the importance of their actions while planning activities near heritage trees. 
(d)  To be considered heritage, a nominated tree or grove of trees must be located in the City of St. Marys, be alive and healthy, not pose a threat to public safety, not pose a threat of distributing invasive exotic seed or invasive exotic vegetative reproductive structures, and must provide cultural or historic value. The tree's owner must agree to have the tree or grove designated as heritage. The property owner must pay any fees associated with determining the health of the tree. This assessment must be performed by a regional forester or designated city arborist or staff. 
(e)  City of St. Marys shall compile a list of heritage trees, which may also include the oldest, tallest, largest and rarest native and exotic tree species growing in the city. 
(f)  Anyone may nominate a heritage tree by contacting the city arborist or designated city staff. Upon nomination by any person and with the written consent of the property owner(s), the city may designate a tree or trees as a heritage tree. After city approval of a heritage tree designation, the city arborist or designated city staff, shall notify the property owner(s) in writing. 
(g)  No tree on private property can be designated without the consent of the current property owner. Once designated by current owner as a heritage tree, this ordinance further states that it is unlawful for any person, without prior written permit from the city planning department, to remove, destroy, cut, prune, break or injure any heritage tree. The heritage tree designation will run with the land. No heritage tree designation can be removed without approval of the city council. 
(Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 3) 
Sec. 102-29. - Alternative compliance to canopy density requirement. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to ensure that a minimum canopy density of trees is maintained on all applicable sites, as defined in this article. If this intent cannot be met because a site will not bear the required density of trees, as determined by the planning director and the St. Marys Tree Board, alternative methods of compliance may be approved: 
(1)  Planting at a location remote from the project site. If trees are to be planted at another location, a tree replacement plan, meeting all applicable standards, must be reviewed and approved. The following note must be shown on the approved plan: "A tree replacement plan addendum for this project shall be submitted to the City Arborist or designated city staff for the City of St. Marys in conjunction with the construction plans for the proposed activity. This plan shall include the species, size and location of trees to be planted off-site to meet the tree density deficit shown. Final acceptance of this project is subject to approval of this plan, as well as verification of the installation of the trees". 
(2)  Contributing to the City of St. Marys Tree Bank. 
a.  The City of St. Marys will accept donations to the City of St. Marys Tree Bank. These donations will be used for the sole purpose of planting trees on public property within the City of St. Marys. For calculating contributions to the City of St. Marys Tree Bank, see section 102-45 of this article. 
b.  The City of St. Marys Tree Bank will be administered by the St. Marys Tree Board, or designated city staff. An annual report shall be submitted to the city manager showing amounts collected, amounts spent, and the type and location of trees planted. 
(b)  The city arborist or designated city staff must review and approve all requests for alternative compliance. In no instance shall more than 80 percent of the required site canopy be met through alternative compliance. As many trees as can reasonably be expected to survive must be planted on the site in question. 
(c)  No development approval (as defined by this article), land disturbance permit, or building permit shall be issued until the city arborist or designated city staff has approved the request and received the necessary documentation and/or funds for the compliance method. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1; Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 4) 
Sec. 102-30. - Tree maintenance for public protected trees. 
(a)  Pruning and trimming. All trees designated for trimming shall be trimmed in accordance with the International Society of Arboriculture Standards and the following standards: 
(1)  Trees trimmed for clearance from utility lines may be trimmed in such a manner as to provide clearance from lines for a designated period of time or cycle, not to exceed two years. In all cases where conditions permit, drop crotch or side trimming methods shall be used to obtain necessary clearance. Topping is prohibited. The individual or business trimming the tree is responsible for the disposal of wood residue and trimmed parts of the tree to include chips, logs and limbs. 
(2)  Whenever trimming harms the visual shape of the tree, additional trimming shall be performed to achieve satisfactory shape and appearance. Where possible, all cuts shall be of appropriate cut taken back to the trunk of the tree, in order to eliminate excessive sprouts and unsightly stubs. All cuts shall be made in a manner that prevents rips to the bark. 
(3)  Thinning and pruning of a mature tree that exceeds more than 25 percent of the leaf surface, on both the lateral branch and the overall foliage that is pruned within a growing season is prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-31. - Tree protection plan. 
    The tree protection plan shall be a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years after construction. Any trees designated for retention on the tree protection plan that die or are severely damaged within the first two years after construction shall be replaced in accordance with this article. These replacement trees shall be maintained for a minimum of two consecutive years after planting or replacement. 
    Tree protection barriers shall be erected around all existing trees to be preserved to meet standards set by the International Society of Arboriculture, Georgia Forestry Commission, and the city's requirements for protection of street trees or other trees required by city tree ordinance (see section 102-47). 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-32. - Exceptions. 
    The planning director and building official, utilizing such other technical assistance as it may require, shall review the application and plot plan and shall consider and determine what effect it will have upon the drainage, topography and natural resources of the area, and shall consider these factors in granting or denying the application. Exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  If any tree shall be determined to be in a hazardous or dangerous condition so as to endanger the public health, welfare or safety, and requires immediate removal without delay, verbal authorization may be given by the city manager, building official, street supervisor, fire chief or police chief, and the tree removed without obtaining a permit as herein required. 
(2)  During the period of an emergency, such as a tornado, ice storm, flood or any other act of nature, the requirements of this article may be waived by the mayor or his designee. 
(3)  All licensed plant or tree nurseries or tree farms shall be exempt from the terms and provisions of this article only in relation to those trees which are planted and growing for sale or intended sale to the general public in the ordinary course of business, or for some public purpose; and persons, firms, organizations, corporations or societies in the business of growing trees for commercial purpose on their own land or on the land leased to them, shall be exempt. 
(4)  Any tree less than 12 inches DBH is exempted from section 102-30. 
(5)  Any lot after development of the residential subdivision or commercial subdivision is complete and the owner has a warranty deed granted to the owner shall be exempt from section 102-31. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1; Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 6) 
Sec. 102.33. - Waivers. 
    The city council at a regular meeting may, upon appropriate application, vary or waive the terms and provisions of this article due to unreasonable hardships in specific cases. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-34. - Appeals. 
    Any person adversely affected by a decision of the building official, city arborist or designated city representative in the enforcement or interpretation of any terms or provisions of this article may appeal such decisions to the city council, by filing written notice thereof within ten days after the decision of the designated city representative. The city council will render a final decision within 90 days. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Secs. 102-35-102-37. - Reserved. 
Sec. 102-38. - Penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-12. The removal or destruction of each tree under this article shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
    Property in violation of this article shall be subject to a stop work order and/or fines and penalties until such time as the city determines remedial actions have been satisfied as follows: 
(1)  Where trees have been removed in violation of this article, the city shall require mitigation in one or more options in accordance with section 102-45. 
a.  Plant replacement trees on-site; and/or 
b.  Plant replacement trees on city canopy recovery sites; and/or; 
c.  Pay a fine to the city which shall be allocated to the tree fund. 
(2)  No more than 15 percent of any one species shall be permitted for replacement trees. Species must be indigenous or native and comply with the acceptable city planting list. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-39. - Severability. 
    Should any part or provision of this article be declared by a court of the competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than part held to be invalid. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-40. - Maintenance bond requirement. 
Bonds,  as required by this section, shall be in the form of letters of credit, certificates of deposit, cash bond, bonds issued by an insurance company legally doing business in the State of Georgia, or other acceptable means agreeable to the city attorney. The letters of credit and certificates of deposit shall be drawn upon banks or savings and loans legally and actually doing business in Georgia. Such bonds must meet the approval of the city attorney's office. This bond shall be in addition to any other bond required by any other government entity. 
(1)  Bonds shall be required for licenses involving the replacement of ten or more trees, or the relocation of five or more trees, or the relocation of any tree with a DBH of ten inches or greater. 
(2)  Calculations for the amount of bonds shall be computed based upon the equivalent canopy replacement criteria applied to each tree to be relocated or replaced, as provided in section 102-27, and upon the cost of installation and maintenance. The fair market value of the cost of trees that would be required to compensate for the canopy to be relocated or replaced shall be posted. The bond period shall be for the tree replacement performance period of two full growing periods, as stated in the license or as extended or released, plus an additional 60 days. The form of security shall be reviewed by the city's attorney's office for legal sufficiency and may not be accepted until approved. 
(3)  Release of bonds. 
a.  Upon successful tree relocation and replacement as determined by this section and written approval by city engineer or designated representative, bonds required for tree relocation and replacement shall be released. Where possible, bonds shall be partially released for partially successful relocation/replacement projects, with the amount retained equal to the value of the additional replacement trees required, plus installation and maintenance. 
b.  Bonds may be released by the city when fee simple title is transferred. The city may condition the release of the bond upon the establishment of a new bond by the new owner in fee simple. 
(4)  Where the licensee plants 50 percent more than the required number of replacement trees and establishes a suitable maintenance plan to ensure the viability of the replacement trees, city engineer may recognize the additional replacement trees as suitable security in lieu of a bond. 
(5)  Governmental entities shall be exempt from the requirement of providing bonds. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1; Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 7) 
Sec. 102-41. - Indemnification. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, or upon any of its officers or employees, or to relieve the owner or occupant of any private property from the duty to keep in safe and healthy condition the trees upon their property or upon a public right-of-way over their property. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1; Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 7) 
Sec. 102-42. - Definitions. 
    All words in these standards have their customary dictionary definition (as defined in the Oxford American Dictionary of Current English, 1999 edition, except as specifically defined herein. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, and the words "may" and "should" are permissive. Technical terms used are defined as follows: 
    2000 ANSI A300: Pruning standards set forth in the Standard Practices for Trees, Shrubs and Other Woody Plant Maintenance. 
    Arborist: A person or firm, who has been trained in the business of diagnosing, treating, pruning and removing trees, including landscape architects, and persons with a formal knowledge of trees, such as cooperative extension service agents. Also includes foresters registered with the Georgia Secretary of State's Office (Pembroke). 
    Basal area: The cross-sectional area of a tree trunk at diameter breast height (DBH) expressed herein in terms of "units" per acre. 
    Buffer: Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance. 
    Caliper; single stem: The thickness of trees measured in inches. A caliper measurement for trees shall be measured 12 inches above the soil line or across the stump if the tree has been severed at less than 12 inches above the soil line. 
    Canopy: The foliar cover in a forest stand consisting of overhead branches and leaves. 
    City arborist: Arborist selected by city to render decisions on issues concerning trees within the City of St. Marys. 
    City land planner: The individual employed within the city planning department charged with reviewing subdivision plats and site plans. 
    Critical establishment period: The first two years after a tree is planted. 
    Dead tree: A tree that does not contain any live tissue, i.e., green leaves or live limbs. 
    Deciduous tree: Any tree which naturally loses its leaves in the fall. 
    Diameter-at-breast-height (DBH): The tree trunk diameter measured in inches at a height 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree forks into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the forks. Measurements shall be made by use of a circumference to diameter conversion tape. 
    Diameter, tree: The diameter of a tree measured as follows: 1) for existing preserved trees, at a point 4.5 feet above the ground; 2) for new replaced trees, at a point six inches above the ground. For multi-trunk trees diameter breast-height (DBH) above. 
    Dripline: The vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy to the ground. 
    Green space: Any area retained as permanently vegetated land. 
    Hardwood tree: Any tree botanically classified as an angiosperm. 
    Heritage tree: Any tree which is determined by St. Marys to be of unique and intrinsic value to the general public because of its size, age, historic association, unique species to the region, ecological value or any tree designated a Georgia State Champion, United States Champion or World Champion by the American Forestry Association (refer to appendix B). This article calls for the city arborist or designated city staff, to maintain a list of trees that are of special interest to the city. Upon recommendation by the city arborist or designated city staff, the city council may designate a tree as a heritage tree, provided the tree's health, aerial space, and open ground area for the root system have been certified by the arborist as sufficient. The city arborist or designated city staff shall maintain a registry of heritage trees. 
    Large maturing tree: Large maturing tree species shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and have a caliper of at least two inches immediately after planting. These species shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 40 feet when grown in City of St. Marys, Georgia. See section 102-46. 
    Natural area: An area of natural vegetation that is generally undisturbed, unmaintained, and is self-perpetuating. It includes not only trees, but also native shrubs, groundcovers, wildflowers, vines and grasses. 
    Overstory trees: Those trees that compose the top layer or canopy of vegetation and will generally reach a mature height of greater than 40 feet. 
    Planting season: The time period or season during which newly planted trees will have the best opportunity for survival. The planting season begins on November 1 and ends on March 31. 
    Private tree: A tree that is located on lands for which the city does not have responsibility for tree management. 
    Proper pruning: As defined by the 2000 ANSI A300 standards. 
    Pruning: The cutting or removing any part of the branching structure of a tree in either the crown, trunk or root areas. 
    Public tree: Any tree located on property belonging to the City of St. Marys. 
    Removal: The physical removal of a tree. 
    Replacement tree: A new tree planted on a site to meet minimum site density factor requirements (regardless of whether trees existed prior to any development). 
    Retention tree: Any tree that is designated on a tree survey or tree management plan to be retained on a site. 
    Root protection zone: The minimum area beneath a tree which must be left undisturbed in order to preserve a sufficient root mass to give a tree a reasonable chance of survival. The circular area above and below ground with a radius equivalent to the greater of six feet or 1.0 feet for every inch in trunk diameter at 4.5 feet above the ground. 
    Site plan: A plan provided that reflects existing and proposed conditions on a site that is intended for construction. This may include but is not limited to topography, structures and/or additions, grading, drainage, erosion control measures, trees to be saved or planted to comply with the requirements of this article, best management practices, parking requirements, streets and other type improvements. 
    Small maturing tree: Small maturing tree species shall have an average mature crown spread of at least 15 feet when grown in City of St. Marys, Georgia. See "Understory tree". 
    Softwood tree: Any tree botanically classified as a gymnosperm. 
    Tree: Any self-supporting, woody perennial plant which normally attains a single trunk diameter of five inches or more and which normally attains a mature height of a minimum of 15 feet. 
    Tree bank: An account, maintained by the Finance Department of the City of St. Marys of funds contributed from developers as a form of alternative compliance to the City of St. Marys Tree Ordinance. Funds from the tree bank are to be used solely for the purchase and planting of trees on public sites within the City of St. Marys as authorized by the city manager or designee. 
    Topping: The severe cutting back of branches to a stub, bud, or a lateral branch not large enough to assume the terminal role. 
    Tree board: The body established pursuant to City of St. Marys. 
    Tree management plan: A to-scale map or site plan prepared in accordance with this article, showing among other items, a detailed plan designed to protect and preserve trees before, during and for a period of two years after construction. 
    Tree removal: The cutting or removing of 50 percent or more of the crown, trunk or root system of a tree, or causing the death of a tree through damaging, poisoning or other direct or indirect action. 
    Tree removal impact fee: A fee to be paid to the City of St. Marys Tree Bank based on the tree removal impact formula found in section 102-44, to be used to offset the environmental impact from tree loss within the city. 
    Tree species selection list: The recommended species of trees for planting within the city maintained and updated periodically by the tree board. Said list will also include species that are determined by the tree board to be discouraged for reasons to be determined by the tree board including, but not limited to, trees that are detrimental to the native environment or in conflict with this article. 
    Understory tree: Those trees that grow beneath the overstory, and will generally reach a mature height of less than 40 feet. 
    Wetland: Land that falls under the jurisdiction of one or more of the following agencies: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources or the United States Army Corp of Engineers (US COE). 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1 (App. A); Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 8) 
Sec. 102-43. - Tree board. 
(a)  A tree board is hereby established to be comprised of five members appointed by the city. All appointments shall be for a three-year term; except the initial appointments shall be as follows: Two members appointed for a three-year term to terminate December 31, 2008; two members appointed for a two-year term to terminate December 31, 2007; and one member appointed to serve for a one-year term to terminate on December 31, 2006. The initial term shall be considered a full term. 
(b)  The mayor and council, when appointing members to the tree board, shall give consideration to those persons who have demonstrated an interest in the preservation and conservation of trees within the city limits. Potential sources for tree board members should include: 
(1)  A public utility providing service within the city. 
(2)  A representative of the development or building community working in commercial projects. 
(3)  A representative of the development or building community working in residential projects. 
(4)  A landscape or forestry professional. 
(c)  The tree board shall choose its own officers and create its operational guidelines and regulations for meetings. The board will establish and publish meeting dates and keep minutes of meetings. The board's rules and guidelines shall be reviewed by the city attorney and approved by the city council. 
(d)  A majority of the total members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(e)  The tree board shall consider, investigate, make findings and make recommendations upon any special matter or question concerning the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees on publicly owned lands. 
(f)  The tree board will annually review and update as needed specifications for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees on publicly owned lands. The review will include a review of the tree and shrub ordinance and the board will recommend changes to the ordinance as needed. 
(g)  The tree board members shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council. Any member may be removed from the tree board by a majority vote of the mayor and city council, at anytime, with or without cause for said removal. 
(h)  The tree board or designated city staff shall be responsible for the City of St. Marys tree city application and award. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. B); Ord. of 5-10-10(2), § 9) 
Sec. 102-44. - Canopy analysis. 
    A basic condition of the city tree protection ordinance is that all applicable sites have a potential minimum canopy of 50 percent by area. The canopy requirement must be met whether or not a site had trees prior to development. The canopy may be achieved by counting existing trees to be preserved or actual canopy pf preserved trees or groupings, planting new trees, or some combination of the two. For canopy analysis, the following formula shall apply: 
CR = SA × 0.5 
Where: 
CR = canopy area requirement 
SA = site area 
  
PROCEDURE FOR CALCULATING THE 
REQUIRED TREE REPLACEMENT: 
Step 1: Area of total site from boundary survey. 
Step 2: Divide area (in square feet) by two. 
Step 3: Subtract preserved tree area from step 2. 
Step 4: Select enough overstory and understory trees to equal area in step 3. (Note: Not more than three understory trees for each overstory tree. Not more than 15 percent of one species and not more than 40 percent of one genus.) 
NOTE: All replacement trees must be two inch caliper or greater. Replacement trees must have minimum area for growth. Sections 102-48-102-50 (include minimum tree planting area in the tree list). 
    Square footage value placed on a two-inch caliber tree for calculating replacement trees: 
a.  Overstory trees values: 
1.  Large growth trees = 1,500 sq. ft./tree planted. 
2.  Medium growth trees = 550 sq. ft./tree planted. 
b.  Understory trees value: 
1.  Small growth trees = 250 sq. ft./tree planted. 
Example 1: Following site to be developed: 
Step 1: Ten acre site = 435,600 sq. ft. 
Step 2: 50 percent canopy cover figure. 
435,600 ;div; 2 = 217,800 sq. ft. to meet 50 percent canopy cover. 
Step 3: Preserved trees left on site = 108,900 sq. ft. (2.5 acres). 
217,800 minus 108,900 = 108,900 sq. ft. of replacement trees. 
Step 4: Replacement trees required to meet 50 percent CR (canopy area requirement). 
CR = canopy area requirement 
108,900 sq. ft. of area to be planted in trees. 
a.  Overstory trees = 1,500 sq. ft./tree for large canopy trees planted. 
b.  Overstory trees = 550 sq. ft./tree for medium canopy tree planted. 
1.  65 overstory (large canopy trees) x 1500 sq. ft. = 97,500 sq. ft. 
2.  15 overstory (medium canopy trees) x 550 sq. ft. = 8,250 sq. ft. 
3.  Total sq. ft. 105,750 sq. ft. 
c.  Understory trees = 250 sq. ft./tree planted. 
1.  13 understory (small canopy trees) x 250 sq. ft. = 3,250 sq. ft. 
c.  Total square footage of trees planted: 109,000 sq. ft. 
THE 109,000 SQ, FT. OF PLANTED TREES HAS MET 50 PERCENT CANOPY AREA REQUIREMENT. 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. C)) 
Sec. 102-45. - City tree bank formula for determining contributions. 
    Contribution calculations are based on two-inch caliper replacement trees with a value updated semi-annually, and on file with the city, representing the average size and cost of materials, labor and guarantee for trees planted in the City of St. Marys area. 
    Example: Based on unit value of tree replacement of $500.00 (amount subject to change). 
    To determine the appropriate CR contribution, first calculate the implantable square footage (ISF) of tree space which cannot be planted on the site. 
    Divide the ISF by 1,500 sq. ft. (the sq. ft. value of a 2-inch caliper overstory replacement tree) and multiply by $500.00. 
    Example 2: From Example 1 the total sq. ft. of 50% CR required is 108,900 sq. ft. 
    Due to space limitation and other site problems, the site only has 84,500 sq. ft. of Plantable Area (PA) for replacement trees. 
    To determine the CR trees not plantable on site use the following formula: 
USF = CR - PA 
In this example: 
CR (108,900 sq. ft.) - PA (84,500 sq. ft.) = 24,400 sq. ft. of ISF 
CR = ISF ;div; 1500 sq. ft. 
CR = 24,400 ;div; 1500 sq. ft. = 16.266 replacement trees 
This means that a total of 16 trees are to be planted at a remote site as a form of alternative compliance or the developer may elect to contribute to the city tree bank the value of 16 trees. 
Determine the acceptable contribution amount as follows: 
16 x $500.00 = $8,000 TOTAL CONTRIBUTION TO TREE BANK 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. D)) 
Sec. 102-46. - Planting specifications. 
    Trees shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock for proper relations of height, caliper and root ball diameter. 
(1)  The diameter of the planting hole shall be a minimum of three times the diameter of the root ball. 
(2)  The planting hole sidewalls shall be scored or roughened to eliminate the smooth, slick surface caused by the shovel or auger. 
(3)  If containerized material is to be planted, any circling roots shall be cut by slicing the root ball vertically from top to bottom in two to three well spaced lines around the root ball with a sharp knife, except in the case of any species of palms (see appendix). 
(4)  The root ball shall rest on undisturbed soil in the planting hole with the top of the root ball on level with the natural ground level or slightly raised (not to exceed a height of two inches above the natural ground level). 
(5)  Any tree planted with the top of the root ball below natural ground level shall not be counted towards the required canopy replacement for the property. 
(6)  The soil used to backfill around the root ball shall be uncompacted, native soil free of rocks, trash, or any construction debris. 
(7)  Stakes and guy wires should only be installed when absolutely necessary. Supporting devices shall not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian movement and shall be removed after 12 months. 
(8)  Mulch in the form of pine straw, pine bark or wood chips shall be evenly distributed over the planting hole to a settled depth of two inches. 
(9)  Permanent built-in or temporary watering systems shall be installed to ensure the plants will survive the critical establishment period. 
(10)  Out-of-season planting is discouraged. Property owners/developers may submit a "request for delay affidavit" to allow for plant installation to occur at a time which better coincides with the normal planting season (November l to March 31). 
Example of Planting Details: 

Diagram 2. Planting Details 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. F)) 
Sec. 102-47. - Example of tree protection detail. 


Diagram 3. Tree Protection Details 
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. F)) 
Sec. 102-48. - Tree list-Large. 
    Large canopy trees for overstory: (count for 1,500 sq. ft. of area for planting - minimum 2-inch caliber). 
    Large trees greater than 50 feet [tall] suitable for areas with more than 400 square feet of total planting area; in a planting strip at least 16 feet x 25 feet or 20 feet x 20 feet. 
Common/Scientific Name Height & Width Sun/Shade Insect & Disease Resistance Growth Rate Deciduous Evergreen Remarks Beech, American 
Fagus grandifolia 50-75' h 
40-80' w PS/FS L S D Native. Needs ample room above and below ground. Acid soil. Fruit attracts wildlife, no litter. Zones 4-9 Blackgum 
Nyssa sylvatica 65-75' h 
25-35' w PS/FS H S D Native. Soil pH below 6 best, texture tolerant, drought tolerant, wet soil tolerant. Fruit attracts wildlife, some litter. Zones 4-9 Cypress, bald 
Taxodium distichum 60-80' h 
25-35' w FS/PS M F D Native. Drought & wet tolerant. 'Knees' form in wet areas. Tolerates compaction. Zones 4-11 Cypress, pond 
Taxodium ascendens 50-60' h 
50-60' w PS/FS H F D Native. Soil adaptable below 7.5. Knobby 'knees' form in moist areas. Attracts wildlife. No litter. Zones 5-9 Hickory, pignut 
Carya glabra 50-65' h 
30-40' w PS/FS M M D Native. Soil texture adaptable. Drought tolerant. Nuts attract wildlife. Zones 4-9 Hickory, shagbark 
Carya ovata 60-80' h 
25-35' w PS/FS H S D Native. Soil texture adaptable. Abundant nuts attract wildlife. Shaggy bark attractive. Zones 4-8 Magnolia, Southern 
Magnolia grandiflora 60-80' h 
30-40' w PS/FS M M E Native. Soil adaptable. Bark is thin, protect from mechanical injury. White showy blooms in spring & summer. Good cultivars. Zones 7-9 Maple, Red 
Acer rubrum 60-75' h 
25-35' w PS/FS H F D Native. Prefers acidic soil, texture tolerant, wet tolerant. Bark is thin. Fruit attracts wildlife. Many cultivars. Zones 4-9 Oak, laurel/darlington 
Quercus laurifolia 60-70' h 
50' w PS/FS H F SE Native. Soil adaptable. Roots will heave sidewalks. Acorns attract wildlife, creates some litter. Zones 6-10 Oak, live 
Quercus virginiana 60-80' h 
60-120' w PS/FS H M E Native. Soil adaptable. Roots will eventually heave sidewalks. Good wind resistance. Some litter. Zones 8-10 Oak, shumard 
Quercus shumardii 60-80' h 
40-50' w FS M F D Native. Soil texture adaptable, acidic. Urban tolerant. Acorns attract wildlife. Some litter. Zones 5-9 Oak, southern red 
Quercus falcata 60-80' h 
60-70' w FS M M D Native. Acidic soil, all textures, urban tolerant. Fruit attracts wildlife, no significant litter. Zones 7-9 Oak, scarlet 
Quercus coccinea 60-75' h 
45-60' w FS M M D Native. Acidic soil, all textures. Needs ample root space. Nuts attract wildlife. Some litter. Zones 5-8 Oak, swamp chestnut 
Quercus michauxii 60-70' h 
30-50' w PS/FS M M D Native. Acidic soil, all textures, occasional wet. Leaf litter persistent, acorns for wildlife. Zones 6-9 Oak, white 
Quercus alba 60-100' h 
60-80' w PS/FS H M D Native. Acidic soil, all textures. Protect roots from disturbances. Nuts attract wildlife. Some litter. Zones 3-9 Oak, willow 
Quercus phellos 60-75' h 
40-60' w FS M F D Native. Acidic soil, all textures, occasional wet, drought, urban tolerant. Nuts attract wildlife. Some litter. Zones 5-9 Pine, loblolly 
Pinus taeda 50-80' h 
30' w FS M F E Native. Soil texture adaptable, acidic. Thick bark- resistant to fire. Needle drop prolific. Zones 6-9 Pine, longleaf 
Pinus palustris 60-80' h 
30-40' w FS M F E Native. Soil texture adaptable. Beautiful bark. Needle and cone drop prolific. Drought tolerant once established. Zones 7-10 Redcedar, eastern 
Juniperus virginiana 40-50' h 
8-25' w FS H F E Native. Soil pH and texture tolerant. Blue fruit attracts wildlife. Good wind break, urban tolerant. Zones 3-9 Sweetgum 
Liquidambar styraciflua 75' h 
50' w PS/FS H M D Native. Soil pH of 7.5 or less. Surface roots. Fruit attract wildlife, significant litter. Cultivar 'Rotundifolia' fruitless. Zones 5-9 Sycamore, American 
Platanus occidentalis 75-90' h 
60-70' w FS L F D Native. Soil pH and texture adaptable. Prefers moist soil. Roots may heave sidewalks. Showy bark. Zones 4-9 Tulip poplar 
Liriodendron tulipifera 80-120' h 
25-40' w FS H F D Native. Acidic soil, occasional wet. Avoid drought & salt. Showy greenish-yellow blooms in spring. Some leaf drop in high heat. Zones 4-9 Zelkova, Japanese 
Zelkova serrata 50-90' h 
50-75' w FS H M D Japan. Soil adaptable. Drought & urban tolerant once established. Cultivar 'Green Vase' elm-like. Zones 5-8  
KEY: 
Sun/shade exposure Growth rate Pest resistance Type FS = Full sun S = Slow (less than 1' per year) H = High D = Deciduous PS = Part sun M = Medium (1-2' per year) M = Medium E = Evergreen S = Shade F = Fast (more than 2' per year) L = Low SE = Semi Evergreen  
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. G) 
Sec. 102-49. - Same-Medium. 
    Medium canopy trees: (Count for 550 sq. ft. of area for planting - minimum 2-inch caliber). 
    Medium trees 30'-50' suitable for spaces with 100 to 200 sq. ft. of total planting space; in a planting strip at least four to seven feet wide; or place at least 4 feet from pavement or wall. 
Common Name/Scientific Name Height & Width Sun/Shade Insect & Disease Resistance Growth Rate Deciduous Evergreen Remarks Birch, river 
Betula nigra 
'Heritage 40-50' h 
40-50' w PS/FS M F D Native. Acidic soil. Drought sensitive in confined spaces. Roots need room. Cultivars available. Zones 3B-9 Elm, lacebark 
Ulmus parvifolia 
'Drake' 40-50' h 
35-50' w FS H F D Asia. Soil adaptable. Drought tolerant once established. Thin bark. Urban tolerant. Zones 5-9 Goldenraintree 
Koelreuteria paniculata 30-40' h 
30-40' w FS/PS M M D China. Soil adaptable. Salt, drought, urban tolerant. Bright yellow flowers in spring. Zones 5-8 Holly, East Palatka 
Ilex x attenuata 30-45' h 
10-15' w FS M M E Florida natural hybrid. Urban & drought tolerant once established. Red berries attract wildlife. Zones 7-9 Holly, American 
Ilex opaca 40-50' h 
15-25' w FS M S E Native. Salt and drought tolerant once established. Red berries attract birds, no litter. Zones 5-9 Holly, Nellie R. Stevens 
Ilex x 20-30' h 
10-15' w FS H M E Hybrid. Soil texture tolerant. Needs male and female plants for berries. Drought tolerant. Showy red berries & deep green leaves. Zones 6-9 Holly, Savannah 
Ilex x attenuata 30-45' h 
6-10' w FS M M E Hybrid. Acidic soil, urban tolerant. Red berries attract birds, no litter. Zones 6-9 Loquat 
Eriobotrya japonica 20-30' h 
30-35' w PS/FS M M E China. Southern range only. Texture tolerant. Well drained soil, afternoon shade. Orange or yellow fruit attracts wildlife, litter. Zones 8-10 Magnolia, sweetbay 
Magnolia virginiana 40-50' h 
15-25' w PS M M D Native. Acidic soil. Tolerates wetlands. Flood & drought tolerant. Showy, white, fragrant flowers. Zones 5-9 Magnolia, Southern 
Magnolia grandiflora 30-50' h 
15-30'w FS H M E Native. Soil adaptable. White showy blooms in summer & early fall. Smaller leaves than species. Zones 6-9 Maple, trident 
Acer buergerianum 30-40' h 
25' w PS/FS H M D China. Acidic, well drained soil. Urban, salt & wind tolerant. Attractive bark. Zones 5-8 Oak, overcup 
Quercus lyrata 35-50' h 
35-50' w FS H M D Native. Soil adaptable, wet & drought tolerant once established. Urban tolerant. Acorns attract wildlife, significant litter. Zones 5-9 Palm, cabbage 
Sabal palmetto 40-50' h 
10-12' w PS/FS H S E Native. Soil tolerant, frond and fruit litter messy. Needs irrigation until established as all cut roots die back. Southern region only. Zones 8B-11 Palm, windmill 
Trachycarpus fortunei 20-40' h 
6-10' w PS/FS M S E China. Soil texture adaptable. Drought tolerant once established. Protect from wind. Southern range of state only. Zones 8A-10B Pistachio, Chinese 
Pistachio chine sis 25-35' h 
25-35' w FS/PS H M D China. Soil texture, pH, drought, urban tolerant. Fruit causes some litter. Zones 6-9 Redbud, eastern 
Cerci's Canadensis 
'Forest Pansy' 20-30' h 
15-30' w PS M F D Native. Light, rich, moist soil, texture adaptable. Showy purple blooms in spring. Cultivar 'Texas White' good. Short lived. Zones 4-9 Silver bell 
Carolina Haleiwa Carolina 20-40' h 
15-30' w PS/FS H M D Native. Acidic soil. Drought sensitive in full sun, roots need room. Showy white blooms in spring. Zones 5-8 Stewart, tall 
Stewart monadelpha 25-35' h 
15-25' w PS/FS H S D Japan. Acidic soils. Thin bark, attractive bark. White, camellia-like blooms in summer. Part shade best in 8B. Zones 6-8 Yellowwood, American 
Cladastris kentukea 30-50' h 
40-50' w PS/FS H M D Native. Needs pruning while young. White fragrant blooms. Tolerates urban conditions. Zones 4-8  
KEY: 
Sun/shade exposure Growth rate Pest resistance Type FS = Full sun S = Slow (less than 1' per year) H = High D = Deciduous PS = Part sun M = Medium (1-2' per year) M = Medium E = Evergreen S = Shade F = Fast (more than 2' per year) L = Low SE = Semi Evergreen  
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. G) 
Sec. 102-50. - Same-Small. 
    Small canopy trees for understory: (Count for 250 sq. ft. of area for planting - minimum 2-inch caliber) 
    Small trees less than 25 feet. Useful under utility lines; areas with less than 100 sq. ft. of total planting area; a planting strip with a width of at least four feet. 
Common Name/Scientific Name Height & Width Sun/Shade Insect & Disease Resistance Growth Rate Deciduous Evergreen Remarks Chastetree 
Vitex agnus-castus 10-15' h 
15-20' w PS/FS M F D Europe. Soil & pH adaptable. Showy lavender blooms. Zones 7-8 Cherry, Okame 
Prunus x incamp 'Okame' 15-25' h 
20' w PS/FS M M D Hybrid. Soil texture and pH adaptable. Roots need room. Pink showy blooms. Fruit attracts birds. Zones 7-9 Crapemyrtle 
Lagerstroemia indica 15-30' h 
15-25' w FS H M D China. Soil adaptable, urban tolerant, drought tolerant once established. Showy summer blooms. Zones 7-9 Crapemyrtle, Japanese 
Lagerstroemia fauriei 35-50' h 
25-35' w FS H M D Japan. Soil adaptable. Urban tolerant. White showy flowers. Beautiful bark. May be resistant to powdery mildew. Zones 6-9 Dogwood, flowering 
Cornus florida 20-30' h 
20' w PS M M D Native. Part shade. Drought sensitive, low salt tolerance, needs good drainage. White showy flowers. Horizontal branching pattern. Zones 5-9 Dogwood, kousa 
Cornus kousa 15-20' h 
15-20' w PS/FS M S D Japan. Soil adaptable. Part shade, needs water. Roots need room. Showy white blooms in spring. Fruit attracts birds. Zones 5-8 Fringetree 
Chionanthus virginicus 12-15' h 
10-15' w PS/FS M S D Native. Acidic soil. Thin bark easily damaged. Urban tolerant. Showy white blooms in spring. Fruit attracts birds. Zones 4-9 Holly, yaupon 
Ilex vomitoria 'Pendula' 15-20' h 
15-20' w S/FS M M E Native. Soil & pH greatly adaptable. Urban tolerant. Thin bark. Red berries attract wildlife. Zones 7-10 Maple, amur 
Acer ginnala 15-20' h 
15-20' w PS/FS H M D Japan. Soil adaptable. Drought tolerant once established. Showy white to yellow blooms in spring. Bright red fruit, some litter. Zones 3-8 Magnolia, star 
Magnolia stellata 15-20' h 
10-15' w PS/FS M S D Japan. Acidic rich soil, all textures. Not drought tolerant.White or pink showy blooms in spring. Zones 4-8 Magnolia, Southern 
Magnolia grandiflora 
'Little Gem' 20-25' h 
10-15' w PS/FS M M E Native. Soil adaptable. Bark is thin, protect from mechanical injury. White showy blooms in summer and early fall. Zones 7-9 Palm, pindo 
Butia capitata 15-25' h 
10-15' w PS/FS H S E Brazil. Soil adaptable. Drought tolerant. Showy orange or yellow fruit attracts wildlife, significant litter. Southern range only. Zones 8B-11. Redbud, Chinese 
Cercis chinensis 10-15' h 
6-10' w PS/FS M F D China. Light, rich, moist soil. Showy purple blooms in spring. Zones 6-9 Redbud, Oklahoma 
Cercis reniformis 
'Oklahoma' 20-30' h 
15-30' w PS/FS M F D Native. Soil & pH adaptable, salt sensitive, showy thick leaves. Zones 5-9 Snowbell, Japanese 
Styrax japonicus 20-30' h 
15-25' w PS/FS H M D Japan. Acidic loamy soil. Afternoon shade, protect from wind. Attractive exfoliating bark. White showy blooms in spring. Zones 6-8 Waxmyrtle 
Myrica cerifera 15-20' h 
20-25' w PS/FS M F E Native. Soil & pH adaptable, urban tolerant. Blue berries attract wildlife. Zones 8-11  
KEY: 
Sun/shade exposure Growth rate Pest resistance Type FS = Full sun S = Slow (less than 1' per year) H = High D = Deciduous PS = Part sun M = Medium (1-2' per year) M = Medium E = Evergreen S = Shade F = Fast (more than 2' per year) L = Low SE = Semi Evergreen  
(Ord. of 2-26-07(2), § 1(App. G)) 
Chapter 106 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Reciprocal agreements as to operation of vehicles registered in other states inapplicable to motor vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 106-1-106-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWING SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 25, 2008, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 106-36-106-46, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. of June 22, 1987, §§ 1-17-19, 1-17-20, 1-17-30, 1-17-32, 1-17-33, 1-17-50-1-17-53, and § 1-17-72; Ord. of Aug. 28, 1989; Ord. of Mar. 11, 1991; Ord. of Sept. 13, 1993; and Ord. of Feb. 28, 2000, § 1. 
State Law reference- Restriction on authority of counties and municipalities to impose business license fee or occupational tax on wrecker services, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10.1; wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-277. 

Sec. 106-36. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and be cited as "The St. Marys Wrecker and Towing Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-37. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Car carrier: means any device for the transferring of automobiles utilizing a flatbed truck. 
    Heavy duty wrecker: means a wrecker with at least 25,000 pounds minimum G.V.W. rating equipped with a 16- to 25-ton P.T. mechanically driven power winch, crane and boom and having dual wheels. 
    Light duty wrecker: means a wrecker with at least 10,000 pounds minimum G.V.W. rating equipped with an 8,000-pound P.T. driven mechanically power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels. 
    Simple tow: A tow which is simple, requiring only the connection of the disabled vehicle to the towing vehicle with minimal cleanup. This tow is normally used for cars, light trucks (four wheels or six wheel duals). Car must be "rollable" regardless of body or frame damage. 
    Operator: includes the person owning the wrecker service and the wrecker service's agents and employees. 
    Special condition tow: A tow of a vehicle of seven or more wheels and/or a vehicle weighing 14,500 pounds or more. This type of tow is typically related to trucks, trailers, travel trailers, mobile homes, and the like. 
    Difficult tow: A tow that requires special handling, for removal of the vehicle, such as skids, pry bars, chain extensions, sand, etc. Any tow that is more than a simple hookup. A tow of any vehicle that cannot roll on its wheels. 
    Tow: Any vehicle needing removal from the public right-of-way for any of the following reasons: accident; no insurance; suspended license; lack of vehicle registration. 
    Wrecker: means an automotive vehicle for hire equipped with hoisting apparatus and other equipment for towing wrecked automobiles or other vehicles. The term "wrecker" shall also include any other vehicle for hire which is equipped and used for the purpose of towing wrecked automobiles or other type vehicles. 
    Wrecker service: means any person who on a regular basis holds itself out to the general public in the city as being engaged solely or partially in the business of towing wrecked or disabled vehicles for a fee. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 106-38. - License and registration with city marshal required; required information. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service who desires to be on the rotational call list, or for any other wrecker service, whether on the rotational call list or not, that is either located in the City of St. Marys or located outside the city limits, to operate in the city without first registering with the city marshal. All vehicles used for towing services or for wrecker service shall be registered with the city marshal using a form to be provided by the city marshal. The registration shall contain a minimum of the following information. All wrecker or towing companies shall comply with these requirements: 
(1)  Complete home and business address and telephone number (office land line and cell numbers) of the operators of any wrecker. 
(2)  Title certificate number for all wreckers and date issued. 
(3)  Description of the wrecker to be registered including the make, model and manufacturer's serial number. 
(4)  Date the vehicle was first put in service as a wrecker. 
(5)  Occupation tax account number. 
(6)  Persons including employees and agents who are authorized to operate the wrecker and the class of driver's license held by each operator. 
(7)  Name and number and address of insurance company or companies which the wrecker service and all operators have liability insurance. 
(8)  The D.P.S. amber light certificate number. 
(9)  D.O.T. registration number in the registration file, as well as painted on the cab door of each vehicle. 
(10)  Photocopy of the valid driver's license of any person that will operate the wrecker or tow vehicle. 
(11)  All vehicles and operators must meet and comply with all state standards for wrecker service or towing operation. 
(b)  This registration shall not be assignable to any other person or other entity without the prior written approval of the city marshal. 
(c)  Failure to register with the city marshall will result in loss of rotation or towing privileges for a maximum of five years. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-39. - Safety vest requirement. 
    All wrecker operators and any assistants are each required to wear an outermost safety vest of no less than 200 square inches front and back in a color variously known as flame orange, hunter orange, or iridescent blaze orange. This safety vest must be worn at all times while supplying or participating in any wrecker services. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-40. - Required information to be printed on side of vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service to use or operate upon any of the streets, roadways or bridges in the city unless such vehicle has in plain view the following information: the name of the business operating the wrecker service; address of the business; the current D.P.S. amber light certificate. Temporary or removable magnetic signs are not permitted. All data, including D.O.T. number shall be permanently attached to the vehicle. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-41. - Monitoring police calls; unauthorized soliciting of business. 
    Wrecker service operators shall not monitor the county sheriff's department, or local police department radio transmissions for the purpose of soliciting business at the scene of an accident, and no employee of the police department, city marshal's office, or City of St. Marys government shall solicit business for any wrecker service. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-42. - Records. 
    Each wrecker service shall maintain a list of all vehicles towed and stored. This list shall contain information as to the make, model, year, color, VIN number, name of owner, and purpose for towing, removing, and storing the vehicle. Records shall be made available to the city marshal and/or the police department (as applicable) during regular business hours. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-43. - Establishment of rotational call list. 
(a)  The city marshal and the 911 emergency dispatch center will maintain a rotational call list of qualified wrecker services who meet the requirements of this article. 
(b)  All calls shall be on a rotational-basis by name of the wrecker service. If the owner of the vehicle requests a specific wrecker service that he/she prefers, it will be the responsibility of the investigating officer to inform the police 911 communications center of the request. Choice of towing company by citizen from qualified and insured towing companies only if made prior to the call for towing and only if the roadway is not blocked and is in a safe condition for the traffic flow (see also subsection (c), below). If a wrecker service on the rotational call list is requested by the owner in possession of a vehicle, the answer of the request by a wrecker service will not be construed as interrupting that wrecker service's normal rotation position on the rotational call list. 
(c)  If vehicle is off of the roadway (outside the fog line) and does not create a safety hazard during the removal of the vehicle, or create a safety hazard to the vehicle, any emergency personnel on-site, and traffic in general, then the officer on-site shall advise the vehicle owner that it is their responsibility to call a qualified insured towing operator of their choice that must respond within 20 minutes; or, if the vehicle operator has no choice, or, is unable to make a choice, then the officer on site will call for a rotational towing service. The 911 center will notify the wrecker service of this special request. Towing companies responding to a special request must be capable of arriving at the scene within 20 minutes of the call for service. If the service cannot respond within the 20-minute period, the special request wrecker shall be cancelled and a rotational wrecker service substituted. There shall be no financial liability to the city or dispatch for owner requested cancelled towing services that cannot meet the 20-minute period. The vehicle owner shall have only one request for special towing. 
(d)  Once a call for towing is initiated, and cancelled by the officer on-site, the towing operator will not lose his position on the rotation list. Any wrecker that is cancelled will not receive any financial compensation. 
(e)  If the vehicles are impounded by the police department for evidence, vehicle must be towed to the police impoundment lot or another police impoundment lot deemed necessary for the proper processing of evidence, regardless of the wishes of the vehicle owner. Any City of St. Marys requested tow from the impoundment area to another area shall be compensated for at the rates noted herein. 
(f)  If the investigating officer requests a rotational wrecker, the wrecker may not be cancelled without the approval of his/her supervisor. 
(g)  If wrecker service is in visual sight of the disabled vehicle location or at the physical location of the vehicle, the wrecker service cannot be cancelled by the investigating officer or the vehicle owner. Under this condition, the vehicle owner is required to arrange for payment of the towing charge prior to leaving the scene of the tow. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-44. - Qualifications of wrecker service and/or towing service. 
    In order for any wrecker service to be placed on the rotational call list, and be licensed under the provisions of this article, each wrecker service must comply with the following qualifications, standards and requirements of the article at all times: 
(1)  The wrecker service shall have at least one light-duty or one heavy-duty wrecker in lawfully operational condition at all times to remain on the active rotation list. Each wrecker service shall immediately notify the 911 dispatch center's city police dispatcher whenever the wrecker service does not have a wrecker immediately available for a rotational call. A lack of prior notification by the wrecker service will be considered as a rotation refusal. 
(2)  Each wrecker shall carry at all times when in service or use, a full complement of service items to include a fire extinguisher, chains, dollies, proper emergency reflectors, and other equipment needed for lifting, extricating, or righting wrecked vehicles and the removal of such vehicles by towing or carting. In addition, each wrecker shall be equipped with a broom, shovel, debris container, and other equipment to clear traveled portions of the roadway. See subsection (9) below, for additional data regarding cleanup. 
(3)  The wrecker service shall maintain and have access to a secured, fenced storage area for vehicles. The fence shall have a minimum height of not less than five feet, surrounding the perimeter of the storage area. Storage lot shall be capable of storing a minimum of 20 cars. Storage lots shall have sufficient night lighting. There shall be posted at the entrance to the parking area, a sign, the minimum size of which shall be 24 inches by 24 inches, painted white background with red letters, stating the towing charges, the storage rate per day and any additional information pertinent to the storage of vehicles. 
(4)  The wrecker service shall have at least one wrecker driver on call at all times. The driver shall also be qualified under state public service commission rules and regulations. 
(5)  The wrecker service shall maintain in full force and effect at all times the following types and amounts of insurance: 
a.  Bodily injury: 
$300,000.00 per person; 
$500,000.00 per accident. 
b.  Property damage: 
$50,000.00 per person; 
All wrecker services shall furnish the code compliance officer with proof of such insurance. 
(6)  Each wrecker must be equipped with at least two amber lights mounted on the highest point on the vehicle. 
(7)  Proof of current amber light certification as per D.P.S. standards. 
(8)  The wrecker service shall accept only those rotation calls from the police department which can be answered by arrival on the scene by that wrecker service within 20 minutes. 
a.  Lack of an immediately affirmative answer (i.e. answering machine, no answer at all, etc.) shall be deemed to be a rotation refusal resulting in loss of the rotational call. 
b.  A verbal refusal of a rotational call, for any reason, will result in the loss of that rotational call plus the next rotational call. 
c.  With the lack of a rotational response from the rotation list, any next available wrecker may be called by the 911 dispatch center to service the request. 
(9)  All wrecker drivers called to the scene of an accident shall be responsible for the cleanup of all debris caused by the accident. If two or more wreckers are called, both operators shall be equally responsible for the cleanup. Debris shall not be placed inside of the vehicle, unless directed by the officer on the site for evidence purposes. All debris shall be disposed of by the wrecker service in a legal and appropriate manner. Do not sweep or dispose of debris onto the berm or adjacent grassy areas. 
(10)  Wrecker services shall not permit an individual to operate a wrecker without holding a valid driver's license. The driver shall also be qualified under state public service commission rules and regulations. 
(11)  Any complaint filed with the city police department and/or city marshal about rates, damaged property or any other type incident will be investigated by the city marshal and may result in the removal of the wrecker service from the rotation list. 
(12)  All wrecker services will be responsible for any damage or missing property from vehicles which have been impounded for the city's police department, while in their custody. 
(13)  All wreckers must submit a copy to the city marshal of data indicating that the vehicle has passed a yearly inspection by the Georgia Department of Motor Vehicle Safety. 
(14)  All wrecker owners must submit to the city marshal a list of all wreckers, to include make, model, size, and vehicle identification number (VIN). In addition, absolutely no wrecker owner, with additional wreckers in other business names, is permitted to place these wreckers on the rotation list. Only one business name per owner will be allowed on the rotation list. 
(15)  All wrecker owner/operators will be prohibited from smoking at any accident scene or hazardous material scene, or respond to a call while under the influence of intoxicants. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1; Ord. No. 2015-002 , 1-5-15) 
Sec. 106-45. - Removal from rotational call list. 
    Any wrecker service violating the provisions of this article may be removed or suspended from the rotational call list by the city marshal, chief of police or his designated representative. In lieu of removing the wrecker service from the rotational call list for minor violations of the provisions of the article, the city marshal, chief of police, or his designated representative, may suspend the wrecker service for a period not exceed 30 days, during which the wrecker service will be removed from the rotational call list, except for request of an individual owner of the automobile. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-46. - Revocation of registration. 
    The city marshal, after a thorough investigation, shall revoke the registration of any wrecker service on any of the following grounds: 
(1)  If the registration was procured by fraudulent conduct or false statement of a material fact. 
(2)  If the wrecker service or operator proceeds to the scene of an accident in violation of this article. 
(3)  If the wrecker service or operator uses a police radio to obtain information as to the location of the scene of an accident. 
(4)  If the wrecker service had been guilty of a violation of the provision of this article for a second time. 
(5)  If the wrecker driver had been convicted in a court of law of driving under the influence of alcohol/drugs or has his/her license suspended for any lawful reason for five years previous to the date of application to be included on the city's. 
Prior to the revocation of the registration of any wrecker service, the city marshal shall notify the wrecker service in writing within ten days from the date of his decision to revoke a registration. The wrecker service shall be given at least ten days' notice prior to revocation, together with a detailed list of all violations alleged against the wrecker service. Upon hearing the facts in which the wrecker service may present evidence, the city marshal may find that the alleged violation or violations have, or have not been proven. In the event that the finding indicates that the alleged violation has not been proven, no further action will be taken. However, if the findings have been proven, such revocation shall terminate all authority and permission granted by the registration to the wrecker service. In the event of three suspensions within a 12-month period, any person whose registration has been revoked shall not be eligible to again apply for a registration for a period of one year from the date of the last revocation. Any person whose registration has been revoked by the city marshal may file an appeal therefrom to the municipal court within 20 days of the third revocation. The municipal court shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the order of revocation. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-47 - Maximum charges allowed. 
    No wrecker service shall charge more than the following fees for services provided when responding to a call received from the rotational call list. Costs noted are per call: 
(1)  Maximum towing charge anywhere simple or difficult, within the city limits of the city, day or night, to a single location based on the following schedule: 
a.  A set fee of $135.00 for each tow. 
b.  Reserved. 
c.  A fee as negotiated between the vehicle owner and the wrecker service for a special condition tow. 
d.  Cleanup of the accident site shall be included in the above fees. Owner requested tow operators not on the rotation list shall be responsible for cleanup in accordance with the terms and conditions of this article. Do not place any debris inside the vehicle except as necessary to preserve evidence. 
e.  A fine of $500.00 will be assessed to each responding towing operator for failure to cleanup the accident site. 
(2)  Storage per day, starting at 12:01 a.m. of the second calendar date following the tow date; $20.00. 
(3)  A reasonable rate may be charged for recovery by winching when recovery is; (1) over 25 feet from the edge of the roadway; or (2) out of water or marsh, and shall not include normal loading. To right an overturned vehicle shall be part of a normal tow and subject to the service charges set forth in this article. 
(4)  No additional charges for any other service relating to the towing or storage of a vehicle resulting from a response to a rotational call list request shall be allowed. The wrecker service charges set forth herein are maximum. The wrecker operator may charge less for any service should he choose to do so. 
(5)  Charges for any tow of a vehicle weighing 14,500 pounds or more are not limited by this article. 
(6)  Payment for any towing fee must be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(7)  Payment of any storage fees must be paid prior to the release of any stored vehicle. 
(8)  The city will not participate in any civil action between the wrecker or towing service and the vehicle owner due to unpaid fees for services rendered, nor will city staff serve as collection agents related to unpaid towing bills. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1; Ord. No. 2015-002 , 1-5-15) 
Sec. 106-48. - Inventory of towed vehicles. 
    St. Marys Police Department Officers will adhere to department's policy of inventory of a vehicle. Upon completion of the inventory, the wrecker driver shall sign the inventory form in the presence of the officer. Upon completion, the wrecker driver will receive a copy of the inventory. The wrecker services company will then assume full responsibility for the vehicle and its contents. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1; Ord. No. 2015-002 , 1-5-15) 
Sec. 106-49. - Police department to be notified. 
    All wrecker services who are on the city's rotational call list will notify the city marshal of any vehicles that have been in storage for a period of five days or longer. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Sec. 106-50. - Towing of city vehicles. 
    All services provided to the city by the towing company for city-owned vehicles shall be towed by the next towing company on the rotation at no cost to the city. Tow shall be to the city public works department yard on Point Peter Road. Towing company will not lose their position on the towing rotation when towing a city-owned vehicle. Companies on the rotation that refuse to tow city vehicles may be removed from the rotation for a maximum of six months. 
(Ord. of 2-25-08(3), § 1) 
Secs. 106-51-106-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICAB AND LIMOUSINE SERVICES 

Sec. 106-75. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and be citied as "The St. Marys Taxicab/Limousine Services Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-76. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chauffeur means, for purposes of this article, any person with a Georgia State driver's license who meets the qualifications as prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 46-7-85.10, and who is authorized by the public service commission to drive a sedan, limousine, extended limousine, van or minibus. 
    City marshal means the individual appointed by the city to serve as the city marshal and enforce the laws and ordinances of the city. 
    Dispatcher means a person assigned to a base of operations, in contact with taxicabs of the licensee's company having access to a telephone to talk with passengers or place phone calls in the event of an emergency. 
    Domicile means the place where the corporate establishment is maintained; its principal place of business. 
    Licensee means a person licensed by the city occupational license to engage in the vehicle for hire business. 
    Limousine means any motor vehicle that meets the manufacturer's specifications for luxury limousine with a designed seating capacity for no more than ten passengers with a minimum of five seats located behind the operator of the vehicle, and which does not have a door at the rear of the vehicle designed to allow passenger entry or exit; further, no vehicle shall be permitted to be operated both as a taxicab and as a limousine. Limousines and limousine carriers shall be fully regulated by the state under the public service commission. 
    Motor vehicle safety standards means standards promulgated by the public safety department for approval by the city council members that all vehicles for hire regulated under this article must meet. 
    Occupational license means the license required of all persons engaged in business in the city, as set forth in chapter 22, concerning licenses, permits and businesses, as amended. 
    Operator's permit means the written authority granted by the city marshal to persons who qualify to operate vehicles for hire, sometimes referred to as driver's permit. 
    Permittee means a person granted a permit to operate vehicles for hire in the incorporated areas of the city. 
    Sedan means any luxury or nonluxury sedan or towncar-type vehicle which has a seating capacity of not more than five passengers and the driver and which does not contain a taximeter designed to measure electronically or mechanically the distance traveled or time. 
    Sedan carrier means any person operating a service regularly rendered to the public by furnishing transportation as a motor common carrier for hire, not over fixed routes, by means of sedans driven by chauffeurs on the basis of telephone contract, written contract or other prearrangement. 
    Taxicab means a motor vehicle used as a public conveyance which does not meet the requirements of a limousine, is not a van, minibus or sedan, has a taximeter and is subject to the rules and regulations of this article. 
    Van means any motor vehicle, other than a limousine, extended limousine, minibus or a sedan, with a designed seating capacity for no more than 15 passengers, including the driver. 
    Vehicle for hire means any motor vehicle designed or used for the purpose of transporting passengers for consideration or charges which are determined by agreement, contract, and mileage or by the length of time the vehicle is used. Such term does not include vehicles regulated by the state public service commission. For the purposes of this article, vehicles for hire shall mean taxicabs and sedans. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-77. - Marking of vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be necessary for every taxicab to have a sign on each side and on the rear of each vehicle, in letters not less than three inches high, stating the full name of the company or individual owning or operating such vehicle and its identification as a taxicab. 
(b)  All taxicabs shall have a light on the top thereof bearing the minimum legend "taxi" or "taxicabs", as the case may be, and the name of the company operating same. The light shall be kept burning at all times the vehicle is in operation as a vehicle for hire. 
(c)  A number shall be assigned to the taxicab or limousine and the owner thereof by the city marshall and shall not be altered or changed without the consent of such officer. The number shall be affixed or attached on each side and the rear of the vehicle by the owner. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-78. - Register to be kept by city marshal. 
    The city marshal shall keep a register of the name of each person owning and operating a taxicab or limousine licensed under this article, containing a description, make of car, VIN and number of the vehicle assigned by the city marshal. Such records shall be open to inspection by the public during normal business hours. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-79. - Additional passengers. 
    No driver of a taxicab shall carry any other person or passenger other than the passenger first employing the taxicab without the consent of the first passenger. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-80. - Unauthorized soliciting of business. 
    No driver of a taxicab or limousine shall solicit passengers directly upon the roadways of the city, except when approached by a potential customer. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-81. - Monitoring taxicab dispatched calls. 
    No driver of a taxicab or limousine shall monitor taxicab dispatched calls for service for the purpose of soliciting business. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-82. - Rates and charges which may be imposed for taxicabs or limousine services. 
    The rates and charges which may be imposed for taxicab or limousine services shall displayed within the vehicle for hire in view of all passengers and explained to each passenger prior to providing any service. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-83. - Insurance. 
(a)  Taxi companies in the city shall be required to prove on the first day of the months of January, April, July, and October in which they intend to do business in the city that they have the amount of insurance which is required for the operation of a vehicle for hire. 
(b)  The license for the operation of the taxicab business shall expire upon the lapse or cancellation or termination or revocation of any policy of insurance covering any taxicab operated by the taxi business. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-84. - Exterior/interior requirements of vehicle for hire. 
(a)  Must meet state mandated requirements for vehicles. 
(b)  In determining whether taxicabs meet the foregoing requirements, the judgment of the city marshal shall be final. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-85. - Operator's appearance. 
(a)  Drivers shall, while on duty, wear a badge or nameplate with his name thereon on his shirt or coat, in plain view. 
(b)  Drivers shall not engage in smoking as defined in section 53-8(g)(2) of this Code of Ordinances while he/she is carrying a passenger. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2015-003 , 1-5-15) 
Sec. 106-86. - Taxicab occupational license required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating taxicabs on the highways of the city until he has secured a license and otherwise complied with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-87. - Application; information required. 
(a)  Every person desiring to engage in the business of operating taxicabs in the city shall, in each and every year in which the business is proposed to be carried on, first make a written application per City of St. Marys Code of Ordinances for an occupational license. 
(b)  Applications shall be in writing, notarized and filed with the planning department. 
(c)  The application shall contain: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant and the location from which the proposed business is to be operated; 
(2)  If a corporation, the name of all the officers or if a partnership, the name of all the partners; 
(3)  The number of vehicles to be operated under such license, if granted; 
(4)  The type of automobiles to be used together with the VIN and tag number of each vehicle; 
(5)  A copy of the minimum liability insurance coverage; 
(6)  A copy of the each operator's valid driver's license. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-88. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a taxicab in the city until a liability insurance policy is procured and filed with the city marshal. Such policy must be signed by a surety or insurance company authorized to do business in this state and the form of such policy shall be approved by the city attorney. The amount of liability insurance for each taxicab shall be as required by Georgia State law. 
(b)  A policy in the amounts listed in subsection (a) shall be furnished for each car or taxicab operated. The policy may be in the form of a fleet policy covering all taxicabs operated by any one owner, in which event such policy shall provide the minimum amount of coverage, as above enumerated, for each taxicab operated by the owner. Before any policy of insurance shall be cancelled for nonpayment or otherwise, notice in writing must be given to the city marshal at least ten days before the same shall take effect. The liability insurance required by this section shall be for the benefit of the city and for the use and benefit of the public. 
(c)  Any person in whose name a taxicab company is operated, and especially the person directly in charge of such operation, shall be required to produce a blanket public liability policy covering all of the vehicles operated upon such taxi company, regardless of the individual ownership of each vehicle. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-89. - Duties of owner. 
    The owner of every vehicle licensed under the provisions hereof, operating within the city, in addition to complying with all the conditions hereof, shall do and perform or cause to be done with respect to each vehicle operated hereunder, the following: 
(1)  Safety inspection: Inspect the vehicle and its equipment at least daily, and make such repairs and alterations as may be required by the condition of the vehicle and not operate any vehicle until repairs or alterations are made. 
(2)  Authorized driver employees: Employ only drivers who present and have with them during the time of employment a valid driver's license, city taxicab driver's permit and ID badge. 
(3)  Work shift limitation: Prohibit any taxi driver from operating any vehicle: 
a.  For longer than twelve hours of any 24-hour period; or 
b.  With less than eight hours relief from duty after working12 hours of the 24-hour period preceding the commencement of such relief from duty. 
(4)  Vehicle inspections: Submit vehicles for inspection whenever required by the city marshal. 
(5)  Rate cards for passengers: Maintain a supply of taxicab rate cards to be furnished to drivers in his employ in sufficient quantity so that the driver of a taxicab may be able to deliver a rate card to each passenger who requests same. There shall also be posted a rate card in the interior of the cab conspicuous and legible to the passenger, as required by state law. 
(6)  Operations records: Provide each driver with a manifest and shall require the following entries to be recorded thereon in ink during the course of daily operation: 
a.  The make, year, vehicle license tag number and registration number of the vehicle. 
b.  The name of the driver. 
c.  The time the vehicle commenced operation. 
d.  A record of all trips made in chronological order showing the destination, the time dispatched, the time returned and the amount of fare. 
e.  When involved in an accident, the driver must report thereon the time and place of incident on the manifest and record any other incident, such as lost property or assistance to the police. 
(7)  Roof light equipped with flashing mechanism: Maintain in working order an outside roof light equipped with a flashing mechanism for taxicabs which will serve the following purposes: 
a.  To clearly indicate to the public when a taxicab is available for hire (light illuminated) and indicate when the taxicab is off duty (light extinguished); and 
b.  To indicate distress when the flasher light is in use. The flashing mechanism, as approved by the city marshal, within the roof light shall be installed within 90 days of the effective date of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-90. - Issuance. 
    Upon payment of the occupational license fees prescribed by the city and upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter, an occupational license shall be issued by the city marshal by delivering to the owner for each car a suitable card, signed by the city marshal, which shall contain the official license number of the taxicab. Such card shall be continuously displayed in a conspicuous place in the taxicab. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-91. - Refusal to grant; right to appeal. 
    If the city marshal refuses to grant an occupational license to any applicant to operate a taxicab, the applicant shall have the right to file an appeal. Any person/s whose occupational license is denied by the city marshal may file an appeal to the St. Marys City Manager within 20 days of the denial. The city manager shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the occupational license denial. The city manger's denial may be appealed to the city council by submitting a written appeal request to city council within 20 days of the denial. The city council shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the occupational license denial. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-92. - Suspension or revocation of occupational license; appeal. 
(a)  The city marshal may suspend or revoke any occupational license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter where the city marshal finds and determines, after notice to the permit holder and an opportunity to be heard that: 
(1)  One or more illegal sales and/or transportation of controlled substances have occurred in the licensed vehicle or such vehicle has been utilized for the purpose of or in connection with one or more such sales and/or transportation; 
(2)  Persons have been permitted to utilize such vehicle who are known to the owner or operator, or in the exercise of ordinary care should be known to the owner or operator, or who are reputed to be, illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances; 
(3)  If the holder thereof violates any of the provisions of this chapter or is convicted in any court of violating any law relating to alcoholic beverages or controlled substances or has been convicted of driving a taxicab or other motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs or is convicted of violating the traffic laws or ordinances of the city or defect or impairment of vision. It shall be mandatory that such owner's occupational license be revoked if the owner is convicted for driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(b)  From the decision of the city marshal in revoking any such occupational license, the person holding such occupational license shall have the right to file an appeal. Any person whose occupational license is suspended or revoked by the city marshal may file an appeal to the St. Marys City Manager within 20 days of the denial. The city manager shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the occupational license revocation. The city manger's denial may be appealed to the city council by submitting a written appeal request to city council within 20 days of the denial. The city council shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the occupational license revocation. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-93. - Taxicab driver's permit required. 
    Before any person shall be entitled to drive a taxicab for the carriage of passengers in the city, he shall first obtain a permit from the city marshal of the city. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-94. - Application; information required. 
(a)  All applicants for permits required by the provisions of this article shall submit an application in writing to the city marshal on a form to be furnished by the city marshal. 
(b)  Such application shall be notarized and shall contain a copy of a valid driver's license. Information on the driver's license must be correct and current or the application will be not processed. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-95. - Qualifications of applicant. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license required by the provisions of this article shall be: 
(1)  Age of 18 or over. 
(2)  Possess a valid driver's license. 
(3)  Must provide a letter on company's letterhead verifying employment. 
(4)  Must submit to a background check. 
(5)  Submit a notarized application along with $15.00 fee. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-96. - Photograph of applicant. 
    A copy of the applicant's valid driver's license shall be filed at the city marshal's office and a copy of the driver's license photograph shall be pasted on his driver's permit when granted. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-97. - Fee; renewal. 
    There shall be an annual driver's permit fee of $15.00, or as otherwise determined by the city council members for a taxicab driver's permit issued under this article. Such permit shall be valid January 1 through December 31, each year. A permit may be renewed from year to year by the city marshal. It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a taxicab in the city after a permit has expired and before renewal has been granted. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-98. - Display. 
    The permit required by this article shall be placed in the automobile which the driver is to drive where the same will be in clear view of the passengers constantly when he is on duty and engaged in his employment as a driver of a taxicab. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-99. - Defacing, obliterating or destroying driver's permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person holding a taxicab driver's permit to deface, obliterate or destroy the same or cause the same to be defaced, obliterated or destroyed. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-100. - Nontransferable. 
    No permit granted under this article can be transferred or be used by any other person than the licensee or grantee and it shall be unlawful to do so. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-101. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to, upon conviction by the city municipal court, a fine of up to $500.00 for each offense. Each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense and will be treated as such. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-102. - Refusal to grant; right to appeal. 
    If the city marshal refuses to grant a driver's permit to any applicant to drive a taxicab, the applicant shall have the right to file an appeal. Any person whose driver's permit is denied by the city marshal may file an appeal to the St. Marys City Manager within 20 days of the denial. The city manager shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the permit denial. The city manger's denial may be appealed to the city council by submitting a written appeal request to city council within 20 days of the denial. The city council shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the permit denial. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Sec. 106-103. - Suspension or revocation of permit; appeal. 
(a)  The city marshal may suspend or revoke any driver's permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter, where the city marshal finds and determines, after notice to the permit holder and an opportunity to be heard that: 
(1)  One or more illegal sales and/or transportation of controlled substances have occurred in the licensed vehicle or such vehicle has been utilized for the purpose of or in connection with one or more such sales and/or transportation; 
(2)  Persons have been permitted to utilize such vehicle who are known to the owner or operator, or in the exercise of ordinary care should be known to the owner or operator, or who are reputed to be, illegal sellers or purveyors of controlled substances; 
(3)  If the holder thereof violates any of the provisions of this chapter or is convicted in any court of violating any law relating to alcoholic beverages or controlled substances, or has been convicted of driving a taxicab or other motor vehicle while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or drugs, or is convicted of violating the traffic laws or ordinances of the city, or defect or impairment of vision. It shall be mandatory that such driver's permit be revoked if the permittee is convicted for driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(b)  From the decision of the city marshal in revoking any such driver's permit, the person holding such driver's permit shall have the right to file an appeal. Any person whose driver's permit is suspended or revoked by the city marshal may file an appeal to the St. Marys City Manager within 20 days of the denial. The city manager shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the suspension or revocation. The city manger's denial may be appealed to the city council by submitting a written appeal request to city council within 20 days of the denial. The city council shall have the authority, upon the hearing of the appeal to reverse, vacate or modify the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. of 6-9-08(3), §§ 1, 2) 
Chapter 110 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The city zoning ordinance adopted Sept. 12, 1994, and all amendments thereto, have been included within the Code at the direction of an ordinance adopted March 10, 1997. 
Cross reference- Development authority, § 2-146 et seq.; planning commission, § 2-211 et seq.; advertising, ch. 6; alcoholic beverages, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; historic preservation commission, § 62-61 et seq.; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. 9, sec. 2, par. 4; The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; conflicts of interest in zoning actions, O.C.G.A. § 36-67A-1 et seq.; coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq.; effect of zoning laws on covenants running with the land, O.C.G.A. § 44-5-60. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 110-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of St. Marys, Georgia Zoning Ordinance". 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, art. 1) 
Sec. 110-2. - Enactment, purpose, objectives, and scope of chapter. 
(a)  Enactment. In accordance with the authority granted by the Constitution of the State of Georgia, as enacted by the Georgia General Assembly and ratified by general election, the City Council of St. Marys, Georgia, does hereby ordain and enact into law the City of St. Marys Zoning Ordinance. As part of this ordinance so enacted into law is the "Official Zoning Map of St. Marys, Georgia". 
(b)  Purpose. [The purpose of this chapter is] to provide for the best use of property promoting the health, safety, morale, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the people of St. Marys. 
(c)  Objectives. These regulations are designed to: 
(1)  Lessen congestion in the streets; 
(2)  Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers; 
(3)  Promote health and general welfare; 
(4)  Provide adequate light and air; 
(5)  Prevent overcrowding of the land; 
(6)  Avoid undue concentration of the land; 
(7)  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
(8)  Sustain the character of the city and its suitability for particular uses; 
(9)  Promote desirable living conditions and stability of neighborhoods; 
(10)  Protect property from blight and depreciation; 
(11)  Secure economy in governmental expenditures; 
(12)  Conserve the value of buildings; and 
(13)  Channel the most appropriate use of land and buildings throughout the city. 
(d)  Scope. [The scope of this chapter is as follows:] 
    An ordinance of the City of St. Marys, Georgia regulating the location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied; the sizes of yards and other open spaces; the density and distribution of population; and the uses of buildings; structures and lands for trade, industry, residence, recreation, conservation, water supply, sanitation, public safety, public activities, preservation of scenic areas, protection against floods, rising waters and erosion, and other purposes; creating districts for said purposes and establishing the boundaries thereof, defining certain terms used herein; providing for the method of administration, appeal and amendment and duties; providing penalties for violation; and for other purposes. 
(e)  Planning commission's power to adopt design guidelines. The planning commission shall have the flexibility to adopt design guidelines for any zone without amendment to the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, §§ 201-204; Ord. of 5-24-10, § 1) 
Sec. 110-3. - All structures must conform to chapter. 
    No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used for any purpose other than is permitted in the district in which the building or land is located. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 301) 
Sec. 110-4. - Access to public street required. 
    No building shall be constructed or erected upon a lot, or parcel of land, which does not abut upon a public street or permanent easement of access to a public street, which easement shall have a minimum width of 25 feet, unless an easement of lesser width was of record prior to the adoption of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 302) 
Sec. 110-5. - Projects under construction not affected. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction of designated use of any building upon which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the adoption of this chapter and upon which building actual construction has been diligently carried on, and provided further, that such building shall be completed within two years from the date of passage and publication of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 303) 
Sec. 110-6. - Zoning designation of annexed areas. 
    Any area annexed to the city shall, upon such annexation be automatically zoned R-1, Single-family Residential District, and shall be subject to all restrictions applicable in such districts, unless the ordinance annexing such area specifically designates a different land use district and further provided that the procedures established for zoning ordinance amendments by article VII have been followed. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 304) 
Sec. 110-7. - Public utilities allowed in all districts. 
    Unless otherwise stated by this chapter, the following public utility uses shall be permitted within easements or dedicated public rights-of-way in any district: Poles, wires, cables, conduits, vaults, laterals, pipes, mains, valves, and any other similar transmission and distribution equipment (but not including distribution centers and substations), provided that the installation thereof shall conform with the rules and regulations of the applicable administrative authorities. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 305) 
Sec. 110-8. - Interpretation of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Interpretation of terms. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular. 
(2)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense and the past tense. 
(3)  The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
(4)  The word "may" is discretionary. 
(5)  The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for". 
(6)  Words not defined herein shall be construed to have the meaning given by common and ordinary use. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Accessory building. A building customarily incidental and subordinate to the main buildings. 
    Accessory use. A use customarily incidental, appropriate and subordinate to the principal use of land or buildings located upon the same premises. 
    Advertising sign or structure. Any cloth, card, paper, metal, painted, glass, wooden, plastic, plaster, stone sign or other sign, device, or structure of any character whatsoever, including statuary, placed for outdoor advertising purposes on the ground or on any tree, wall, bush, rock, post, fence, building or structure. The term "placed" shall include erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, sticking, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing, or making visible in any manner whatsoever. The area of an advertising structure other than a sign shall be determined as the area of the largest cross-section of the structure. Neither directional, warning, nor other signs posted by public officials in the course of their public duties nor merchandise or material being offered for sale, shall be construed as advertising signs for the purpose of this definition. 
    Advertising sign, outdoor (billboard). A sign which directs attention to a profession, business, commodity, service, or entertainment other than one conducted, sold, or offered upon the premises where such sign is located, or on the building to which such sign is affixed. 
    Airport. Publicly owned airports. 
    Airport hazard. Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the air space required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at an airport, or which otherwise is hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft. 
    Alley. A minor right-of-way dedicated to public use which affords only a secondary means of vehicular access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street and which may be used for public utility purposes. 
    Apartment. A building designed for or occupied by four or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family, including apartment houses, apartments and flats, efficiency apartments, and studio apartments, but not including, boarding homes, hotels or motels. 
    Boardinghouse. A dwelling other than a hotel where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals are provided for two or more persons. 
    Buildable area of lot. The buildable area of a lot is the space remaining after the minimum open space requirements of this chapter have been met. 
    Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or personal property. 
    Building line. The line, established by law, beyond which the building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law. 
    Building height. The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level adjoining the building to the highest point of the roof. For structures to be constructed within the floodplain, the mean finished ground level shall be measured from the elevation of the designated 100-year flood, as identified on the current flood insurance rate map, to the top of the highest point of the roof. For structures to be constructed outside or above the 100-year floodplain, as identified on the current flood insurance rate map, the mean finished ground level shall be measured from the elevation of the existing ground area proposed for the structure (taken at the geometric center of the proposed structure) to the highest point of the roof. 
    Building official. The employee or employees of the City of St. Marys, or their duly authorized representative, given the responsibility for building inspection and construction permitting. 
    Building, principal. A building in which there is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. (See also accessory building .) 
    Building setback line. A line establishing the minimum allowable distance between the front of the structure and the front property right-of-way line when measured perpendicularly thereto. The term "building line", where used in this chapter, shall be synonymous with the term "building setback line". 
    Building site. A single parcel of land under one ownership, occupied or intended to be occupied by a building or structure. 
    Centerline of street. The line surveyed and monumented by the City of St. Marys or the Georgia Department of Transportation or if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
    Club. Building and facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, person, or persons for a social, educational, or recreational purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business. 
    Condominium (building). A building containing three or more individually owned dwelling units and related, jointly-owned, common areas as defined by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
    Construction. For the purpose of section 110-5, construction begins when a building permit is issued. 
    Curb cut. Any interruption or break in the line of a street for the purpose of connecting a driveway to a street, or otherwise to provide vehicular access to abutting property. 
    Day care center or kindergarten. Any place used for the daytime care or education of five or more children under 17 years of age where the children's parents or guardians are not residents of the premises. 
    Dwelling. A building or portion thereof that provides living facilities for one or more families; including one-family, two-family and other multiple-family dwellings, but not including hotels and boardinghouses. 
    Dwelling, multifamily. A structure designed for the occupancy of two or more families with separate housekeeping facilities for each family. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by one family. 
    Dwelling unit. One or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment, boardinghouse, hotel or motel, designed primarily for occupancy by one family for living or sleeping purposes. 
    Fair market value. The value of property or structures, shall mean, as determined by the tax assessor, either: (a) before the improvement was started; or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. 
    Family. One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit, living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit; provided that a group of four or more persons who are not within the second degree of kinship shall not be deemed to constitute a family. 
    Notwithstanding the definition in the preceding paragraph, a family shall be deemed to include four or more persons not within the second degree of kinship occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, if said occupants are handicapped persons as defined in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, as amended by the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Such unrelated individuals shall have the right to occupy a dwelling unit in the same manner and to the same extent as any family unit as defined in the first paragraph of this definition. 
    Home business office. An office within a dwelling which is secondary to the use of the structure for dwelling purposes. The office may be for the purposes of service or trade workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers, or individuals who work at home, such as writers or computer programmers. Home business offices are not offices for on-site customer servicing. Customers are prohibited from visiting the office and there may be no signs indicating the presence of such office on the premises. 
    Home occupation. Any occupation or profession carried on by the inhabitants which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, which does not change the character thereof, and which is conducted entirely within the main or accessory buildings; provided that no trading in merchandise is carried on and in connection with which there is no display of merchandise or sign other than one nonilluminated nameplate not more than two square feet in area attached to the main or accessory building and no mechanical equipment is used or activity is conducted which creates any dust, noise, odor, or electrical disturbance beyond the confines of the lot on which said occupation is conducted. 
    Hotel or motel. A building or group of buildings under one ownership containing sleeping rooms occupied, intended or designed to be occupied, as the more or less temporary abiding place of persons who are lodged with or without meals for compensation, but not including an auto or trailer court or camp, sanitarium, hospital, asylum, orphanage, or building where persons are housed under restraint. Hotel and motel include tourist homes and bed and breakfasts. 
    Institution. A building occupied by a nonprofit organization or corporation or a nonprofit establishment for public or semi-public use. 
    Junk yard. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area for storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
    Loading space, off-street. Space logically and conveniently located for pickups and deliveries scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used and accessible to such vehicles. 
    Lot. A parcel or plot of land of varying size which is designated as a single unit of property and which is intended to be occupied by one building, or group of buildings, and its accessory buildings and uses as required by this chapter. 
(1)  Lot area. The total area included within lot lines. 
(2)  Lot, corner. A lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets. 
(3)  Lot coverage. The percentage of lot area covered by principal and accessory buildings and structures. 
(4)  Lot, double frontage. A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on more than one street other than an alley. 
(5)  Lot depth. The mean distance between front and rear lot lines. 
(6)  Lot frontage. The linear distance a lot or parcel abuts a public street or permanent easement from beginning to end at any one point. For lots that front a street at more than one point, this distance shall not be construed as a cumulative amount. 
(7)  Lot lines. Lines forming the boundaries of a lot as defined above. 
(8)  Lot width. Distance between the side boundaries of the lot measured at the front yard set back line. 
    Lot of record. A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has been legally recorded in the records of the Clerk of Camden County Superior Court; or a parcel of land, the deed of which has been legally recorded in the same office as of the effective date of this chapter. 
    Manufactured housing. All structures identified by any manufacturer as modular, manufactured, and/or prefabricated shall be considered 'manufactured' and shall be permitted only in the residential zones identified in ordinance 110. Manufactured homes shall be constructed in strict compliance with the data and definitions contained in O.C.G.A. 8-2-131 and the state fire marshal's regulations 120-3-7. In addition, all manufactured homes shall be constructed with a permanent foundation of either concrete block, brick, or galvanized metal stud with solid stucco finish to be in compliance with coastal hurricane wind loading requirements. Any manufactured home located within a one percent flood plain shall comply with City Ordinance Chapter 54 as well as all applicable FEMA flood requirements. All foundation skirting shall be of permanent material around the entire perimeter of the manufactured home, with ventilation vents (and flood vents if required) to ventilate the area. The payment of a yearly renewal fee and inspection is required for all new manufactured homes. 
    Manufactured housing park. A parcel of land which is used or intended to be used for the rental or lease of spaces, stands, or manufactured houses and the provision of services for two or more manufactured houses. 
    Manufactured housing space, stand. A plot of ground within a manufactured housing park designed for the accommodation of one manufactured house for rent or lease and not to be bought or sold individually. 
    Mobile homes. A transportable factory built home, designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling and built prior to the enactment of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which became effective June 15, 1976. Mobile homes are not permitted uses in any district. Existing mobile homes (also known as trailers, single wide, double wide, etc.) which are so damaged, worn out or obsolete that is has lost one half or more of the value paid for it by the current owner may be replaced with a manufactured home upon determination by the building inspector that the existing mobile home is damaged, worn out or obsolete to the required extent. If required to be replaced with a manufactured home, the definition and conditions as listed for a manufactured home shall apply. Manufactured housing is only permitted within the MH zone. 
    Modular home. A factory fabricated, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the Southern Building Code Congress International. For the purposes of this chapter, modular home shall be construed to be a single-family dwelling. 
    Nonconforming use. Any building structure or uses of land or building lawfully existing at the effective date of this chapter, which does not conform with the provisions of this chapter or amendments thereto. 
    Nursing home. A home for aged or ill persons in which three or more persons not of the immediate family are provided with food, shelter and care for compensation, but not including hospitals, clinics, or similar institutions devoted primarily to diagnosis and treatment. 
    Personal property. Any property which is not real property. 
    Physical construction. Permanent emplacement of structural components. 
    Public utility. Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state, or municipal regulations to the public: Natural gas, steam, electricity or other energy sources, water, sewage disposal, communication, including cable TV. 
    Right-of-way line. The outside boundaries of a highway right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be established by usage, dedication or by the official right-of-way. 
    Shipping containers. For the purposes of this ordinance, portable storage containers also known as conex boxes or shipping containers of any size length or condition are not permitted for human occupancy, or permanent or temporary storage, except as listed in Section 110-8-Temporary storage containers, in any residential zone of the city. Shipping containers are permitted in commercial and industrial zones for storage purposes only. 
    Special use. A special use is that activity or use that would not be appropriate generally or without restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location, or relation to the neighborhood would promote the public health, safety, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity, or general welfare. Such uses may be permitted in zoning districts as special uses, if specific provisions for such special uses are made in this chapter. This is not to be confused with a variance. 
    Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling. 
    Street. Any public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street, intersecting. Any street which joins another street at an angle, whether or not it crosses the other. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground. 
    Subdivision. The division of a parcel or tract of land into two or more lots for immediate or future use. 
    Temporary storage units. Temporary (or portable) storage units (similar to PODS) are transportable units designed and used primarily for temporary storage of building materials, household goods, personal items, construction debris and other materials for use on a limited basis on residential property. Temporary storage units connected to construction are required to be removed within two weeks of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. For the purposes of moving, the unit would be permitted for no longer than three months. 
    Townhouse. A building containing two or more attached, individually owned dwelling units with no related common areas. 
    Travel trailer. Any single-family structure ordinarily towed by a motor vehicle or self-propelled and being no longer than 36 feet, having a water closet toilet. 
    Variance. A variance is a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary undue hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area and size of structure, for size of yards and open spaces and for any rule or regulation herein involving distance, area, height, or any other dimension, to include by way of example, but not limited to, setback distances for buildings, distances of curb cuts from comers, etc.; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. This is not to be confused with special uses. 
    Yard. An open space on the same lot with a principal building, unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground upward, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street right-of-way and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
(2)  Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the principal building, situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
(3)  Yard, rear. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the site lines of the lot. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, §§ 401, 402; Ord. of 6-26-03; Ord. of 11-13-06(2), § 1; Ord. No. 2015-015 , 5-4-15; Ord. No. 2015-021 , 6-15-15) 
Sec. 110-9. - Provisions of chapter declared to be minimum requirements. 
(a)  In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of public health, safety, morals, or general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of the lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or ordinances of the City of St. Marys, Camden County, State of Georgia, and the United States of America, the most restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. 
(b)  The city shall not approve any request for any subdivision, special use, variance, or other request that is in opposition to any currently effective, legally adopted deed restriction and/or covenants which apply to the property for which the request is made. 
(1)  An applicant for any variance, special use, rezoning, or subdivision of any parcel that has covenants or deed restrictions shall submit with the application a valid copy, certified by the Clerk of Superior Court of Camden County, Georgia, of the deed restrictions and/or covenants currently in effect. 
(2)  This deed restrictions and/or covenants data will be used by the city to determine the validity of any application for variance, special use, rezoning, subdivision or other matter. 
(3)  The city is not required to enforce and will not enforce any deed restrictions, covenants or similar private legal agreements concerning the use of land in the city. 
(c)  In the event any portion of this article shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, it is the intention of the city council of the city that such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this article which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the invalid or unconstitutional section, sentence, clause, or phrase were not originally a part of the article. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1201; Ord. of 7-9-07, §§ 1, 2) 
Secs. 110-10-110-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LAND USE DISTRICTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 110-51. - Establishment of land use districts. 
    For the purposes of these regulations, St. Marys, Georgia, is hereby divided into the following land use districts: 
R-1 Single-family Residential 
R-2 Low Density Multifamily Residential 
R-3 Medium and High Density Multifamily Residential 
R-4 Single-family Residential 
M-H Manufactured Housing 
R-5 Townhouse 
PD Planned Development 
C-1 Central Business 
C-2 Highway Commercial 
C-3 Office-Apartment 
I-L Light Industrial 
I-G General Industrial 
I-A Airport Industrial 
CP Conservation-Preservation 
WD Waste Disposal 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 501) 
Sec. 110-52. - Interpretation of land use district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to boundaries of any land use districts as shown on the official zoning map, the following shall apply. 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or highway centerlines, or street or highway right-of-way lines, said boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot lines, said boundaries shall be construed as following such lines. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are indicated as being approximately parallel to the centerlines or right-of-way lines of streets, or the centerlines or right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto at the scaled distance indicated on the zoning map. 
(4)  All streets, alleys, and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be in the same zone as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, or railroad right-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary the zoning of such street, alley, or railroad right-of-way, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such centerline. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as following salt water shorelines shall be construed to follow the mean low water mark of said shorelines, and in the event of change, the boundary line shall be construed as moving with the actual low water line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of fresh water rivers, creeks, canals, lakes, inlets or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(7)  Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, the planning commission shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of passage of this chapter, the planning commission may permit the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed 75 feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the lot. 
(9)  It is the policy of the planning commission that all fresh and salt water marsh areas fall within the Conservation-Preservation Land Use District (CP). Where a boundary is indicated as following such fresh or salt marsh area the boundary line shall be construed as following the actual limits of said fresh or salt marsh. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 502) 
Secs. 110-53-110-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SPECIFIC LAND USE DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 110-61. - Intent. 
    The regulations set by this division within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly, and to each class or kind of structure or land, except when modifications are provided. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, art. 6) 
Sec. 110-62. - R-1, Single-Family Residential District. 
    District intent. This is the most restrictive residential district. The principal use of land is for single-family dwellings and related recreational, religious and educational facilities needed to provide the basic elements of a balanced and attractive residential area. These areas are intended to be defined and protected from the encroachment of uses not performing a function appropriate to the single-family residential environment. Internal stability, attractiveness, order and efficiency are encouraged by providing for adequate light, air and open space for dwellings and related facilities and through consideration of the proper functional relationship of each element. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in an R-1, Single-Family Residential District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family residences (must meet the requirements in subsection (d) below); 
(2)  Parks or playgrounds; 
(3)  Country clubs, golf courses; 
(4)  General purpose of gardening, but not the keeping of livestock, or nondomestic animals. Only laying hen chickens, but no roosters or other fowl, are permitted provided the following minimum requirements are met: A maximum of five laying hen chickens, and their enclosures, shall be 15 feet from property lines and not visible from the street. Laying hen chickens and their enclosures, must be kept in a neat, clean and sanitary condition and be well-maintained and free from offensive odors, excessive noise or any other condition that would constitute a nuisance. Enclosures must be attractive and well-maintained. 
Any citizen proposing to have laying hen chickens under this section shall submit the following documents to the building department to indicate compliance with the minimum requirements as noted above: 
a.  Sketch site plan showing location of the coop and enclosure. All distances between the proposed coop and/or enclosure and the adjacent property lines shall be clearly shown. These dimensions shall be field verified by the building department. 
b.  Signature of the citizen indicating understanding and compliance with the minimum requirements noted above, or a form provided by the building department. 
c.  A $10.00 administrative fee will be collected to offset the cost to process and verify that the applicant is in compliance with the minimum requirements as noted herein. 
d.  Change of ownership of the property shall require a new application for approval. 
(5)  Accessory buildings and structures; 
(6)  Home business offices. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
(1)  Public and private schools; 
(2)  Public buildings and utilities; 
(3)  Churches; 
(4)  Day care centers or kindergartens; 
(5)  General purpose farm or garden that includes the keeping of livestock or nondomestic animals; 
(6)  Home occupations provided that the conditions set forth in section 110-97 are met. 
(7)  Fruit and vegetable sales with outdoor sales and caretakers residence. 
a.  The establishment of fruit and vegetable sales with outdoor sales and caretakers residence shall be a special use, to include all of the application and documentation requirements noted under section 110-145. Special permit uses, as well as requirements noted under this subsection (7). 
b.  The location of any proposed use under this section shall be limited to: the existing R-1 zoned parcels along Georgia 40 (Osborne Road) between Herb Bauer Drive (the library) and the Dark Entry Creek, and the existing R-1 zoned parcels along Georgia Spur 40 (Charlie Smith Sr. Highway) between Georgia 40 and Colerain Road. 
c.  All outdoor sales as part of this special use shall not be located in present or future parking areas, and shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet as measured from the property line to provide for future parking requirements. 
d.  Permanent signage shall be as per the sign ordinance, with the following new condition that no push in type signs, or sandwich type signs, or other "temporary" signage be located within the above setback or on any pole or on any fence. 
e.  State and/or county health department and/or department of agriculture approval shall be obtained and prominently displayed on the premises and viewable by the general public. 
f.  Valid and approved City of St. Marys occupational tax license. 
g.  Fruit and vegetable sales facility shall be of coastal design and coloration. 
h.  A caretaker residence shall be permitted behind or "above the shop" for only the business owner and his/her immediate family. 
1.  If the caretaker residence is located "above the shop", the residence shall have: 
i.  Code-approved fire separation between the residence and the shop below; 
ii.  Be a minimum of 900 square feet; 
iii.  Have a fully functioning sprinkler system to applicable code; 
iv.  Have at least two exits as remote as possible from each other; 
v.  Be in compliance with all applicable codes. 
2.  If the residence is located behind and not physically connected to the shop (business use), the shop portion of the structure shall conform to the approved C-2 commercial portions of the St. Marys Building Code and Zoning Ordinance, as applicable; and the residential portion of the structure shall conform to the approved R-1 residential portions of the applicable St. Marys Building Code and Zoning Ordinance, as applicable. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in R-1, Single-Family Residential Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 75 feet 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet 
(4)  Minimum side yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: 15 feet; 
(5)  Minimum rear yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: 15 feet; 
(6)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 30 percent; 
(7)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(d)  Single-family residential standards . All single-family residences, whether site built or modular houses, must meet the following standards in the R-1 District: 
(1)  The roof shall be covered with asphalt composition shingles, 5-V metal roofing, tile materials or other suitable materials. Corrugated metal or plastic panels are prohibited. 
(2)  The exterior wall materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as conventional vinyl or metal siding, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, brick, brick veneer, concrete block, or similar materials, but shall not include smooth ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels. 
(3)  The minimum horizontal dimension of the structure as installed on the site shall be 24 feet. 
(4)  The minimum heated and cooled floor area shall be 900 square feet. 
(5)  All principal structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation. For the purposes of this section, a permanent foundation shall mean a concrete slab, concrete footers, foundation wall, pilings or post construction which complies with the city building code. 
(6)  No "manufactured housing" or "mobile homes", as those terms are defined in subsection 110-8(b), shall be permitted in this district. 
(7)  All units must meet wind loading requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Administrator and the State of Georgia adopted building codes. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 601; Ord. of 1-31-05, § 2; Amend. of 5-16-11; Ord. No. 2014-040 , 9-15-14) 
Sec. 110-63. - R-2, Single-Family Residential District. 
    District intent. This residential district is created to provide low density multifamily residential dwellings, primarily in the form of two and three dwelling unit structures. Single-family and other uses allowed in the R-1 District are also permitted. Persons residing in this district are entitled to protection from other types of uses which are detrimental to the residential characteristics of the district. The regulations which apply to this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy living environment for its residents. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in an R-2, Low Density Multifamily Residential District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District (see subsection 110-62(a)) except that single-family residences are not required to meet the standard listed in subsection 110-62(d)(5); 
(2)  Two-family dwellings (duplex); 
(3)  Three-family dwellings (triplex); 
(4)  Boardinghouses (not to exceed four units); 
(5)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Any special use permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District (see subsection 110-62(b)); 
(2)  Nursing homes. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in R-2, Low Density Multifamily Residential Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot areas: 
a.  Single-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet; 
b.  Two- and three-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet for the first two units, 4,000 square feet for each additional unit; 
c.  Boardinghouses: 10,000 square feet for the first three units plus 4,000 square feet for each additional unit. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 70 feet; 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet; 
(4)  Minimum side yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: Ten feet; 
(5)  Minimum rear yard, set back from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: 15 feet; 
(6)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 35 percent; 
(7)  Maximum building height: 35 feet; 
(8)  Minimum dwelling unit size (heated and cooled area): 
a.  Single-family dwellings: 600 square feet; 
b.  Two- and three-family dwellings: 600 square feet per unit; 
c.  Boardinghouses: none. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 602) 
Sec. 110-64. - R-3, Medium and High Density Multifamily Residential District. 
    District intent. To provide for development of condominium dwelling units and medium to high density residential development. This district's regulations are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable and healthy residential environment while discouraging the encroachment of uses capable of adversely affecting the district's character. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in R-3, Medium and High Density Multifamily Residential Districts shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the R-1, Single-Family Residential and R-2, Low Density Multifamily Residential except that single-family residences are not required to meet the standard listed in subsection 110-62(d)(5); 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings and apartments; 
(3)  Single-family condominium dwellings; 
(4)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Any special use permitted in the R-1, Single-family Residential District or R-2, Low Density Multifamily Residential District. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in R-3, Medium and High Density Multifamily Residential Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings: 10,000 square feet; 
b.  Two- and three-family dwellings: 10,000 square feet for the first two units and 4,000 square feet for each additional unit; 
c.  Condominiums and multifamily dwellings of more than three units: 8,000 square feet for the first two units; plus 2,000 square feet for each additional unit; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 16 feet for condominium dwellings; 70 feet for all other uses; 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet; 
(4)  Minimum side yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: Ten feet; provided, that condominium dwellings which are not end units may have 0 feet side yards on each side adjoining another unit. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: 15 feet; 
(6)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 55 percent for condominiums; 35 percent for all other permitted uses; 
(7)  Maximum building height: 45 feet; 
(8)  Minimum dwelling unit size: 
a.  Single-family dwellings, and condominium dwellings: (heated and cooled area) 800 square feet; 
b.  Two- and three-family dwellings: 600 square feet per unit; 
c.  Multifamily dwelling of more than three units: 600 square feet for the first six units; 500 square feet for the next six units; and 400 square feet per unit in addition to the first 12 units. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 603) 
Sec. 110-65. - R-4, Single-Family Residential District. 
    District intent. The intent of this district is to provide distinct areas within the city where single-family dwellings are allowed by right and single-family manufactured housing is allowed on a special use permit basis. It is intended that R-4 land use districts be limited to those areas of the city where manufactured homes and single-family dwellings have historically existed together but where single-family dwellings are the dominant housing type. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in the R-4, Single-Family Residential District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Single-family dwellings; except that single-family residences are not required to meet the standard listed in subsection 110-62(d)(5); 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds; 
(3)  Country clubs and golf courses; 
(4)  General purpose farm or garden, but not the keeping of livestock or non-domestic animals; 
(5)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(6)  Home business offices. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145, and if any additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Manufactured houses on individual lots; 
(2)  Public and private schools; 
(3)  Public buildings and utilities; 
(4)  Churches; 
(5)  Day care centers and kindergartens; 
(6)  Clubs, lodges, or fraternal organizations; 
(7)  General purpose farm or garden that includes the keeping of livestock or non-domestic animals; 
(8)  Home occupations. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in R-4, Single-family Residential Districts, shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at the building line: 75 feet; 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet; 
(4)  Minimum side yard, setback from street: 25 feet, setback from other property line: Ten feet; 
(5)  Minimum rear yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: 15 feet; 
(6)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 30 percent; 
(7)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(8)  Minimum dwelling unit size (heated and cooled) shall be 900 square feet. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 604) 
Sec. 110-66. - R-5, Townhouse Dwelling District. 
    District intent. To provide for the development of townhouse dwelling units at a medium density so as to provide for the amenities of open space and recreational potentials essential to family living. This district provides a choice of housing types in the community where such dwellings would be compatible with existing development. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in the R-5, Townhouse Dwelling District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the R-1 Single-family Residential District; 
(2)  Townhouse dwelling; 
(3)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Any special use permitted in the R-1, Single-family Residential District. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in R-5 Townhouse Dwelling Districts shall conform with the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 
a.  Single-family detached dwellings: 10,000 square feet; 
b.  Single-family townhouses: Not more than 16 townhouses per acre of land, each townhouse development containing at least one acre of land; 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 16 feet for single-family townhouses; 70 feet for all other uses; 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 25 feet; 
(4)  Minimum side yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: Ten feet, provided, that townhouse dwellings which are not end units may have zero feet said yards on each side adjoining another unit; 
(5)  Minimum rear yard, setback from street: 25 feet; setback from other property line: 15 feet; 
(6)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 55 percent for single-family townhouses; 35 percent for all other permitted uses; 
(7)  Maximum building height: 35 feet; 
(8)  Minimum dwelling unit size: 800 square feet. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 605) 
Sec. 110-67. - MH, Manufactured Housing District. 
    District intent. The intent of this district is to provide sound and healthy residential areas to meet the unique needs of manufactured housing residents; to encourage the consolidation of manufactured housing into parks; to protect manufactured housing residential areas from encroachment by incompatible uses; and to enhance property values in the community by providing distinctive areas for manufactured housing. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in Manufactured Housing Districts shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Manufactured housing parks; 
(2)  Single-family manufactured housing on individual lots; 
(3)  Single-family residences; 
(4)  Parks and playgrounds; 
(5)  Laundromats; 
(6)  Accessory uses and structures; 
(7)  Home occupations. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Any special use permitted in the R-1, Single-family Residential District. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in the Manufactured Housing District shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  All manufactured housing shall be built in compliance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974. 
(2)  a. 
Single-family residences and manufactured homes on individual lots must meet the lot area regulation requirements of R-1, Single-family Residential District; 
b.  All manufactured houses shall comply with the provisions of (3)j. below, Additional Requirements. 
(3)  Manufactured Housing Parks shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: Four acres; 
b.  Maximum density is seven mobile homes per acre; 
c.  Each manufactured house shall be located on a lot or space having an area of at least 4,000 square feet. 
d.  Each manufactured home lot shall be graded and drained so that rain water will not stand in pools or puddles. 
e.  The minimum distance required for the separation of a manufactured house from any other mobile home shall be: 20 feet from side to side, 20 feet from side to rear, setback from interior driveways shall be at least 15 feet. 
f.  No manufactured house shall be located closer than 30 feet from street right-of-way lines and not closer than 20 feet from property lines. 
g.  Manufactured housing parks shall have a minimum of 400 square feet of common open space per manufactured house space; however, no manufactured house park shall have less than 6,000 square feet of total common open space. 
h.  Manufactured housing parks shall have visual buffers such as shrubbery and/or fencing at least six feet in height between the park and adjacent non-manufactured home residential users. Buffer strips shall meet the requirements of section 110-92. 
i.  All manufactured house spaces shall abut on interior drive of gravel or similar all-weather surface; interior drives shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall have unobstructed access to a public street; and parking space of gravel or similar all- weather surface sufficient for automobiles shall be located on each manufactured house space. 
j.  Additional requirements: 
1.  Manufactured house placement. Manufactured house supports or pillars shall be provided not more than ten feet on center or less beginning from the front of the mobile home. Supports or pillars shall be placed upon concrete pads having minimum dimensions of 16" x 16" x 4". 
2.  Anchoring. All manufactured houses shall be anchored prior to the unit being occupied or used in any other way. The anchoring system shall be designed to resist a minimum 28 wind velocity of 90 miles per hour. 
3.  Stability. All manufactured houses shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be stabilized in such a way so as to prevent tilting of the unit. No manufactured house shall permanently rest on wheels used to transport it. 
4.  Skirts. All manufactured houses shall, prior to occupancy or other use, have skirts installed that are designed to compliment the appearance of the manufactured house and are coordinated throughout the park. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 606) 
Sec. 110-68. - PSM Port of St. Marys planned development district. 
(a)  District intent. This district is reserved for establishment of shopping centers, planned residential areas, planned industrial developments, and similar types of large-scale compatible use developments, as well as cemeteries. The regulations are designed to permit the greatest latitude possible with respect to internal site planning considerations, and location of these developments within the city in the interest of long-range development. This district encourages innovations in residential and nonresidential development so that growing demands for housing and commercial areas may be met by a greater variety in type, design and layout of buildings and by the conservation and more efficient use of open space, as well as other natural amenities. 
(1)  Specific requirements. Specific requirements may be requested by the planning commission upon review of the planned development prior to acceptance of the plot plan and written report. 
(2)  Amendments to existing PD Districts. 
a.  Any request pertaining to amending a PD District shall be considered an amendment to the zoning ordinance and shall be processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in article VII, amendments. 
b.  All information required in subsections (3) and (4) of this section shall be submitted to the planning commission and subsequently forwarded to the city council with the recommendations of the planning commission. 
c.  If the amendment is approved by the city council, all information pertaining to the proposal, presented or agreed to by the applicant shall be deemed conditions of approval. All permits granted in the PD District shall be in conformance with those conditions. 
d.  Before approval of an amended Planned Development District, the city council may require a contract with safeguards satisfactory to the city attorney guaranteeing completion of the development according to the criteria listed herein. Such guarantee may include the submission of a performance bond in an amount set by the city council. 
(3)  Plot plan for planned development. The plot plan drawn to scale (one inch equals 100 feet or one inch equals 50 feet) by a registered civil engineer, registered land surveyor, or registered architect shall show the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration. The plan shall include the following elements: 
a.  General information items: 
1.  Name of the development and developers; 
2.  A north arrow; 
3.  Date of field survey; 
4.  Tract boundary lines, dimensions, bearings and angles; 
5.  Reference points to at least two permanent monuments; 
b.  Proposed building sites and sizes; 
c.  Types of uses proposed for buildings and structures; 
d.  All property dimensions; 
e.  Platting and street systems: 
1.  Proposed reservations or dedications for streets; 
2.  Means of ingress and egress; 
3.  Access and circulation arrangements; 
4.  Off-street parking and loading facilities; 
f.  Means of protecting or screening abutting properties including proposed landscaping; 
g.  Location of proposed reservations, easements, or dedications; 
h.  If requested, two-foot vertical contour intervals. 
(4)  Written report for planned development. A written report shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development, and shall include: 
a.  A general description of the proposal; 
b.  A legal description of the site; 
c.  Proposed standards for development including: 
1.  Restrictions on the use of property; 
2.  Density, yard, and height requirement; 
3.  Restrictive covenants; 
d.  Proposed dedication or reservation of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites. 
e.  Exceptions or variations from the requirements of this chapter if any are being requested. 
f.  Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and storm drainage facilities. 
g.  Description of percentage of land within the development to be provided for various uses: 
1.  Residential. 
2.  Commercial. 
3.  Industrial. 
4.  Open space. 
5.  Utilities. 
6.  Parking and storage. 
7.  Others. 
(b)  PSM-IP Port Industrial Tract (I-P). Tract intent: The purpose of this planning area is to provide areas for manufacturing, processing, assembling, fabricating, marine facilities, intermodal transfer and related activities. 
(1)  Permitted Uses: Permitted uses allowed in Sections 110-72-Light Industrial (I-L). 
a.  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in an I-L, Light Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes, provided that such uses are conducted in such a manner that noxious odors, fumes, dust and similar particles, or noise are not emitted or detectable beyond the property lines of the lots on which the uses are located. 
1.  Building material sales yards and lumber yards, including the sales of rock, sand, gravel and the like. 
2.  Warehouse and wholesale establishments. 
3.  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses, but specifically excluding waste processing, handling or storage facilities. 
4.  Research or experimental stations and laboratories. 
5.  Radio and/or television station transmission or reception towers. 
6.  Horticultural nurseries. 
7.  Office buildings for business, governmental, professional, or other general purposes. 
8.  Repair garages provided that all business is conducted inside an enclosed building and/or inside an aesthetically pleasing barrier which will shield the business activity from view of passing motorists and surrounding property owners. 
9.  Animal hospital and/or boarding facility. 
10.  Transportation terminals. 
11.  The assembly, disassembly, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, and repairing or processing of materials and boats. Examples of such uses include, but are not limited to, printing, commercial laundry, photographic films processing, repair garages, building maintenance shops, metal work, millwork, and cabinetry work. 
12.  Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incident to permitted uses. 
b.  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145 and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
1.  Retail businesses or services provided such businesses or services are; (1) incidental to a permitted light-industrial use; and (2) located on the same premises. 
2.  Watchman or caretaker's one- or two-family dwelling provided that; (1) such dwelling is located on the premises of the permitted light-industrial use; and (2) a member of the household is employed by the industry as a watchman or caretaker. 
3.  Open yard use for the sale, rental, dismantling and/or storage of new or used salvage and/or junk materials or equipment, provided that: (1) such uses are separated from adjoining properties by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least eight feet in height; and (2) no burning of materials or products will be conducted on the premises. 
110-73 General Industrial (I-G), under the city zoning regulations as included herein both by right and conditional uses. 
a.  Uses permitted. Property and buildings within the I-G, General Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
1.  All uses permitted in the I-L, Light-Industrial District. 
2.  Industrial uses which involve manufacturing, fabrication, processing, assembly, packaging, treatment or storage of heavy materials, products or equipment; but not including junk or salvage operations or uses which may cause the conditions outlined below in subsection b.1., special permit uses, and specifically excluding waste handling, treatment or storage facilities. Waste handling, treatment or storage as part of an overall industrial process is permitted. 
3.  Accessory buildings, structures, and other uses customarily incidental to a permitted use. 
b.  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained within article V, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
1.  Any special use allowed in the I-L, Light Industrial District. 
2.  Any industrial use that may produce injurious or noxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions as a result of its operation. Such uses shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from adjoining property lines and must be in conformance with all applicable rules and regulations administered by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(2)  Marine facilities. Permitted uses: 
a.  Shipping facilities for shallow draft barges and vessels. 
b.  Import/export operations. 
c.  Container cargo. 
d.  Bulk cargo. 
5.  Break-bulk cargo. 
6.  Shipyard operations-Vessel construction and repair. 
7.  Dry dock. 
8.  Vessel berthing. 
9.  Vessel bunkering operations (fueling and replenishment). 
10.  Bunker (fuel) storage facilities limited to 100,000 gallons. 
11.  Inter-modal operations (rail, truck, maritime vessel). 
12.  Bulkheads, seawalls, piers and pier heads. 
13.  Solar and clean energy generating facilities. 
All marine facilities shall comply with state and federal standards, which are in effect at the time of such permitting, and regulations shall be determined, by the direct application to appropriate agencies. 
(3)  Maintenance areas. 
Permitted uses: 
a.  Vehicle maintenance. 
b.  Storage of vehicles and parts, boats, and landscape equipment. 
c.  Fuel storage. 
d.  Shops for woodwork, metalwork and painting. 
5.  Greenhouses, plant propagation areas and holding yards. 
6.  Mulching facility and mulch storage. 
7.  Storage of chemicals and bulk materials as permitted by law. 
8.  Offices associated with maintenance operations. 
(4)  Open space. 
(5)  Roads. 
(6)  Utilities. 
(7)  Wetlands. 
(8)  Storage facilities. 
(9)  Steam and energy production and storage facilities. 
(c)  110-68-PSM-MU Mixed Use Tract (MU). Tract intent: The purpose of this planning area is to provide an area that permits commercial uses in addition to manufacturing, assembling, fabricating, marine facilities, and related activities. 
(1)  Permitted Uses: Neighborhood Commercial: Uses permitted in city of zoning ordinance section 110-69-C-1 Central Business District. 
a.  Permitted uses: 
1.  Generally recognized retail business which supply commodities on the premises and without outdoor storage of goods, such as but not limited to groceries, drugs, clothing, notions or hardware. 
2.  Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises such as but not limited to repair shops (radios, television, shoes, upholstery, etc.), beauty parlors or barber shops, and dry cleaners. 
3.  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to banks, loan companies, insurance offices and real estate offices. 
4.  Professional services including the following: medical offices, dentists, legal and similar or allied professions. 
5.  Public offices such as post offices, city administration, museums and similar governmental offices. 
6.  Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls. 
7.  Public and private schools and religious institutions. 
8.  Waterfront facilities pertaining to normal fishing, shrimping, and boating activities. 
9.  Restaurants, grills, delicatessens, and similar eating establishments, but not including "drive-in" types. 
10.  Hotels and boardinghouses. 
11.  Accessory uses and structures. 
12.  Multifamily dwellings (must be in conjunction with a permitted commercial use(s) utilizing the first occupied floor for commercial use and meet commercial dwelling standards for the C-1 District). 
b.  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
1.  Laundromats. 
2.  Theaters. 
3.  Parking lots (private and public) not including those areas required by article IV, off-street parking and loading. 
4.  Public utility installations and buildings including water towers, electric transformer stations, and water and sewage pumping stations, provided that: no open storage is permitted at the site; the area is fenced in by a wall or fence at least six feet in height; and landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and maintained. 
(d)  PSM-CA Conservation Area Tract (MU). Tract intent: The purpose of this planning area is to provide a conservation tract to preserve wildlife habitat as identified by the wood stork colony known to exist on the property. 
(1)  Permitted uses: 
a.  Wildlife habitat. 
b.  Open space. 
1.  Landscape areas. 
2.  Stormwater ponds, drainage improvements. 
3.  Saltwater and freshwater wetlands including buffers. 
4.  Conservation areas and greenbelts. 
5.  Multi-use trails. 
6.  Perimeter buffers. 
c.  Wetlands. 
1.  Open space and buffers. 
2.  Conservation areas. 
3.  Activities in all areas as permitted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
4.  (USACOE), the Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD) and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Coastal Resource Division. 
5.  Disposal of reclaimed water as permitted by EPD. 
6.  Storm water control and management. 
7.  Marine facilities, boardwalks, trails, bridges and other permitted structures and facilities. 
8.  Forest management. 
d.  Utilities. 
(e)  PSM-GD General Design Criteria and Development Standards. 
(1)  Overall site design should be harmonious in terms of landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, sizes and street patterns, and use relationships. 
(2)  Variety in building types, heights, placement on lots and size of open spaces are encouraged if they are conducive to a safe, healthy and aesthetically pleasing living environment. 
(3)  The average density for residential dwelling units in a PD District should not exceed those set forth in the R-2 District, although it may be clustered within the PD District. 
(4)  A buffer strip with plant cover trees and/or an attractive fence should be provided by the PD District, unless the adjoining use is compatible. For instance, when one family and multifamily dwellings within a PD District are on property adjoining an R-3 District, then no buffer shall be required. 
(5)  Within a PD District, the design should include buffers suitable for screening residential areas from commercial or industrial uses when dangers of incompatibility exist. 
(6)  The parking regulations of this chapter should be accepted as minimum standards, and therefore creative improvements are encouraged. 
(7)  Shopping centers and other types of planned developments shall not have more than two access points to any one public street, unless unusual circumstances dictate the need for additional access points. 
(8)  All access points from a PD District should be located at least 100 feet from the intersection of any street. 
(9)  Proposed cemeteries must be a minimum of ten acres and must otherwise comply in all respects with O.C.G.A. § 10-14-01 et seq. together with all rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of State of Georgia. 
(f)  PSM-SP Special Permit Uses. The uses listed under the various land use districts (article II, division 2) as "special permit uses" are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses which are called permitted uses. Special permit uses are uses which would not normally be appropriate in a district unless strictly controlled as to size, lot coverage, impact on public services, visibility, traffic and other such characteristics. The following procedure is established to integrate the special permit uses with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
(1)  When applying for a building permit, the applicant shall be informed by the planning and zoning director that the proposed use is a special permit use. The matter will then be referred to the planning commission. 
(2)  An application for special permit use shall be filed with the planning and zoning director at least 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city planning commission. Such application shall contain all information requested thereon and any other material or information pertinent to the request which the planning commission may require. 
(3)  Public hearings, public hearing procedures, and standards for special use permits. 
a.  Required public hearings. No official action shall be taken on any proposed special permit unless one public hearing has been held. The public hearing shall be conducted by the planning commission. 
b.  Procedure for calling a public hearing. 
1.  Prior to scheduling required public hearings, applicants shall complete all submission requirements provided by the planning and zoning director (e.g., forms, fees, deeds, maps, etc.) 
2.  The planning and zoning director shall then notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
3.  At least 16, but not more than 44 days prior to scheduled public hearings, the planning and zoning director shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
4.  Not less than 15 days prior to the date of a public hearing, the planning and zoning director shall post in a conspicuous location on the property in question a sign which shall contain information regarding the proposed special permit; specifically the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
5.  The primary goal of conducting public hearings on proposed special permits shall be to solicit pertinent factual information which will be beneficial in helping the planning commission judge the merits of each specific proposed special permit. 
(i)  Notice to property owners. The planning and zoning director shall give notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of public hearings to be held by the planning commission on proposed special permits or supplements by mail to the owners of all properties abutting any part of the property proposed to be changed. The failure to notify as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any recommendations or action adopted hereunder. 
(ii)  Action of planning commission. The planning commission may recommend approval of the application, as submitted, to city council; or it may require conditions for approval before recommendation of approval is made to city council; or it may recommend denial of the application. These recommendations shall then be certified to the city council. 
(iii)  Action of the city council. The city council shall consider the recommendations of the planning commission, and vote on the special permit. If the proposed special permit is not recommended by the planning commission, the favorable vote of a majority of the city council shall be required to approve the special permit. The applicant and others so requesting shall receive notice of the decision of the city council through the planning and zoning director. 
(iv)  Denial of special permits. If the decision of the city council is to deny the special permit, then the same property may not again be considered for a special permit until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the special permit by the city council. 
(v)  Appeals of decision. Decisions of the city council may be appealed to the superior court as described in section 110-165 of this chapter. A written appeal must be submitted to the court within 30 days after the city council decision otherwise, its decision is final. 
c.  Procedure for conducting a public hearing. Public hearings on special permits shall be conducted in the same manner as described in section 110-165 for zoning amendments. 
d.  Standards for special use permits. A special use permit recommendation for approval may be granted by the planning commission only if the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the planning commission that: 
1.  Neither the proposed use, nor the proposed site upon which the use will be located is of such a character that the use will have significant adverse impact upon the value or quiet possession of surrounding properties greater than would normally occur from generally permitted uses in the zoning district. In reaching a determination on this standard, the planning commission or city council shall consider: 
(i)  The size of the proposed use compared with the surrounding uses; 
(ii)  The intensity of the proposed use, including amount of noise to be generated, hours of operation, expanse of pavement, and similar measures of intensity of use, compared with surrounding uses; 
(iii)  The potential generation of noise, dust, odor, vibration, glare, smoke, litter and other nuisances; 
(iv)  Unusual physical characteristics of the site, including size of the lot, shape of the lot, topography, and soils, which may tend to aggravate adverse impacts upon surrounding properties; 
(v)  The degree to which landscaping, fencing and other design elements have been incorporated to mitigate adverse impacts on surrounding properties. 
2.  City or other facilities serving the proposed use will not be overburdened or hazards created because of inadequate facilities. In reaching a determination on this standard, the commission shall consider: 
(i)  The ability of the traffic to safely move into and out of the site at the proposed location; 
(ii)  The presence of facilities to assure the safety of pedestrians passing by or through the site; 
(iii)  The capacity of the street network to accommodate the proposed use; 
(iv)  The capacity of the sewerage and water supply systems to accommodate the proposed use; 
(v)  The capacity of the storm drainage system to accommodate the proposed use; 
(vi)  The ability of the fire department to provide necessary protection services to the site and development. 
3.  The natural characteristics of the site, including topography, drainage, and relationship to ground and surface waters and floodplain, shall not be such that the proposed use when placed on the site will cause undue harm to the environment or to neighboring properties. 
e.  Conditions of special exceptions. Upon consideration of the standards listed in subsection (3)d. above, the planning commission and/or the city council may require, such conditions, in addition to those required by other provisions of this chapter, as it finds necessary to insure compliance with those standards and all other applicable requirements of this chapter. Violation of any of those conditions shall be a violation of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, specifications for: Type of landscaping/vegetation, increased setbacks and yards, specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities, hours of operation, operational controls, professional inspection and maintenance, sureties, location of piers, docks, parking and signs, and types of construction. 
(4)  All special use permits shall be licensed by the city. All initial applications for a special use permit shall be accompanied with an application fee of $500.00. If approved, the special use permits will be effective from July 1 through June 30 of each calendar year. If the special use permit application is denied, $250.00 of the initial application shall be refunded to the applicant. All existing special use permits shall expire on September 1, 2003, unless renewed pursuant to the provisions of this amended section. Thereafter, all special use permits are required to be renewed each July 1, at a cost of $75.00. 
(5)  Electronic game promotions. Performance standards and development criteria. It is the intent of the city that these supplementary regulation standards and criteria be in addition to, rather than in lieu of, any other requirement in this chapter. The following uses, whether permitted or permissible by exception, must meet the criteria listed under each use as a prerequisite for further consideration under this Zoning Code: 
a.  Any game promotions or sweepstakes utilizing electronic equipment and drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service utilizing electronic equipment. 
b.  Distance limitations. Such establishments shall not operate within 750 feet of the perimeter property line of a church or school, and 3,000 feet of the perimeter property line of a military installation. With respect to the distance between such an establishment and an established church, school, or military installation the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the building or portion of the building used as part of the proposed location to the nearest point of the grounds (property line) used as part of the church, school facilities, or military installation. The applicant for such an establishment which involves a change in location or a new location shall provide the planning department with a map of the proposed location and vicinity. The map shall show existing zoning and all locations of schools, churches and military installations within a radius of 750 feet for schools and churches and 3,000 feet for military installations of the proposed location and the actual distances thereto from the proposed location measured as required herein. The map shall include a certificate that all distance requirements as required herein as it relates to the proposed location have been met and both the map and certificate shall be prepared and executed by a land surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. 
c.  Where an establishment for game promotions or sweepstakes utilizing electronic equipment and nonconforming drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service utilizing electronic equipment exists lawfully in any zoning district prior to the passage of this provision, such use may be continued on such property as a nonconforming use subject to all restrictions, limitations and requirements set forth in chapter 22, article VII, "Electronic Game Promotions," and all other applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances for continuance of a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 607; Ord. of 11-10-03, § 3; Ord. of 5-9-16 ) 
Sec. 110-69. - C-1, Central Business District. 
    District intent. The C-1, Central Business District is intended to protect and promote suitable areas for business and commercial uses which benefit from proximity to each other; to allow certain appropriate residential uses; to encourage the eventful elimination of uses inappropriate to the central business area, and to encourage the cohesive development of a town center for the city. 
(a)  Uses permitted. 
(1)  Generally recognized retail business which supply commodities on the premises and without outdoor storage of goods, such as but not limited to groceries, drugs, clothing, notions or hardware. 
(2)  Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises such as but not limited to repair shops (radios, television, shoes, upholstery, etc.), beauty parlors or barber shops, and dry cleaners. 
(3)  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to banks, loan companies, insurance offices and real estate offices. 
(4)  Professional services including the following: medical offices, dentists, legal and similar or allied professions. 
(5)  Public offices such as post offices, city administration, museums and similar governmental offices. 
(6)  Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls. 
(7)  Public and private schools and religious institutions. 
(8)  Waterfront facilities pertaining to normal fishing, shrimping, and boating activities. 
(9)  Restaurants, grills, delicatessens, and similar eating establishments, but not including "drive-in" types. 
(10)  Brew pubs. 
(11)  Hotels and boardinghouses. 
(12)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(13)  Single-family dwellings (must meet area regulations and dwelling standards for single-family dwelling in C-1 District). 
(14)  Multifamily dwellings (must be in conjunction with a permitted commercial use(s) utilizing the first occupied floor for commercial use and meet commercial dwelling standards for the C-1 District). 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
(1)  Laundromats. 
(2)  Theaters. 
(3)  Parking lots (private and public) not including those areas required by article IV, off-street parking and loading. 
(4)  Public utility installations and buildings including water towers, electric transformer stations, and water and sewage pumping stations, provided that: no open storage is permitted at the site; the area is fenced in by a wall or fence at least six feet in height; and landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and maintained. 
(c)  Area regulations: 
(1)  Commercial uses. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, commercial uses permitted in the C-1, Central Business District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 30 feet. 
c.  Minimum front yard setback: None, however, pedestrian walkways shall be accessible. 
d.  Minimum side yard: None, unless the parcel is adjacent to a residential district in which case the minimum side yard shall be five feet. 
e.  Minimum rear yard: None, unless the parcel is adjacent to a residential district in which case the minimum rear yard shall be 15 feet. 
f.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 100 percent. 
g.  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
h.  Off-street parking and loading requirements as provided in article IV, except where the planning commission waives such requirements or portion thereof, where it finds that they are unnecessary, excessive, or impractical, given the size of the lot. 
(2)  Single-family detached dwelling uses. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, single-family detached dwellings permitted in the C-1, Central Business District shall conform to the following requirements: 
a.  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
b.  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
c.  Minimum front and rear yard setback: Ten feet. 
d.  Minimum side yard setback: five feet for single story: Seven and one-half feet for multi-story or five feet if multi-story and sprinkled for fire suppression. 
e.  Maximum percentage of lot coverage, remaining lot area after meeting required setbacks and parking requirements. 
f.  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
g.  Minimum of two off-street parking spaces required per residence. No parking spaces permitted in front yard setback area. 
h.  Only one driveway per residence. If an alley exists behind the lot, ingress and egress to the residential structure must be accessed from the alley and no curb cut will be permitted along the main roadway. 
i.  A minimum roof pitch of five × 12 is required. 
j.  Structures built within the Historic District must comply with the historic preservation ordinance. 
k.  Single-family detached dwelling standards. All single-family dwellings, whether site built or modular houses, must meet the following standards in the C-1 District: 
1.  The roof shall be covered with asphalt composition shingles, 5-V metal roofing, tile materials or other suitable materials. Corrugated metal or plastic panels are prohibited. 
2.  The exterior wall materials may include clapboards, simulated clapboards such as concrete composite siding, wood shingles, shakes, stucco, tabby, brick, brick veneer, concrete block or similar materials, but shall not include smooth ribbed or corrugated metal or plastic panels. 
3.  The minimum horizontal dimension of the structure as installed on the site shall be 24 feet. 
4.  The minimum heated and cooled floor area shall be 900 square feet. 
5.  All principal structures shall be placed on a permanent foundation. 
6.  No "manufactured housing" or "mobile homes" as those terms are defined in subsection 110-8(b), shall be permitted in this district. 
7.  All units must meet wind loading requirements of the Federal Emergency Management Administrator and the State of Georgia adopted building codes. 
8.  Any structures built within the Historic District must meet the requirements of the historic preservation ordinance. 
(3)  Commercial dwelling standards. Dwelling units are permitted on the second floor or above in buildings utilizing the first occupied floor for permitted C-1 commercial uses. Such buildings may house one or more dwelling units, for rent or sale, provided that no such unit shall be less than 450 square feet of heated and cooled area exclusive of any hallways and stairs designed for access to the unit(s). 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 608; Ord. of 11-10-03, §§ 1, 4; Ord. of 8-14-06, § 1; Ord of 11-13-06(2), §§ 2-6; Ord. No. 2015-042 , 11-2-15) 
Sec. 110-70. - C-2, Highway Commercial and Community District. 
    District intent. The intent of this district is to provide areas for commercial uses which primarily render a service to local residents or to other non-local individuals such as tourists, vacationers, truckers, workers, and commuters. The regulations applying to this district are designed to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of high traffic volume uses in an attractive and well-designed manner; 
(2)  Ensure adequate and properly designed means of ingress and egress while considering and providing for overall safe and adequate traffic flow on the highways. 
(3)  Discourage encroachment by industrial, residential or other uses which may be incompatible with the specialized character of this district. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in the C-2, Highway Commercial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the C-1, Central Business District, except residential. 
(2)  Retail and wholesale business and service establishments, including shopping centers that conduct business entirely within an enclosed building. 
(3)  Animal care facilities, animal hospital and/or boarding facility, and veterinary offices. 
(4)  Commercial recreation facilities including bowling alleys, roller or ice skating rinks, theaters (not including drive-ins), and the like. 
(5)  Hotels, tourist homes, and motels. 
(6)  Transportation terminals. 
(7)  Microbreweries. 
(8)  Public utility, installation or sub-installation, including water towers, but specifically excluding waste treatment processing or storage. 
(9)  Churches. 
(10)  Community facilities: Assembly halls, recreation centers, civic centers, local government public uses including schools, libraries, parks, playgrounds, and fire stations. 
(11)  Medical health services: Clinics and pharmacies, hospitals, medical or dental labs, offices of health service practitioners and other health services not elsewhere classified. 
(12)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(13)  Travel trailer parks. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Outdoor sales of new or second hand automobiles, manufactured or modular homes, boats, and other such items provided the lot is graded, surfaced and drained for disposal of all surface water; and provided that ingress and egress is provided to the outdoor sales area. 
(2)  Drive-in restaurants provided that outside lighting and advertisement arrangements are directed away from adjoining residential districts (if any); and parking surface areas are separated from adjoining residential districts (if any) by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least six feet in height. 
(3)  Mini-warehouse developments provided that no business activities other than the rental of storage units is conducted on the premises; and further provided that all storage on the property shall be kept within an enclosed building. 
(4)  Cable television towers/satellite dishes; and that all adjoining property which is zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3 under the City of St. Marys, Georgia, Zoning Ordinance, be separated from such towers/satellite dishes by a visual barrier, with a height of not less than five feet, nor more than seven feet. Such barrier shall be opaque, and shall prevent the free passageway and obstruct the view between such towers/satellite dishes and all adjoining properties which are zoned R-1, R-2, or R-3. 
(5)  Day care centers, kindergartens or schools provided that a minimum of 100 square feet of outdoor play area be provided for each child. Such outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height. Such use shall comply with the Georgia Department of Human Resources Regulatory Services. Such use shall provide the number of off-street parking spaces required for schools as set forth in section 110-124-Number of Parking Spaces Required, and section 110-126-Off-Street Loading and Unloading Requirements. 
(6)  Electronic game promotions. Indoor facilities operated by a licensed permit holder for game promotions or sweepstakes utilizing electronic equipment, meeting the performance standards and development criteria set forth in chapter 22, article VII, "Electronic Game Promotions", and drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service utilizing electronic equipment, meeting the performance standards and development criteria set forth under Code of Ordinances chapter 110, subsection 110-145(6), special permit uses. 
(7)  Repair garages provided that all business is conducted inside an enclosed building and/or inside an aesthetically pleasing barrier which will shield the business activity from view of passing motorists and surrounding property owners. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in the C-2, Highway Commercial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 75 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setbacks from State Route 40: 40 feet; minimum setback from other public rights-of-way: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard: Setback from property line: Seven feet; unless property is adjacent to a residential district where 15 feet is required, 25 feet from street rights-of-way. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback: Seven feet, unless property is adjacent to a residential district where 15 feet is required. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(d)  Other requirements. 
(1)  Uses permitted in C-2 Districts shall meet the standards set forth in article IV pertaining to off-street parking, loading requirements. 
(2)  Any type of business in a C-2 Zoning District must conduct all its business inside an enclosed building and/or inside an aesthetically pleasing barrier, as prescribed by the planning commission, which will shield the business activity from the view of passing motorists and surrounding property owners. All finished products of such businesses shall be kept inside an enclosed building or behind such barrier. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 609; Ord. of 5-13-96; Ord. of 11-10-03, § 2; Ord. of 11-13-06(2), § 7; Ord. of 7-18-11(2); Ord. No. 2015-028 , 8-3-15; Ord. No. 2015-042 , 11-2-15; Ord. of 3-21-16 ) 
Sec. 110-71. - C-3, Office-Apartment District. 
    District intent. The purpose of this district is to provide and protect an environment suitable for a mixture of high-density residential uses in a variety of dwelling types, other than single-family and two-family dwellings; selected office, institutional and commercial uses; and such other uses as may be necessary to and compatible with apartment and office surroundings. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in the C-3, Office-Apartment District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Animal care facilities and veterinary offices. 
(2)  Communications: Radio and TV broadcasting stations. 
(3)  Commercial recreation and entertainment: Tennis centers, club facilities. 
(4)  Community facilities: Assembly halls, recreation centers, civic centers, local government public uses including schools, libraries, parks, playgrounds, and fire stations. 
(5)  Dwellings: Condominiums, townhouses, apartments. 
(6)  Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through fast-food facilities. 
(7)  Lodging: Hotels, motels, boardinghouses. 
(8)  Religious facilities: Churches and other places of public worship. 
(9)  Retail trade facilities incidental and conducted totally within office buildings, institutional uses, motels, hotels, and apartments provided such incidental uses amount to less than ten percent of the buildings' net floor area and further provided that every public entrance to such incidental use shall be from a lobby, hallway or other interior portion of the primary structure excepting restaurants. 
(10)  Personal services: Barber and beauty shops, funeral homes, laundry and dry cleaning, and photo studios. 
(11)  Medical health services: Clinics and pharmacies, hospitals, medical or dental labs, offices of health service practitioners and other health services not elsewhere classified. 
(12)  Law offices and legal services. 
(13)  Other professional services: Engineering, finance, real estate, surveying, planning, accounting, office parks, other professional offices. 
(14)  Accessory uses and structures. 
(b)  Special permit uses. None. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses and buildings permitted in the C-3 district shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet except that dwellings shall be subject to R-3 regulations for minimum lot area. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 75 feet, except that dwellings shall be subject to the R-3 regulations for minimum lot width. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 40 feet form State Route 40; 25 feet from other streets. 
(4)  Minimum side yard: Setback from property line: Seven feet; 25 feet from street; unless the property is adjacent to a residential district where 15 feet is required. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback: Ten feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(7)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage by buildings: 35 percent except that dwelling shall be subject to the provisions of the R-3 district. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 610) 
Sec. 110-72. - I-L, Light Industrial District. 
    District intent. This district is established to provide land for light industrial uses which are not significantly objectionable with regard to noise, odor, fumes, etc., to surrounding properties. This district's regulations are designed to provide a compatible environment for uses generally classified as light industrial in nature; to protect and reserve undeveloped areas within the city that are suitable for such light industries; and to discourage encroachment by residential, commercial, or other uses that may adversely affect the industrial character of the district. Lands within this district should be located in relation to the thoroughfare network of the city, as well as rail and air if required, and designed so that uses within the district do not disrupt normal traffic flow patterns within the city. Planned industrial parks are encouraged within this district. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in an I-L, Light Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes, provided that such uses are conducted in such a manner that noxious odors, fumes, dust and similar particles, or noise are not emitted or detectable beyond the property lines of the lots on which the uses are located. 
(1)  Building material sales yards and lumber yards, including the sales of rock, sand, gravel and the like. 
(2)  Warehouse and wholesale establishments. 
(3)  Public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards, and other related uses, but specifically excluding waste processing, handling or storage facilities. 
(4)  Research or experimental stations and laboratories. 
(5)  Radio and/or television station transmission or reception towers. 
(6)  Horticultural nurseries. 
(7)  Office buildings for business, governmental, professional, or other general purposes. 
(8)  Repair garages provided that all business is conducted inside an enclosed building and/or inside an aesthetically pleasing barrier which will shield the business activity from view of passing motorists and surrounding property owners. 
(9)  Animal hospital and/or boarding facility. 
(10)  Transportation terminals. 
(11)  The assembly, disassembly, fabricating, finishing, manufacturing, packaging, and repairing or processing of materials and boats. Examples of such uses include, but are not limited to, printing, commercial laundry, photographic films processing, repair garages, building maintenance shops, metal work, millwork, and cabinetry work. 
(12)  Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incident to permitted uses. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145 and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Retail businesses or services provided such businesses or services are; (1) incidental to a permitted light-industrial use; and (2) located on the same premises. 
(2)  Watchman or caretaker's one- or two-family dwelling provided that; (1) such dwelling is located on the premises of the permitted light-industrial use; and (2) a member of the household is employed by the industry as a watchman or caretaker. 
(3)  Open yard use for the sale, rental, dismantling and/or storage of new or used salvage and/or junk materials or equipment, provided that: (1) such uses are separated from adjoining properties by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least eight feet in height; and (2) no burning of materials or products will be conducted on the premises. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in the I-L, Light Industrial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: As required to meet district's area regulations and intent. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 30 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback, from property line or street: 30 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 20 feet; from street, 30 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 611; Ord. of 5-12-08) 
Sec. 110-73. - I-G, General Industrial District. 
    District intent. It is the intent of this district to provide land for those heavy industrial uses that may create nuisances and therefore may not be compatible with uses of other zoning districts. Land within this district is intended for industrial operations which require buildings and open areas for the fabrication, processing, extraction or repair of raw materials or manufactured products. Uses in this district should be located so as to discourage the disruption and/or congestion of traffic in the city. Further, it is the intent of this district to discourage any encroachment by residential developments or other uses capable of adversely affecting the industrial character of this district. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings within the I-G, General Industrial District shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  All uses permitted in the I-L, Light-Industrial District. 
(2)  Industrial uses which involve manufacturing, fabrication, processing, assembly, packaging, treatment or storage of heavy materials, products or equipment; but not including junk or salvage operations or uses which may cause the conditions outlined below in subsection (b)(2), special permit uses, and specifically excluding waste handling, treatment or storage facilities. Waste handling, treatment or storage as part of an overall industrial process is permitted. 
(3)  Accessory buildings, structures, and other uses customarily incidental to a permitted use. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained within article V, and if additional conditions which may be required are met: 
(1)  Any special use allowed in the I-L, Light Industrial District. 
(2)  Any industrial use that may produce injurious or noxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions as a result of its operation. Such uses shall be located a minimum of 200 feet from adjoining property lines and must be in conformance with all applicable rules and regulations administered by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, uses permitted in the I-G, General Industrial District shall conform to the following regulations: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: As required to meet district's area regulations and intent. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 200 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback from property line: 40 feet; setback from street: 50 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 30 feet; setback from street: 50 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 612) 
Sec. 110-74. - I-A, Airport-Industrial District. 
    District intent. The regulations set forth in this section shall be known as the Airport Industrial District of the City of St. Marys for the purpose of restricting height of objects around the airport and promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of St. Marys by preventing the creation of hazards to airports located wholly or partially herein, thereby protecting the lives and property of the users of such airports and of occupants of land in their vicinity and preventing destruction of impairment of the utility of such airports and public investment therein; and to promote and direct the light industrial growth within the Airport-Industrial District. 
(a)  Standard and Airport Zoning Maps. 
(1)  The St. Marys Airport Zoning Map, prepared by Mayes, Sudderth & Etheredge, Inc., and dated August 9, 1993, is hereby adopted by reference as integral parts thereof, said airport together with the approach, horizontal, conical and transitional surfaces thereof shall be governed by the regulations set forth in this section. 
(2)  It is hereby found that an obstruction has the potential for endangering the lives and property of users of St. Marys Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of St. Marys Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy or impair the utility of St. Marys Airport and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared; 
a.  That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by St. Marys Airport. 
b.  That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general welfare and that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and 
c.  That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration or mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or the marking and lighting of obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire and or interests in land. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Airport: St. Marys Airport. 
    Airport elevation: The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet from sea level. 
    Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in paragraph (e) of this section. In plan the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal and conical zones: These zones are set forth in paragraph (d) of this section. 
    Board of adjustment: A board consisting of members appointed by the City of St. Marys as provided in this chapter. 
    Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
    Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
    Height: For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in this chapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Heliport primary surface: The area of the primary surface coincides in size and shape with the designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This surface is a horizontal plane at the elevation of the established heliport elevation. 
    Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane 150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
    Larger than utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet powered aircraft. 
    Nonconforming use: Any pre-existing structure, object of natural growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or an amendment thereto. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
    Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in paragraph (e) of this section. 
    Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them. 
    Precision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
    Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in paragraph (d) of this section. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point to the runway centerline. 
    Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
    Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surface to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
    Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
    Utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft or 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
    Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
(c)  Airport zones. In order to carry out the provisions of this chapter, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to St. Marys Airport. Such zones are shown on St. Marys Airport Zoning map consisting of two sheets, prepared by Mayes, Sudderth & Etheredge, Inc. and dated August 4, 1993, which is attached to this chapter and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than 3/4 mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as 3/4 mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(7)  Heliport approach zone. The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 500 feet at a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet from the primary surface. 
(8)  Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(9)  Heliport transitional zones. These zones extend outward from the sides of the primary surface and the heliport approach zones a horizontal distance of 250 feet from the primary surface centerline and the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(10)  Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(11)  Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. 
(d)  Airport zone height limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no structure shall be erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this chapter to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than 3/4 mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as 3/4 mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone. Slopes 50 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(7)  Heliport approach zone. Slopes eight feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a distance of 4,000 feet along the heliport approach zone centerline. 
(8)  Transitional zones. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(9)  Heliport transitional zones. Slope two feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the heliport approach zones and extending a distance of 250 feet measured horizontally from and at 90 degree angles to the primary surface centerline and heliport approach zones centerline. 
(10)  Horizontal zone. Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 174 feet above mean sea level. 
(11)  Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 150 feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of 350 feet above the airport elevation. 
(12)  Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height of 45 feet above the surface of the land. 
(e)  Use restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this section in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, or lighting that makes it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
(f)  Nonconforming uses. 
(1)  Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this section shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other change or alternation of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this section, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(2)  Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the City of St. Marys to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the City of St. Marys. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 613) 
Sec. 110-75. - CP, Conservation-Preservation District. 
    District intent. This district is established to preserve and control development within certain land, marsh and water areas of this city. These areas serve as wildlife refuges, possess great natural beauty, are of ecological significance, are utilized for outdoor recreational purposes, or provide needed open space for the health and general welfare of the city's inhabitants. The regulations are designed to discourage encroachment of uses capable of destroying the undeveloped character of the district. 
(a)  Permitted uses. The following uses shall be permitted in CP, Conservation-Preservation District. 
(1)  Private dock or boathouse. 
(2)  Bait house. 
(3)  Public utility lines, fire or water tower, utility substations. 
(4)  Publicly owned park, open space, or recreational facilities. 
(5)  Farms for the growing of agricultural products, or timber with dwelling unit for owner or operator. 
(6)  Wildlife refuges, including dwelling units of caretakers. 
(7)  Museum or exhibit area on or near land of historic, aesthetic, or educational significance. 
(b)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in accordance with the provisions contained in section 110-145 and if additional conditions which may be required are met. 
(1)  Dredging, or land fill must comply with state and federal regulations. Furthermore, plans for the alteration of lands in a CP District must be submitted to the city planning commission and approved by the city council. 
(c)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter uses permitted in the CP, Conservation-Preservation District shall conform to the following regulations. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: One-half acre. 
(2)  Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback from street: 50 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback from street: 30 feet; setback from property line: 20 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback from property line: 20 feet. 
(6)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: 30 percent. 
(7)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 614) 
Sec. 110-76. - WP, Waste Management District. 
    This district is established to provide land for waste treatment and disposal in locations which meet strict criteria for protection of other city land uses and the environment. The district's regulations are designed to provide a compatible environment for waste processing and treatment facilities so that they will not be encroached upon by other uses or be adversely effected by nearby conflicting land uses. Land designated for waste management should be located in relation to the transportation systems it will utilize so that it will not disrupt normal traffic flow patterns within the city. Due to the special nature of waste and the potential health and environmental risks involved, this district will be only designated on the zoning map in response to a specific rezoning request by an applicant. 
(a)  Uses permitted. Medical waste treatment and incineration, hazardous waste processing and storage, sewerage treatment, solid waste processing and recycling services. 
(b)  Area regulations. 
(1)  Minimum lot area: 5 acres. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum of a 100-foot wide thick, mature, natural or cultivate landscape buffer established and maintained along all property lines, excluding approved driveways, building sites and drainage facilities as shown on the approved development plan. 
(3)  As conditions for approval, access to the site shall be controlled and monitored by a responsible agent of the operator. 
(4)  The operator shall be responsible for the control and proper disposal of incidental litter by providing fencing or other physical barriers. 
(5)  As a condition of approval, the applicant shall develop an emergency plan which will be used should there be an accident or other problem which threatens the health or environment. The applicant shall put in place the necessary equipment, hire the necessary personnel and other requirements of the emergency plan before operation can begin. This plan must be approved by the city council. 
(6)  As a condition of approval, the applicant shall develop and have approved by the city council, a closure plan for the facility which will establish how the facility can be closed without remaining a danger to health, safety or the environment. The applicant shall post a bond or other acceptable (to the city) security with the city to finance implementation of the closure plan. 
(7)  No waste disposal district shall be located within 1,000 feet of a residence. 
(8)  No waste disposal districts shall be located within 1,000 feet of any body of water. 
(9)  All waste disposal districts shall be located so that they directly access a state highway. 
(10)  No waste disposal district shall contain wetland areas as determined by the Section 404 Army Corps Program. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 615) 
Sec. 110-77. - Recreational Vehicle and Travel Trailer Parks District (RVD). 
(a)  District intent. The intent of this RVD district is to provide an area, outside the normal use of the commercial district, on which to establish a planned, desirable living area with adequate open space and health considerations for the placement of recreational vehicles on a temporary basis. 
(b)  Uses permitted. The following uses shall be permitted within the recreational vehicle park district: 
(1)  Recreational vehicles and travel trailers. 
(2)  Playground, parks and swimming pools. 
(3)  Community buildings, intended for the use of park patrons, which may include: bathrooms, showers, kitchen, food and notion sales, meeting rooms, recreation rooms, park office, and a single-family residence for the park manager. 
(c)  Travel trailer defined. Any single-family structure ordinarily non-motorized and towed by a motor vehicle and normally being less than 40 feet in length and intended for living for short periods. 
(d)  Recreational vehicle defined. A self-contained, self-powered vehicle normally outfitted with a kitchen, bathroom (with holding tank) and sleeping space. This type of vehicle was built for the sole purpose of providing temporary living accommodations for short periods of time. 
(e)  Special permit uses. There shall be no special permit uses permitted within the RVD district. 
(f)  Temporary permits. There shall be no temporary permits issued within the RVD district. 
(g)  Variance. There shall be no variances issued within the RVD district. 
(h)  Home occupations. There shall be no home occupations permitted within the RVD district. 
(i)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this section, uses permitted in the RVD district shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Only travel trailers or recreational vehicles shall be permitted to be placed within the RVD district. 
(2)  Minimum lot area for a recreational vehicle park shall be four acres. 
(3)  Maximum density shall not exceed 15 parking lots per acre with no more than one travel trailer per parking lot. 
(4)  Each unit location shall be served by a community or public water system, sewer hookup to either a community engineered sewer (approved by the Camden County Health Department sized for the number of units it is intended to serve) or public sewer system (approved by the water department), and individual electrical hook-up connections. If water and sewer services are available as defined by the city the park shall be connected to the public services. 
(5)  The park shall be graded and drained so that rainwater will not stand in pools or puddles. A master drainage plan shall be required as part of the development review of the park. 
(6)  No unit parking space or community building shall be located closer than 30 feet to a right-of-way line or closer than 20 feet to a property line. 
(7)  All parks shall have a minimum of 150 square feet of common open space for each unit, with a minimum of 10,000 square feet of common space regardless of the number of units. 
(8)  Parks shall establish and maintain an aesthetically pleasing visual buffer such as a continuous planted buffer strip, consisting of shrubbery or a hedgerow, or a solid brick, concrete block or stone wall or a board fence that is at least six feet in height between the park and adjacent residential uses and property. Such buffer strip, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
(9)  All unit parking lot spaces shall be paved and abut on an interior paved drive; interior drives shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall have unobstructed access to a public street. A parking space for additional vehicles shall be constructed of pavement or confined gravel area sufficient enough that automobiles may be located on each unit parking lot space. One space for additional vehicles shall be provided for each five-unit parking spaces. 
(10)  All park accesses to the city's roadway shall meet the requirements for a commercial driveway. 
(11)  All units staying in the park must be attached to a pull vehicle or be self-powered so they may be removed in the event of pending inclement weather. 
(12)  All units staying in the park must be currently licensed in the state and county in which the unit is registered. 
(13)  Stability. All units shall, prior to occupancy or other use, be stabilized in such a way as to prevent tilting of the unit. 
(14)  Each park must make private arrangements for garbage collection. 
(15)  All park plans shall be submitted for approval using the same guidelines as a final plat approval for a subdivision. 
(16)  All parks must obtain an occupational license from the city to operate a business. In addition to the occupational tax, there shall be paid to the city an annual charge of $50.00 per parking lot per year paid by the park owner or operator at the time the annual occupational license is obtained or renewed. 
(17)  No building permits are needed to place a travel trailer or recreational vehicle in the park. However, the park manager must keep a log of spaces rented, to whom, license plate number and for how long, recording arrival and departure date. 
(18)  Ownership. The park owner shall be allowed to own and/or maintain no more than one unit in their park. 
(19)  Registration. The travel trailer park shall maintain a registration as required by Georgia state law and shall not allow a unit to remain longer than 180 days without re-registering said unit. 
(Ord of 9-9-02, § 2; Ord. of 3-10-03, § 1) 
Sec. 110-78. - Maritime Heritage District (MHD). 
(a)  General: The St. Marys waterfront, waterside and landside, is unique as it embodies the essence of St. Marys and is a major economic engine for the city. For the waterfront area to thrive, it needs flexibility to change, with a mixture of commercial, recreational, and educational facilities as well as accommodations to meet changing demands. At the same time, the waterside area is surrounded by a largely residential neighborhood and that the cars, buses and pedestrians it attracts can disrupt normal residential life for residents. To allow the waterfront area to thrive as an important institution in the city and also to assure residents that its existence and future plans will enhance and not disrupt the surrounding residential neighborhood, the city has created a Maritime Heritage District (MHD) overlay. 
(b)  Statement of purpose: The MHD is intended to permit commercial, museum, tourism, historical, cultural and educational uses that preserve and enhance the city's historic character, both landside and waterside, while providing opportunities for exploring the maritime heritage of the city. This zone is intended to allow for the establishment, continuation and expansion of such uses and activities in ways that will maintain and enhance compatibility with surrounding neighborhoods and the Historic District. 
(c)  Limits of Maritime Heritage District (MHD): The MHD shall include both landside and waterside areas as approved by the commissioner of DNR as per O.C.G.A. § 52-7-21. 
(1)  Area of the landside portion of the MHD shall encompass the entire land on both sides of St. Marys Street and Stable Alley between Bartlett and Cole Street and on both sides of Osborne Street between St. Marys Street and the St. Marys Railroad crossing to the north. The MHD shall follow the limits of the C-1 zone as to the depth of the MHD. Any additions to this MHD must comply with the criteria included herein, and any such change shall be made in such a way as to not disrupt the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(2)  For the purpose of this article a 25-foot buffer shall be maintained between a new city determined marsh protection line (MPL) located 25 feet preceding the DNR determined: 
a.  Upland/marsh boundary (UMB); or 
b.  The upland water boundary (UWB); or 
c.  The wrested vegetation jurisdictional line (WVJL), as applicable. 
Within this buffer area all proposed docks, buoys, bulkheads, boat ramps, marinas, marsh walks and any manmade fixed constructs shall be strictly prohibited, unless permitted through state or federal agency. There shall be no removal of live and healthy trees and shrubs. Any dead vegetation shall be removed by hand level with the ground area. Stumps shall remain in the ground and not be removed. No mechanical tractors or other wheeled/tracked vehicles shall enter this buffer zone, unless permitted through state or federal agency. 
The city shall determine the MPL. The location of the UMB or UWB or WVJL shall be as determined by DNR staff and shall remain valid for a maximum period of one year from the date of determination. After one year, a new determination shall be obtained. Access to properly permitted floating constructs shall be by approved DNR and city permit. 
(d)  Landside portion of MHD: A feasibility report, dated December 16, 2013, outlining the conceptual goals of the MHD has been created that establishes the conceptual guideline of the MHD. 
(1)  Applicant for any use in the MHD must submit to the planning commission a site plan for approval, following the provisions contained in this section and/or Zoning Ordinance No. 110. In the event of discrepancy between this overlay ordinance and any section of the Zoning Ordinance No. 110, this overlay ordinance has priority. 
(2)  Site plan shall include information required in this section as well as the Zoning Ordinance No. 110. The planning commission may provide a variance to the required information if in the best interests of the city and in accordance with the goals of the MHD. Factors to be considered by the planning commission and city council in approving any project within the MHD, including both landside and waterside. In the event of discrepancy between this overlay ordinance and any section of the Zoning Ordinance No. 110, this overlay ordinance has priority. 
(3)  General requirements for the Landside District of the MHD: 
a.  The proposed uses and layout that are in conformity with the goals of the City of St. Marys Comprehensive Plan and the Zoning Ordinance No. 110. 
b.  Activities and facilities as permitted herein shall be located on both sides of St. Marys Street and Stable Alley between Bartlett and Cole Street and on both sides of Osborne Street between St. Marys Street and the St. Marys Railroad crossing to the north. The depth of this overlay from these streets is the edge of the current C-1 zone. 
c.  Building and building elements, possessing historic significance, shall be preserved, to the extent feasible. Modifications shall not compromise the historic aspect of the building. Any proposed buildings or modifications to existing buildings shall be harmoniously related to their surroundings, to the terrain, and to the use, scale and architecture of existing buildings in the vicinity. The design guidelines as approved by council shall provide guidance for any new or renovated structures. For structures within the limits of the HPC, any changes or revisions or new structures shall be reviewed and approved by the HPC following their criteria and procedures. 
d.  All activities within the MHD shall be designed such that harmony and compatibility with surrounding residential neighborhoods and land uses, including adequate buffers, protection of pedestrian safety, provision for adequate parking, minimized impact of motor vehicles, and prevention of glare to adjacent properties from lighting on-site. Commercial and tourist traffic shall be directed to major arterials and away from residential streets. 
e.  That the use of the water and water related elements (buoys, docks, piers, etc.) are in compliance with all state and federal rules, laws, and guidelines, including but not limited to the U.S. Coast Guard, DNR, U.S. Environmental Protection Administration (EPA), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Georgia Environmental Protection Division (EPD), Department of Defense (DOD), U.S. Corp of Engineers (USCOE), the State of Florida, and City of St. Marys regulation. 
f.  For the purposes of subdivision, the minimum lot size, and frontage bulk requirements of the underlying C-1 zoning district shall remain in effect. 
(4)  Specific minimum design standards for the Landside District. The following minimum design standards shall apply to the MHD. Except as noted, these standards are the C-1 standards listed in Ordinance No. 110: 
a.  Area and bulk requirements: Existing structures located within the MHD are deemed to be conforming in terms of any existing encroachments on front, side and rear yard setbacks, maximum height and floor area ratio. Existing buildings may be enlarged, provided such expansion is consistent with the structure's exterior historic architecture and approved as part of the MHD and/or the HPC process. 
b.  Minimum front yard: Zero feet where adjacent structures are at zero feet. For other parcels, front yard setback shall be a minimum of ten feet. 
c.  Minimum side yard: Five feet for maintenance of the structure(s) or access to exit doorways, or access to rear yard trash collection equipment. 
d.  Minimum rear yard: Ten feet to provide for utility services, HVAC units, trash collection equipment, and other required building services in compliance with this section and Ordinance No. 110. 
e.  Maximum building height: 45 feet from the base flood elevation to the top of the highest ridge. 
f.  Maximum percentage floor area to site area at grade: 45 percent. 
g.  Parking for ground floor commercial shall be on street, with minimum two per apartment for each upper floor apartment on-site. 
h.  Delivery services shall be from the front (street) location. 
i.  Trash collection equipment shall be located at the rear of the structure. 
(5)  Permitted landside overlay uses: 
a.  All permitted uses in the C-1 Zone, except marine related facilities, which will be defined herein; and single-family residences at grade (upper floor apartments are permitted). 
b.  Boat docks in compliance with DNR and COE regulations. 
c.  Nautical training school - on land and on sea or on river. 
d.  Commercial aquariums. 
e.  Museums with nautical themes. 
f.  Shops with items for sale to residents and visitors alike that relate to the history of the city and maritime activities. 
g.  Festivals of a maritime nature separate from existing festivals. 
h.  Shops creating traditional or modem maritime articles on the premises and for sale, such as rope, knots, fishing gear, buoys, maps, etc. 
i.  Shops catering to the boating public such as purser supplies, and general grocery items. 
j.  Vendors for fresh seafood right off the ship. 
k.  Restaurants with outdoor seating overlooking the marsh/water. 
l.  Bait and fishing tackle sales and service shop. 
m.  Fresh seafood processing and shipping. 
n.  Parks and other recreational facilities - public and private. 
o.  Convenience store for boating and general grocery supplies for boaters. No vehicle gas/diesel sales or vehicle service (boats or wheeled vehicles). 
p.  Expanded restrooms to include pay showers, and pay laundry facilities. 
(6)  Uses not permitted in the Landside Overlay Zone: 
a.  Boat and boat trailer storage and RV storage with any portion of lot frontage facing Osborne Street or St. Marys Street. 
b.  Habitation in any RV vehicle for any period of time. 
c.  Amplified sound of any type except as approved by the city via its event approval process. 
d.  Disposal of fishing waste in any private or public trash container or dumpster without the permission of the owner. 
e.  Animals not on a leash. Animal wastes. 
f.  Single-family residences at grade. 
(7)  Special uses for the overlay zone shall follow procedures as outlined in other sections of Ordinance No. 110. 
a.  Fenced, ground level boat storage with a landscaped buffer between the fence and the property line. Boat storage "stacks" limited to a maximum of two levels of boats, with roof and buffer. 
b.  Horse drawn carriages for touring within the MHD-L District, which will include areas for overnight accommodation of horses, mules, and donkeys that pull the carriages. 
(8)  Landside buffers: Both performance buffers and standard buffers may be required. 
a.  Performance buffers: The planning commission will carefully analyze any buffers between the MHD and surrounding residential neighborhoods with particular regard to the objectives and requirements of this section. The commission may tailor buffers to include greater setbacks, landscaping, fences, walls, and berms, considering the relative heights of the uses on each side of the buffer. The commission may allow for buffering to be located on adjacent property with consent of the affected property owner (landscaping, fence, or wall, etc.). 
b.  Standard buffers. Unless otherwise approved, buffers for nonresidential uses within the MHD shall be established and maintained as per Zoning Ordinance No. 110. 
c.  Buffers may only be varied from those established in the event such variance is compatible with the objectives of this section and does not disrupt surrounding properties. Any variance shall follow the process outlined in Zoning Ordinance No. 110. 
(e)  Waterside portion of MHD: 
(1)  Waterside plan: Applicant for any use in the MHD must submit a plan to the planning commission for approval, following the provisions contained in these regulations and/or the Zoning Ordinance No. 110. In the event of discrepancy between this overlay ordinance and any section of the Zoning Ordinance No. 110, this overlay ordinance has priority. 
(2)  The use of the waterside of the MHD is strictly controlled by various agencies of the local, state, and federal government and submission of any plan to the planning commission will be required to first have the appropriate governmental agency approval attached to the application. 
(3)  For the purpose of this article, this section covers all docks, buoys, bulkheads, boat ramps, marinas, marsh walks and any manmade fixed constructs from the jurisdictional marsh line as determined in the field by DNR staff within one year of the date of determination, and extending through the water to the city limits. For the purpose of this section, these constructs shall be referred to by the term "fixed constructs". 
(4)  The area of the waterside portion of the MHD is as defined above, and shall include all public and private property within the city limits of the City of St. Marys. 
(5)  For the purpose of this article, this section covers all ships, boats, trawlers, dinghies, barges, and any manmade floating construct that floats on, is anchored through, or floats below, the water of the St. Marys River and its numerous tributaries, named or unnamed. For the purpose of this section, these constructs shall be referred to by the term "floating constructs". 
(6)  This section has no jurisdiction over the waters of the St. Marys River that are outside of the city limits or state line except for the two present and two future floating buoys which are owned by the city and permitted through the Florida DEP. As owner of the buoys, the city retains the right to enforce their use as a property owner, rather than a government agency. 
(7)  There are two major types of maritime constructs regulated by this section: floating constructs and fixed constructs. 
a.  Floating constructs: All floating constructs shall be regulated by the City of St. Marys with staff as designated by the city manager. Floating constructs will either be docked at a fixed or floating dock to the limits of the approved DNR permit for the dock attached to; or at anchor anywhere within the jurisdictional limits of the City of St. Marys; or attached to the city-owned buoys located within, and permitted by, the State of Florida. 
1.  All existing or new constructs shall submit to the Planning Department of the City of St. Marys the following data in order to use the waterside portion of the MHD. This data will be placed on a form provided by the city that will be used to issue a permit for use of the MHD. 
i.  Name of vessel. 
ii.  Length, beam, draft, and length and width of main deck, gross weight, amount of force that the ship will draw at anchor, whether at a dock or on the hook, and other data as appropriate. 
iii.  Home port of vessel. 
iv.  Name of owner of record for vessel with current land address and cell phone number. 
v.  Radio call frequency and call name and number. 
vi.  Insurance certificate valid in the state of floating construct registration or the State of Georgia or the State of Florida. 
vii.  Copy of current Coast Guard certificate as appropriate for the size of ship. Valid registration of the floating construct from the home state/country will also be required. 
viii.  Information as to most recent pump out of solid wastes, with a notation as to capacity of the on-board holding tank. This data shall be in the form of a pump out log showing where and when any wastes are discharged, either at a legally approved pump out facility, or at sea in a legal manner. This log shall be available to authorized city and state personnel at all times upon request. All pump out facilities shall have a locking Y valve and related certification that the floating construct will not discharge and treated or untreated wastes within the boundary of the MHD. 
ix.  Information as to the water holding tank and need for city water. 
2.  Based on the channel width, and the anticipated size of the vessels to be encouraged to visit the city, it is expected that only five to seven large floating constructs will be able to be permitted on the hook and in the channel. 
These large floating vessels are identified as any ship with two or more masts of 64 feet in deck length from the bow to the stern with operable sails and identified as barque, galley, barquentine, brig, topsail schooner, fore and aft schooner, ketch, junk, frigate, as well as any ship that is square rigged, or combination of both types rigging. If there is confusion or doubt as to the type of rig that this section covers, the city manager or his designated staff member shall have the authority to designate the type of sailing rig. 
Smaller floating constructs will be permitted with no minimum number as long as sufficient distance is maintained between vessels to allow for the changing of the tide. 
All vessels desiring to anchor within the harbor shall respect the presence of any buoy identifying the presence of a crab trap, and moor at least 100 feet from the visible surface location of the buoy. 
3.  Each floating construct shall register with the city upon docking at a city-owned or controlled dock or buoy or other docks. The city reserves the right to assess a fee for docking privileges. 
4.  The following floating constructs are exempt from this section: the ferries used to transmit tourists to Cumberland Island; any city authorized water taxi service to/from Fernandina; any trawler owned by Lang's (and/or their successors and assigns), or other company owning a trawler as approved by the city; any vessel owned and operated by the national park service; any floating construct using the Wheeler Street or Meeting Street boat ramps to enter and leave the landside area; and any floating construct under contract with either marinas (presently known as Lang's (east and west), their successors and assigns) and the Gateway docks. 
5.  Registration of all floating constructs shall be available at the office of the planning and building department (or other location as determined by the city council), located at 418 Osborne Street, St. Marys, GA. 31558 from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, not including approved holidays. Ships that arrive after these hours shall immediately contact the city the next day the offices are open. 
6.  The city will assist and support a ship that meets the criteria of this section that desires to seek an extension from the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act regarding live-aboard vessels. All documentation and related data shall be by the applicant for the extension. 
7.  All crabbing and fishing activities are regulated by various departments of the State of Georgia. This section shall not permit any infringement of the permit rights of any crabber or fisherman. 
b.  Fixed constructs: Each existing fixed construct shall have a valid DNR water bottom lease. Any future proposed fixed construct shall be in compliance with all lease documents, permits and approvals from the local, State of Georgia, or federal government. 
1.  Existing fixed constructs currently in operation and/or permitted shall be exempt from this section. 
2.  Each NEW and proposed fixed construct shall apply for and obtain a building permit with the fee calculated as per the currently approved city fee schedule. No city building permit will be issued without a valid and approved DNR permit attached to the application. The resident shall be solely responsible for obtaining any DNR and/or Corp of Engineers permits for any dock or bulkhead fixed construct, including floating docks. The city will provide any necessary plan approval for applicants use in obtaining these DNR and USCOE permits. 
3.  For the purpose of this section, any floating dock attached to a fixed dock shall be treated as a fixed construct. 
4.  In the event of a natural disaster or emergency, the city reserves the right to permit large vessels of any type to anchor in the MHD at no cost. 
5.  All fees shall be waived for any officially sanctioned "Tall Ship" festival as approved by the city as an event. 
(8)  Permitted uses Waterside MHD: 
a.  Fixed and floating constructs as defined herein. 
b.  Fishing/crabbing from designated docks, piers, boats in harbor, and shoreline. 
c.  Diving activities with proper safety equipment. 
d.  Ships/boats safely moored in the harbor either on the buoys or on the hook. 
e.  Docking of dingys and john boats to designated locations on the docks. 
f.  Sailing activities. 
g.  City sponsored and owned marina/docks/wharfs/buoys for use by docking agreement. 
h.  Mooring fields managed by the city and as permitted by the State of Georgia and the State of Florida. 
i.  Live-a-boards as permitted by the State of Georgia and "tied" to an adjacent marina. 
j.  Mooring locations including buoys with permit sought and issued by DNR on a case-by-case basis. 
k.  Crabbing activities by DNR permit in all water areas outside of the defined navigable channel and in accordance with minimum separation distance of 100 feet from docks, anchored boats, and the navigable channel. 
l.  City-owned pump out facilities. 
(9)  Uses not permitted in the waterside overlay zone: 
a.  The following uses within the CP zone of Ordinance No. 110 shall not be permitted within the MHD overlay zone. (NOTE: the CP zone is present in wetlands and other marsh areas outside the limits of the overlay district, and these exceptions will not apply to these portions of the CP zone.) 
1.  Farms for the growing of agricultural products, or timber including dwelling unit for owner or operator of the farm on the parcel. 
2.  While wildlife refuges will be permitted, however, the zone will not include dwelling units of caretakers. 
3.  Any use that is not related to the adjacent landside zoning of any parcel. (Note: The zones that abut the MHD-W overlay are R-1, R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2. There are no I-G, I-A, or I-L zones adjacent to the MHD-W overlay.) 
4.  Anchoring for any reason within the defined ship channel. 
5.  Dumping of trash, human wastes, fish wastes and other debris. 
6.  Abandoning of any boat/ship/barge in the waterside zoning overlay zone. 
(10)  No wake zone: All areas of the waterside overlay zone shall be designated as a "NO WAKE ZONE" for the safety of all boaters in the area. 
(11)  Enforcement: 
a.  The waterside portion of the MHD ordinance shall be enforced by the Camden County Sheriff's Department or other agency having jurisdiction for any violation for floating constructs not attached to a fixed construct. 
b.  For enforcement of any violation of fixed constructs or for floating constructs connected to fixed constructs, the City of St. Marys shall have enforcement powers that coordinate and compliment any enforcement activities of other authorities having jurisdiction. 
(f)  Incentives: City council shall reserve the right to offer any legally permitted economic and/or physical enhancements to promote or further the purposes of this section. Enhancements shall be similar to, but not limited to: 
(1)  Tax credits for landscaping; 
(2)  Tax credits for participating in the creation of a street scape along St. Marys Street; 
(3)  Tax credits on local taxes in addition to those provided by the military zone and enterprise zone programs; 
(4)  Adjustments to lot coverage requirements not to exceed 80 percent of buildable area; 
(5)  Adjustments to building height not to exceed one additional story not to exceed ten feet; 
(6)  Other potential enhancements as presented by the applicant and approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 2014-003 , 2-3-14; Ord. No. 2014-22 , 6-2-14; Ord. of 7-18-16 ) 
Sec. 110-79. - A-F General Agriculture-Forestry District. 
(a)  District intent. To provide land for the production of agricultural products such as field crops, livestock, poultry and other conventional agricultural and forestry pursuits. This A-F District is also created to assist in the conservation of natural resources by encouraging practices which will conserve soil and water resources. Utilities shall be provided by the land user or owner. The city shall not be obligated to extend public water supply and sewage disposal facilities to serve properties. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Property and buildings in an A-F General Agriculture-Forestry District shall be used for the following purposes, all as part of a PC approved site development plan: 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family. Stick built structure for owner and family or employee. 
a.  Minimum of one additional residence on first five acres. Residences must meet the minimum setback requirements of the A-F zoning district. Further residences limited to one per five acres. Site plan required. 
(2)  All agricultural-forestry land uses, buildings and activities. 
(3)  Tree farms. 
(4)  Stables, institutional, including riding ring and trails for training. 
(5)  Minor, major and rural home occupations. 
(6)  Parks, playgrounds. 
(7)  Country clubs, golf courses (public and/or private). 
(8)  Hunting, fishing clubs or lodges. 
(9)  Accessory buildings and structures (must conform to area requirements of section 110-91). 
(10)  Nurseries. 
(11)  Schools (including colleges and technical schools/colleges). 
(12)  Fishing camps. 
(13)  Religious worship facilities. 
(14)  Privately owned cemeteries/mausoleums. 
(15)  Installation of all infrastructure, utilities, roads, culverts, sidewalks etc., to access any multiple parcels of any permitted use or special permit uses created within and by this zone shall be the sole fiscal and physical responsibility of the subdivider and/or property owner(s). All infrastructure, utilities, roads, culverts, sidewalks etc., shall conform to City of St. Marys standards as defined by chapter 86 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(16)  Logging of agricultural forestry products and their byproducts is a permitted use. 
(c)  Special permit uses. The following uses may be permitted in the A-F District in accordance with provisions contained in section 110-145 as part of a PC approved site development plan: 
(1)  Utilities. 
(2)  Cellular, radio, TV, telephone or other electronic/microwave towers. 
(3)  Fill dirt operations as part of an approved plan. 
(d)  Specific uses not permitted. Without decreasing the binding effect of the prohibitions of section 110-3, the following uses are specifically prohibited in the A-F zone: 
(1)  Billboards or other signage along any existing or newly established roadways within or adjacent to the A-F zone. 
(2)  Race tracks, both animal related or vehicle related. 
(3)  Junk yards, whether by intended purpose or unintended result. 
(4)  Any industrial and commercial use, to include mulching and land fill (municipal waste) activities. 
(5)  Recycling activities. 
(6)  Parking lots for five or more vehicles, paved or unpaved, except as required for the permitted use. 
(7)  Public amphitheater. 
(8)  Solar farms or wind farms. 
(9)  Any proposed use not specifically permitted by this zoning classification is prohibited. 
(e)  Area regulations. Unless otherwise specified in this Code, uses permitted in the A-F General Agriculture-Forestry Districts shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  Minimum lot area: Five acres total (upland minimum of 2.5 acres). 
(2)  Minimum lot width, at building line: 150 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard, setback from street: 75 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard, setback from property line: 50 feet. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard, setback from property line: 50 feet. 
(6)  Maximum percentage of lot coverage: Ten percent. 
(7)  Maximum building height: 35 feet above the 100-year flood zone. 
(Ord. of 11-5-12, § 1; Ord. No. 2014-025 , 6-2-14) 
Secs. 110-80-110-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 110-91. - Accessory uses and structures. 
    In addition to the principal uses which are designated herein as being permitted within the several zoning districts established by the chapter, it is intended that certain uses customarily incidental or accessory to such principal uses shall also be permitted. For the purposes of this chapter, therefore, each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use, and, as such, may be situated on the same lot with the principal use or uses to which it serves as an accessory. 
(a)  Accessory structures and uses for residences. 
(1)  Private garage for the occupant's automobiles or vehicles. Must be noncommercial usage of garage. 
(2)  Parking area or open storage space for motor vehicles belonging to the occupant, and provided that this regulation shall not be misconstrued to mean commercial uses are allowed. 
(3)  Shed for the storage of equipment. 
(4)  Children's playhouse or play equipment. 
(5)  Private kennel, pens, or cages for occupant's pets provided it does not create a nuisance to neighbors. 
(6)  Private swimming pool with bath house or cabana provided they are not used for residential purposes. 
(7)  Structures designed and used for the purposes of shelter in the event of catastrophes. 
(8)  Noncommercial flower, ornamental shrub or vegetable garden, or greenhouse. 
(9)  Private boat dock, boat houses. 
(b)  Accessory structures and uses for church buildings. 
(1)  Religious education buildings. 
(2)  Parsonage, pastorium, or parish house, together with any use accessory to a dwelling as listed above. 
(3)  Off-street parking area for the use without charge to members and visitors to the church. 
(c)  Accessory structures and uses for commercial and industrial uses. 
(1)  Off-street parking or storage area for customer, client or employee-owned vehicles. 
(2)  Completely enclosed building for the storage of supplies, stock or merchandise. 
(3)  Light manufacturing and/or repair facility incidental to the principal use provided that odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare produced as a result of such manufacturing or repair operation is not perceptible from any boundary line of the lot on which said principal and accessory uses are located and provided such operation is not otherwise specifically prohibited in the district in which the principal use is located. 
(4)  Sheltered roofs, awnings or canopies incidental to retail and commercial use, where such use is permitted, provided that no part shall, in any case, be located any closer than the setback required for principle structures. 
(d)  Setback and other requirements for accessory uses and structures. In any district, all accessory uses and structures, shall observe all setbacks, yards, and other requirements set forth for the district in which they are located. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 701) 
Sec. 110-92. - Buffer strips. 
    Any institutional, commercial, manufactured home park, or industrial uses, off-street loading areas, or off-street parking areas for five or more automobiles shall be separated from adjoining residential property by a continuous planted buffer strip or a solid brick, concrete block or stone wall or a uniformly painted board fence. Such buffer strip, if planted, shall be composed of healthy plants which possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact planting screen not less than six feet in height, or if wood, stone, block, or brick shall not be less than six feet high. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 702) 
Sec. 110-93. - Curb cuts and access points. 
    Ingress-egress openings in concrete, asphalt, rock, or other street curbing provisions, commonly referred to as "curb cuts," as well as other means of vehicular access to and from private property shall be regulated in the several zoning districts established by this chapter in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Size and spacing of curb cuts and other access points. In no case shall a curb cut or other access point be less than nine feet nor more than 40 feet in length. No two curb cuts or other access points shall be closer than 25 feet from each other except in residential zoning districts. 
(2)  Location of curb cuts and other access points. At street intersections no curb cuts or other access points shall be located closer than 25 feet from the intersecting point of the two street rights-of-way or property lines involved (or such lines extended in case of a rounded corner), whichever is the least restrictive. 
(3)  Permits for access onto state-owned highway rights-of-way. A permit must be obtained from the Georgia Department of Transportation before curb cuts or any other point of access shall be authorized onto state-owned highway rights-of-way from abutting property. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 703) 
Sec. 110-94. - Double frontage lots. 
    On lots having frontage on more than one street, but not located on a corner, the minimum front yard setback shall be provided for each street in accordance with the regulations for the land use district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 704) 
Sec. 110-95. - Exceptions to front yard setback requirements. 
    The front yard requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any lot where the average front yard on already built-upon lots located within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such a lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on the developed lots. However, in no case shall setback be less than ten feet. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 705) 
Sec. 110-96. - Exceptions to height regulations. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, silos, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flag poles, masts and aerials. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 706) 
Sec. 110-97. - Home occupations and home business offices. 
    Profit-making activities conducted in homes fall into two classes: home occupations and home business offices. 
(a)  Home occupation. If a home occupation is permitted in a land use district, it must comply with the following requirements. It shall be allowed, with a special use permit, provided that it: 
(1)  Is carried on by a member(s) of the family residing in the dwelling unit only. One employee who is not part of the family is permitted. 
(2)  Is conducted entirely within the principal building or accessory structure. 
(3)  Utilizes not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the principal building or 100 percent of the accessory structure. 
(4)  Produces no alteration or change in the character or the exterior of the principal building from that of a dwelling. 
(5)  Involves no sale or offering for sale of any article not produced or assembled by members of the family or single employee, or any service not entirely performed by members of the family residing on the premises, or single employee. 
(6)  Creates no disturbing or offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, traffic hazard, unhealthy or unsightly condition. 
(7)  Is not visibly evident from the outside of the dwelling except by one non-illuminated sign two square feet or smaller in size. 
(b)  Home business office. If a home business office is permitted in a land use district, it must comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  There shall be no sign or external indication of the business office. 
(2)  No more than one vehicle used in the conduction of the business may be parked at the home location. Signage on this vehicle is limited to the area of the driver and passenger front doors of said vehicle. 
(3)  No material, other than office supplies may be stored on-site. 
(4)  The office may occupy no more than 25 percent of the floor area of the principal structure or accessory structure. 
(5)  The office must be located in the principle structure. 
(6)  Only residents of the dwelling may engage in work at the office. 
(7)  Customers shall not visit the office. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 707) 
Sec. 110-98. - Junk yards. 
(a)  All junk yards shall be completely screened from roads or developed areas with a solid fence or wall a minimum of eight feet, maintained in good condition as determined by the governing authority, and painted except for masonry construction, or with suitable plantings. 
(b)  No operations shall be conducted which shall cause a general nuisance or endanger the public health. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 708) 
Sec. 110-99. - Nonconformance. 
(a)  Continuation of nonconformance. Any lawful use of buildings, structure, land, or parts thereof existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter, and made nonconforming by the provisions of this chapter or any amendments thereto, may be continued, subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Nonconforming lots of record. In any district, a single lot of record at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this chapter may be built upon even though such lot fails to meet the minimum requirement for lot area or lot width which is applicable in the district, provided such lot is in a separate ownership from and not of continuous frontage with any other lot or lots in the same ownership. For the purposes of this chapter, a single lot of record is an individual parcel of land described on a deed or subdivision plan legally recorded with the Camden County Clerk of Courts. Such lot shall conform to all other requirements, not involving lot area or lot width, for the district in which it is located, unless a variance from such other requirement is obtained from the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 709) 
Sec. 110-100. - Nonconforming buildings or structures. 
(a)  No building or structure or site improvements such as parking or driveways which is nonconforming with respect to the space and bulk requirements of this chapter may be expanded, enlarged or increased in height unless such expanded or enlarged or higher portion complies with the space and bulk requirement of this chapter. 
(b)  Should any nonconforming building or structure be destroyed or damaged by any means beyond the control of the owner, it shall be rebuilt or restored within a period of one year or thereafter conform with the space and bulk requirements of this chapter unless a variance from such requirements is granted by the planning commission pursuant to section 110-145. If a nonconforming building is demolished or removed by or for its owner, it shall not be rebuilt or replaced except in conformity with the space and bulk requirements of this chapter unless a variance from such requirements is granted by the planning commission pursuant to section 110-145. 
(c)  Should any manufactured home existing in an R-1 district be destroyed or damaged by any means beyond the control of the owner, it shall be replaced or restored within a period of one year or thereafter conform with the use, building and space requirements of section 110-62. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 710; Ord. of 1-31-05, § 1) 
Sec. 110-101. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
(a)  No nonconforming use of land shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(b)  No nonconforming use of land shall be moved in whole or in part to any portion of the lot which was not occupied by such use at the effective date of the adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(c)  If any nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 711) 
Sec. 110-102. - Nonconforming use of structures. 
(a)  No existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended or expanded except in changing the use of the structure to a conforming use. 
(b)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly in existence and arranged or designed for such use at the time of the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(c)  If a nonconforming use of a structure is superseded by a permitted use, the nonconforming use shall not thereafter be resumed. 
(d)  If any nonconforming use of a structure ceases for any reason for a period of more than one year, any subsequent use of such structure shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such structure is located. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 712) 
Sec. 110-103. - Obstruction to vision at road intersections. 
    In order to minimize accidents at road intersections, the following regulations shall apply in all districts: 
(1)  Within the area formed by the rights-of-way lines of intersecting roads and a straight line connecting points on such rights-of-way lines, at a distance of 20 feet from their points of intersection there shall be a clear space with no obstruction to vision between the height of 30 inches and a height of ten feet above the average grade of road as measured at the centerline thereof. 
(2)  Requirements of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit any necessary retaining wall. 
(3)  Trees shall be permitted in the clear space provided that foliage is cut away within the prescribed height. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 713) 
Sec. 110-104. - Vision clearance at private drive and entrances intersecting with public streets. 
    At the intersection of any private drive, or entrance, or exit with a public street: no fence, wall, hedge or other planting, or sign forming a material impediment to visibility over a height of 21/2 feet shall be erected, planted, placed, or maintained. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 714) 
Sec. 110-105. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Sept. 9, 2002, repealed § 110-105 which pertained to travel trailer parks and derived from an ordinance adopted Sept. 12, 1994, § 715. 
Sec. 110-106. - Travel trailers, campers and recreational vehicles in residential districts. 
    No more than one travel trailer, camper or recreational vehicle may be stored on a residential lot. Such trailer, camper or vehicle may not be occupied, used or connected to water, sewer or electrical utilities in any residential district. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 716) 
Sec. 110-107. - Shopping centers. 
    Shopping centers are defined as a group of three or more retail stores or shops under single ownership or management or owned individually as condominium unit. Shopping centers are special permit uses in C-2 Districts and shall comply with the requirements of special uses and the following additional standards. The applicant shall submit site plan containing all the relevant information in order for the planning commission and city council to determine that the proposed development meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(1)  There shall be no more than two access points to any one public street. All entrance and exit points shall be located to afford maximum safety to traffic, provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress to and from the site and to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic. 
(2)  Any exit driveway shall be so designed so as to provide the following minimum sight distance measured in each direction. The measurements shall be from the driver's seat of a vehicle standing on that portion of the exit driveway with the front of the vehicle a minimum of ten feet behind the curbline or edge of shoulder with the height of the eye 3.75 feet to the top of an object 4.5 feet above the pavement. 
Allowable Speed Required Sight Distance 25 160 40 275 45 325 50 350 55 425  
(3)  Where a site occupies a corner of two intersecting roads, no driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the point of tangency of the existing or proposed curb radius of that site. 
(4)  No part of any driveway shall be located within a minimum of ten feet of a side property line. However, the planning commission/city council may permit a driveway serving two or more adjacent sites to be located on or within ten feet of a side property line between adjacent sites. 
(5)  If the proposed shopping center is adjacent to another shopping or commercial property, the commission/council may require connection of parking areas so as to alleviate use of the public street for traffic movement between properties. 
(6)  Driveways shall intersect the road at an angle of as near 90 degrees as site conditions will permit and in no case less than 60 degrees. 
(7)  The dimensions of the driveways shall be designed to accommodate adequate the volume and character of vehicles anticipated to be attracted daily to the development. The following are the minimum widths: 
One-way driveways: 15 feet. 
Two-way driveways: 25 feet. 
(8)  Any driveway shall be constructed with the surface approved by the commission/council. Such surface shall extend to the paved portion of the road and shall extend throughout the area defined by the required driveway dimensions. 
(9)  Where a driveway serves right-turning traffic from a parking area providing 200 or more parking spaces and the road has an average daily traffic volume exceeding 7,500 vehicles, an acceleration lane and a deceleration lane for each connection is required. Each shall be 200 feet in length and ten feet wide. A minimum 35 foot curb return radius shall be used for each. 
(10)  Parking shall be provided as required in article IV. Parking aisles which provide direct access to individual parking stalls shall be 25 feet wide. All parking shall be 90 degrees (perpendicular) from the aisles. 
a.  Parking areas should be designed to focus on major walkways, which should be fenced or marked. 
b.  Where pedestrians must cross service roads or access roads to reach parking areas, crosswalks should be clearly designed by pavement markings or signs and lighted. Crosswalk surfaces should be raised slightly to be distinguished from driveways, unless drainage problems would result. 
(11)  Exterior lighting shall meet the following requirements: 
a.  The style of the light and the light standard shall be consistent with the architectural style of the principal building. 
b.  The maximum height of freestanding lights shall be no more than 25 feet. 
c.  All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of the cone of illumination to 150 degrees. 
d.  Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent residents, the lights should be appropriately shielded. 
e.  Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings are not permitted. 
f.  The following intensity in foot-candles should be provided: 
1.  Parking lots: an average of 1.5 foot-candles throughout; 
2.  Intersections: Three foot-candles; 
3.  Maximum at property lines: One foot-candle. 
(12)  Buffer and landscaping shall be required as follows: 
a.  Buffers are fences, landscaping, berm and mounds used to minimize any adverse impacts or nuisance on the site or from adjacent areas. Buffers are required where a shopping center abuts a residential use or district. 
b.  Natural plants can be used as buffers, if the existing natural plants are sufficient to block the view of the new shopping center. New plantings can be used if they are of sufficient size and character to substantially block the view of the shopping center from the residential area. 
c.  Landscaping is required for all shopping centers. For each 24 parking spaces there shall be required adjacent to the parking spaces, three canopy trees, two understory trees and six shrubs. 
d.  Unless otherwise specifically indicated by the planning commission, all plant materials required shall meet the following minimum size standards: 
Canopy tree: 21/2 caliper. 
Understory tree: Four feet in height. 
Shrub: Two feet in height. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 717) 
Secs. 110-108-110-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE AND VEHICLE PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 110-121. - General intent and application. 
    It is the intent of these requirements that adequate parking and loading facilities be provided off the street for each use of land within the jurisdiction of this chapter. Requirements are intended to be based on the demand created by each use. These requirements shall apply to all uses in all districts. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 801) 
Sec. 110-122. - Control (via ownership or lease). 
    The control of land upon which the off-street parking is provided shall be the same as the ownership of land on which the principal use is located. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 802) 
Sec. 110-123. - Size and access. 
    Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than 18 x 10 feet exclusive of access drives or aisles and be in usual shape and condition. There shall be adequate ingress and egress to all parking spaces. Where a lot does not abut on a public or private alley or easement of access, there shall be provided an access drive leading to the parking or loading spaces. Such access drive shall not be less than ten feet in width. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 803) 
_____
Sec. 110-124. - Number of parking spaces required. 
    The number of off-street parking spaces required are set forth in the following table. Where the use of the premises is not specifically mentioned, requirements for similar uses shall apply. 
Uses Required Parking Spaces Automatic laundry 1 for each 3 laundry machines Automobile sales and service garage 1 for each 400 square feet of floor area Banks/professional offices 1 for each 300 square feet of floor area Bowling alleys 1 for each alley Churches, temples, or places of worship, funeral homes, schools, public buildings, theaters, auditoriums, areas and places of assembly, private clubs, community buildings, social halls, and lodges 1 for each 5 seats based on maximum seating capacity in principal assembly area, or 1 for each 17 classroom seats, whichever is greater Country clubs, golf clubs, gun clubs, tennis clubs and organizations designed to provide outdoor sporting or recreational activities. 1 for each 5 members Dwellings-single-family 2 for each unit Dwellings-multiple-family 11/2 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area Food store, supermarket 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area Funeral homes, mortuaries 20 for each parlor Furniture, appliance stores 1 for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area Hospitals, sanitariums, and nursing homes 1 for each 6 patient beds, plus one for each two employees Hotels and motels 1 for each guest room plus 1 for each 3 employees Manufacturing, industrial plant, research laboratory, bottling plants 1 for each 2 employees on largest shift plus 1 for each 150 sq. ft. devoted to sales or service Medical offices 4 for each doctor, plus 1 for each 2 employees Restaurants, beer parlors, night clubs 1 for each 300 sq. ft. of floor space Rooming houses, boardinghouses, dormitories, fraternities, and sororities 1 for each 2 beds Service station 2 for each pump Wholesale and warehouse concerns 1 for each 2 employees, plus 1 for each company vehicle, plus 1 for each 50 sq. ft. of retail sales or service  
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 804) 
_____
Sec. 110-125. - Location and use of off-street parking areas. 
(a)  The parking spaces for all dwellings shall be located on the same lot as the residence. 
(b)  Parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot with the main building of the principal use. 
(c)  Two or more principal uses may utilize a common area in order to comply with off-street parking requirements, provided that the number of spaces required for each use is met. 
(d)  Portions of the public right-of-way on minor streets may be allowed for maneuvering incidental to parking when determining parking area requirements for individual uses. 
(e)  On collector streets, major streets, and controlled access highways, parking facilities shall provide space outside the public right-of-way for maneuvering incidental to parking. 
(f)  Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicles and location of off-street parking areas. Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any district zoned residential (R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, M-H or and PD containing these zones) except in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  No more than one commercial vehicle per dwelling shall be permitted, the size of which shall be no larger in size than a pick-up truck, panel truck or van and is limited in size to a one-ton carrying capacity; and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted for parking in the zones noted. 
(2)  Travel trailers, hauling trailers, or boat trailers (with or without a boat), and boats without a trailer, shall be permitted if parked or stored behind the front yard setback or behind the building line of the residence or garage if the set back is a greater dimension than the front yard setback as established by ordinance, whichever is greater. 
(3)  A travel trailer shall not be occupied either temporarily or permanently while it is parked or stored in any area except in a travel park authorized under this section. 
(4)  No tractor, or trailer or combination tractor trailer (over seven wheels) shall be located or parked on pavement or on grass in any residential front or side yard and such vehicles or combination of vehicles shall not be parked in a non-residential district in an area not designated for the parking of these vehicles. Residential zoned streets shall not be used for parking of these vehicles. Any damage to curbs or sidewalks or underground utilities or grass or landscaping caused by the illegal use of these above areas for the parking of tractors, trailers and/or tractor trailer combinations will be the responsibility of the vehicle owner to either repair or compensate the city or property owner for the damage, whichever is applicable. A tractor trailer is any combination commercial trucking unit consisting of a tractor hooked up to a full trailer (a trailer entirely supported by its own wheels) or a semitrailer (a trailer which, when moving, is supported by its own wheels in the rear and by the tractor in the front). 
Moving vans/trucks, construction vans/trucks, and local delivery vans/trucks consistent with the ability of the roadway to accommodate the load are permitted only for the minimum length of time necessary to accomplish their moving, construction or delivery tasks in the zones so noted. Extended parking of these type vehicles is not permitted as per subsection (f)(4) above. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 805; Ord. No. 2013-036 , 12-16-13; Ord. No. 2015-027 , 8-3-15) 
Sec. 110-126. - Off-street loading and unloading requirements. 
    Areas suitable for loading and unloading motor vehicles in off-street locations shall hereafter be required at the time of the initial construction of any building or structure used or arranged to be used for commercial, industrial, governmental or multifamily residential purposes. Such off-street loading areas shall have access to a public alley or street and shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following requirements, the computation of which shall not be included in the off-street parking requirements. 
(1)  Amount of area required for each loading space. Each off-street loading and unloading space required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at least ten feet wide; 50 feet long and 14 feet high. Such space shall be clear and free of obstructions at all times. 
(2)  Location of off-street loading areas. Required off-street loading and unloading areas shall in all cases be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be considered as part of the area provided to satisfy off-street parking requirements as listed herein. 
(3)  Adequacy of loading area. All uses, whether specified in this chapter or not, shall provide off-street loading areas sufficient for their requirements. Such space shall be adequate so that no vehicle being loaded or unloaded in connection with normal operations shall stand in or project into a public street, walk, alley, or way. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 806) 
Sec. 110-127. - Number of off-street loading spaces. 
(a)  Retail business uses with from 4,000 to 25,000 square feet in total floor area: One space. 
(b)  Wholesale, industrial, governmental and institutional uses, including public assembly places, hospitals and educational institutions shall provide one space for the first 25,000 square feet of total floor area. For anything in excess of 25,000 square feet, such uses shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule. 
Square Feet Number of Spaces 25,000 - 50,000 2 50,000 - 100,000 3 100,000 - 200,000 4 200,000 - 350,000 5 For each additional 50,000 or fraction thereof 1 additional  
(c)  Multifamily residences with less than ten dwelling units: None. 
(d)  Multifamily residence with ten to 30 dwelling units: One space. 
(e)  Multifamily residences with more than 30 dwelling units: One space per each 30 dwelling units or fraction thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 807) 
Secs. 110-128-110-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 110-141. - Planning and zoning director. 
(a)  All provisions of this chapter shall be enforced and administered by the planning and zoning director(s). He may be provided with assistance of other people if directed by the city council. 
(b)  The duties and powers of the planning and zoning director shall be: 
(1)  To receive and check all applications for building and sign permits, certificates of occupancy, and certificates of appropriateness. 
a.  Prior to issuance of any building permit, the planning and zoning director shall ensure that the proposed building structures or use conforms in all respects to the provisions of this zoning chapter and other applicable regulations (see section 110-142). 
b.  Prior to issuance of certificate of occupancy, the planning and zoning director shall determine that the work completed is in accordance with all provisions of this chapter and other applicable regulations (see section 110-143). 
c.  For new developments proposed within the city which meet or exceed the minimum thresholds identified in the Department of Community Affairs' Procedures and Guidelines for the Review of Developments of Regional Impact (DRI), the city will comply with these intergovernmental review procedures. The city shall be allowed up to a maximum of 30 days to complete the review process for large development projects that are likely to create impacts in other local jurisdictions. The city will not take any official action to further any such developments until the DRI Review Process is completed or a maximum of 30 days has transpired from the date the completed DRI Request for Review Form was forwarded to the Coastal Georgia Regional Development Center. 
(2)  To require any information necessary to determine the conformity of the application with the regulations of this chapter. This information may include: 
a.  Proposed uses of building, structure, or land; 
b.  Placement of the building or structure on the lot; 
c.  Size, dimensions or other characteristics of the building, structure, and the lot itself, 
d.  Placement, size, and number of signs; 
e.  Number, size, and location of parking and unloading spaces; 
f.  Any other relevant information under this chapter (such as access points). 
(3)  To inspect premises of applicant's property, building or structure. 
(4)  To review for compliance with this zoning chapter and other applicable regulations are established. 
(5)  To notify any person responsible for violating the provisions of this chapter and to order the action necessary to correct the violation. He shall order: 
a.  Discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings, or structures. 
b.  Removal of illegal buildings or structures; 
c.  Discontinuance of any illegal work being done. 
(6)  To issue temporary permits, provided that the permit includes necessary safeguards for the public safety, health, and welfare. (See section 110-144). 
(7)  To inform the applicant of a building permit if his proposed use, building or structure is designated as a special permit use or requires a variance and to advise said applicant of the procedure necessary to acquire this permit. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 901) 
Sec. 110-142. - Building permit. 
(a)  Building permit required. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to begin the excavation or filling of any lot for the construction of any building, including accessory buildings, until the building official has issued a building permit for such work. 
(2)  No building permit for construction, alteration, or demolition of any structure shall be issued unless the applicant has complied with the requirements of the St. Marys Historic Preservation Commission Ordinance and the Flood Damage Ordinance. 
(b)  Issuance of a building permit. 
(1)  The applicant shall submit to the building official a dimensioned plot plan, either in sketch or to scale, indicating the size, shape and location of all buildings on the lot, either proposed or existing. Such plot plan shall be accompanied by a complete set of building plans and a completed application for a building permit. 
(2)  Applicant shall also state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and structures. 
(3)  If the proposed work conforms to the provisions of this chapter, the building official shall issue the building permit. 
(4)  If the building permit is refused, the building official shall give the applicant a written explanation of reasons for the refusal. 
(5)  Building permits expire if physical construction has not begun within six months of the initial date of issue or work has stopped for a period of six months. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 902) 
Sec. 110-143. - Certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  Certificate of occupancy required. No land or building hereafter erected or altered in its use shall be used until a certificate of occupancy has been granted. 
(b)  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Upon completion of any work for which a building permit has been granted, application shall be made to the building official for a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Within three business days of application, the building official shall make a final inspection of the property and shall issue the certificate of occupancy if the work conforms to the necessary regulations. 
(3)  If the certificate is refused, the building official must state such refusal in writing, with the cause. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 903) 
Sec. 110-144. - Temporary permit. 
    The planning and zoning director is authorized to issue temporary permits for the following uses, subject to the applicable conditions for each individual temporary use and provided it is determined such use will cause no traffic congestion, will not adversely affect surrounding areas, and will not create a nuisance nor otherwise constitute a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Any temporary use not allowed for in this chapter shall be requested from the city council. Each application for temporary permit shall be filed with the planning and zoning director a minimum of 14 days prior to the commencement of such temporary use. 
(1)  Carnival or circus, in approved open areas, for a period not to exceed three weeks. Such application shall be accompanied by documentation in a form acceptable to the planning and zoning director establishing adequate public liability insurance coverage and current safety inspection reports. 
(2)  Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure, in an approved open area, for a period not to exceed 40 days and 40 nights. 
(3)  Open lot sale of Christmas trees, in the approved area, for a period not to exceed 45 days. 
(4)  Contractor's office and equipment sheds, for a period of 12 months, provided that such office is placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 904; Ord. of 3-10-03, § 1) 
Sec. 110-145. - Special permit uses. 
    The uses listed under the various land use districts (article II, division 2) as "special permit uses" are so classified because they more intensely dominate the area in which they are located than do other uses which are called permitted uses. Special permit uses are uses which would not normally be appropriate in a district unless strictly controlled as to size, lot coverage, impact on public services, visibility, traffic and other such characteristics. The following procedure is established to integrate the special permit uses with other land uses located in the district. These uses shall be reviewed and authorized or rejected under the following procedure: 
(1)  When applying for a building permit, the applicant shall be informed by the planning and zoning director that the proposed use is a special permit use. The matter will then be referred to the planning commission. 
(2)  An application for special permit use shall be filed with the planning and zoning director at least 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city planning commission. Such application shall contain all information requested thereon and any other material or information pertinent to the request which the planning commission may require. 
(3)  Public hearings, public hearing procedures, and standards for special use permits. 
a.  Required public hearings. No official action shall be taken on any proposed special permit unless one public hearing has been held. The public hearing shall be conducted by the planning commission. 
b.  Procedure for calling a public hearing. 
1.  Prior to scheduling required public hearings, applicants shall complete all submission requirements provided by the planning and zoning director (e.g., forms, fees, deeds, maps, etc.) 
2.  The planning and zoning director shall then notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
3.  At least 16, but not more than 44 days prior to scheduled public hearings, the planning and zoning director shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
4.  Not less than 15 days prior to the date of a public hearing, the planning and zoning director shall post in a conspicuous location on the property in question a sign which shall contain information regarding the proposed special permit; specifically the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
5.  The primary goal of conducting public hearings on proposed special permits shall be to solicit pertinent factual information which will be beneficial in helping the planning commission judge the merits of each specific proposed special permit. 
(i)  Notice to property owners. The planning and zoning director shall give notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of public hearings to be held by the planning commission on proposed special permits or supplements by mail to the owners of all properties abutting any part of the property proposed to be changed. The failure to notify as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any recommendations or action adopted hereunder. 
(ii)  Action of planning commission. The planning commission may recommend approval of the application, as submitted, to city council; or it may require conditions for approval before recommendation of approval is made to city council; or it may recommend denial of the application. These recommendations shall then be certified to the city council. 
(iii)  Action of the city council. The city council shall consider the recommendations of the planning commission, and vote on the special permit. If the proposed special permit is not recommended by the planning commission, the favorable vote of a majority of the city council shall be required to approve the special permit. The applicant and others so requesting shall receive notice of the decision of the city council through the planning and zoning director. 
(iv)  Denial of special permits. If the decision of the city council is to deny the special permit, then the same property may not again be considered for a special permit until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the special permit by the city council. 
(v)  Appeals of decision. Decisions of the city council may be appealed to the Superior Court as described in section 110-165 of this chapter. A written appeal must be submitted to the court within 30 days after the city council decision otherwise, its decision is final. 
c.  Procedure for conducting a public hearing. Public hearings on special permits shall be conducted in the same manner as described in section 110-165 for zoning amendments. 
d.  Standards for special use permits. A special use permit recommendation for approval may be granted by the planning commission only if the applicant establishes to the satisfaction of the planning commission that: 
1.  Neither the proposed use, nor the proposed site upon which the use will be located is of such a character that the use will have significant adverse impact upon the value or quiet possession of surrounding properties greater than would normally occur from generally permitted uses in the zoning district. In reaching a determination on this standard, the planning commission or city council shall consider: 
(i)  The size of the proposed use compared with the surrounding uses; 
(ii)  The intensity of the proposed use, including amount of noise to be generated, hours of operation, expanse of pavement, and similar measures of intensity of use, compared with surrounding uses; 
(iii)  The potential generation of noise, dust, odor, vibration, glare, smoke, litter and other nuisances; 
(iv)  Unusual physical characteristics of the site, including size of the lot, shape of the lot, topography, and soils, which may tend to aggravate adverse impacts upon surrounding properties; 
(v)  The degree to which landscaping, fencing and other design elements have been incorporated to mitigate adverse impacts on surrounding properties. 
2.  City or other facilities serving the proposed use will not be overburdened or hazards created because of inadequate facilities. In reaching a determination on this standard, the commission shall consider: 
(i)  The ability of the traffic to safely move into and out of the site at the proposed location; 
(ii)  The presence of facilities to assure the safety of pedestrians passing by or through the site; 
(iii)  The capacity of the street network to accommodate the proposed use; 
(iv)  The capacity of the sewerage and water supply systems to accommodate the proposed use; 
(v)  The capacity of the storm drainage system to accommodate the proposed use; 
(vi)  The ability of the fire department to provide necessary protection services to the site and development. 
3.  The natural characteristics of the site, including topography, drainage, and relationship to ground and surface waters and floodplain, shall not be such that the proposed use when placed on the site will cause undue harm to the environment or to neighboring properties. 
e.  Conditions of special exceptions. Upon consideration of the standards listed in subsection (3)d. above, the planning commission and/or the city council may require, such conditions, in addition to those required by other provisions of this chapter, as it finds necessary to insure compliance with those standards and all other applicable requirements of this chapter. Violation of any of those conditions shall be a violation of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, specifications for: Type of landscaping/vegetation, increased setbacks and yards, specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities, hours of operation, operational controls, professional inspection and maintenance, sureties, location of piers, docks, parking and signs, and types of construction. 
(4)  Where the city council authorizes the issuance of a special permit use for the use of land or building, as listed in article II, "Land Use Districts", that special permit shall be issued only to the applicant/entity requesting the special permit use and only for the specific use presented at the public hearing. No special permit use shall be transferable or assignable, even if the use is unchanged. 
(5)  All special use permits shall be licensed by the city. All initial applications for a special use permit shall be accompanied with an application fee of $500.00. If approved, the special use permits will be effective from July 1 through June 30 of each calendar year. If the special use permit application is denied, $250.00 of the initial application shall be refunded to the applicant. All existing special use permits shall expire on September 1, 2003, unless renewed pursuant to the provisions of this amended section. Thereafter, all special use permits are required to be renewed each July 1, at a cost of $75.00. 
(6)  Electronic game promotions. Performance standards and development criteria. It is the intent of the City of St. Marys that these supplementary regulation standards and criteria be in addition to, rather than in lieu of, any other requirement in this chapter. The following uses, whether permitted or permissible by exception, must meet the criteria listed under each use as a prerequisite for further consideration under this Zoning Code: 
(a)  Any game promotions or sweepstakes utilizing electronic equipment and drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service utilizing electronic equipment. 
(b)  Distance limitations. Such establishments shall not operate within 750 feet of the perimeter property line of a church or school, and 3,000 feet of the perimeter property line of a military installation. With respect to the distance between such an establishment and an established church, school, or military installation the distance shall be measured by following a straight line from the nearest point of the building or portion of the building used as part of the proposed location to the nearest point of the grounds (property line) used as part of the church, school facilities, or military installation. The applicant for such an establishment which involves a change in location or a new location shall provide the planning department with a map of the proposed location and vicinity. The map shall show existing zoning and all locations of schools, churches and military installations within a radius of 750 feet for schools and churches and 3,000 feet for military installations of the proposed location and the actual distances thereto from the proposed location measured as required herein. The map shall include a certificate that all distance requirements as required herein as it relates to the proposed location have been met and both the map and certificate shall be prepared and executed by a land surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Where an establishment for game promotions or sweepstakes utilizing electronic equipment and nonconforming drawings by chance conducted in connection with the sale of a consumer product or service utilizing electronic equipment exists lawfully in any zoning district prior to the passage of this provision, such use may be continued on such property as a nonconforming use subject to all restrictions, limitations and requirements set forth in chapter 22, article VII, "Electronic Game Promotions", and all other applicable provisions of the Code of Ordinances for continuance of a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 905; Ord. of 6-26-03; Ord. of 7-18-11(2)) 
Sec. 110-146. - Variances. 
    The planning commission may authorize a variance from the requirements of this chapter where it can be shown that owing to special and unusual circumstances related to a specific lot, strict application of the chapter would cause an undue or unnecessary hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow the use of property for a purpose not authorized within the zone in which the proposed use would be located. In granting a variance the planning commission may attach conditions which it finds necessary to protect the best interests of the surrounding property or vicinity and otherwise achieve the purpose of this chapter. 
(a)  Conditions governing the granting of a variance. A variance may be granted by the planning commission only in the event that all of the following circumstances exist: 
(1)  Exceptional or extraordinary circumstances apply to the property which do not apply generally to other properties in the same vicinity, and result from lot size or shape, topography or other circumstances over which the owners of the property since enactment of this chapter have had no control. 
(2)  The variance is necessary for the preservation of a property right of the applicant substantially the same as owners of their property in the same zone or vicinity possess. 
(3)  The variance would not materially be detrimental to the purposes of this chapter, or to property in the same zone or vicinity in which the property is located, or otherwise conflict with the objective of any city plan or policy. 
(4)  The variance requested is the minimum variance which would alleviate the hardship. 
(5)  The lot in question cannot yield a reasonable return unless the variance is granted. 
(6)  The need for a variance is not the result of the action of the owner or previous owner. 
(b)  Public hearings, public hearing procedures, and procedures for taking action for variances. 
(1)  Required public hearings. No official action shall be taken on any proposed variance unless a public hearing has been held by the planning commission. Public hearings on variances shall be conducted in the same manner as described in section 110-165 for zoning amendments. 
(2)  Procedure for calling a public hearing. 
a.  Prior to scheduling the required public hearings, applicants shall first complete all submission requirements provided by the planning and zoning director (e.g., forms, fees, deeds, maps, etc.) A complete application must be filed 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting where the application will be heard. The application shall be accompanied by a list of names and addresses of all abutting property owners of the property for which the variance is requested, shown by the current City of St. Marys tax maps and indexes thereof. The failure to notify as provided in this section shall not invalidate any recommendations or actions adopted hereunder. 
b.  The planning and zoning director shall then notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
c.  At least 16 but not more than 44 days prior to scheduled public hearings, the planning and zoning direc-tor shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
d.  Not less than 15 days prior to the date of a public hearing, the planning and zoning director shall post in a conspicuous location on the property in question a sign which shall contain information regarding the proposed variance; specifically the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
e.  No official action shall be taken on a proposed variance by the planning commission until after the required public hearing has been conducted. The commission may conduct more than one hearing if the commission deems necessary. 
f.  The primary goal of conducting public hearing on proposed variance shall be to solicit pertinent factual information which will be beneficial in helping the planning commission judge the need of the proposed variance. 
1.  Notice to property owners. The planning and zoning director shall give notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of public hearing to be held by the planning commission on proposed variance by mail to the owners of all properties abutting any part of the property proposed to be changed. The failure to notify as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any recommendations adopted hereunder. 
2.  Action by planning commission. The planning commission shall render its decision based on the variance criteria in (a) above. The planning and zoning director shall notify the applicant within five days of the decision by the planning commission. 
3.  Time limit on permit for variance. Authorization of a variance shall be void after one year unless substantial construction has taken place. However, the planning commission may extend authorization for an additional period not to exceed one year, on request. 
4.  Denial of variances. If the decision of the planning commission is to deny the variance, then the same property may not again be considered for a variance until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the variance by the planning commission. 
5.  Appeals of decision. Decisions of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council as described in section 110-162 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 906) 
Sec. 110-147. - Official zoning map interpretation. 
    The planning commission shall provide interpretations of the official zoning map. In case of any question as to the location of any boundary line between zoning districts, a request for interpretation of the official zoning map may be made of the planning commission, and a determination shall be made by the planning commission. All decisions rendered in this regard by the planning commission shall be based on criteria set forth in section 110-52 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 907) 
Sec. 110-148. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not less than $2.00 and no more than $50.00 for each offense. Each day the violation continues constitutes a separate offense and will be treated as such. In the case of any building, structure, or land used, erected, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of this chapter, the building official or any other appropriate authority, or any city resident who would be damaged by such violation, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action to prevent the use of the building, structure, or land. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 908) 
Secs. 110-149-110-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - APPEALS 

Sec. 110-161. - Administrative appeals. 
    Appeals of planning and zoning director decisions shall be made to the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1001) 
Sec. 110-162. - Appeals of planning commission decisions. 
    Appeals of planning commission decisions shall be made to the city council. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the planning and zoning director within 15 days of the decision of the planning commission. The city council decision is final. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1002) 
Sec. 110-163. - Powers of the planning commission. 
    The powers of the planning commission shall be to hear and decide appeals where an error is alleged in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the planning and zoning director in the enforcement of any section or article adopted in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1003) 
Sec. 110-164. - Powers of the city council. 
    The powers of the city council shall be to hear and decide appeals on any action or ruling of the planning commission pursuant to this chapter except actions of the planning commission involving rezoning of land or amending the zoning ordinance so long as any such appeal is filed within 15 days after the planning commission has rendered its decision. Written notice of appeal shall be filed with the planning and zoning director and the appellate body. If the appeal is not filed within the 15-day period, the decision of the planning commission shall be final. If the appeal is filed, the city council shall receive a report and recommendation thereon from the planning commission and shall hold a public hearing on the appeal. 
    In exercising the above powers, the city council may reverse, affirm, or modify the orders or requirements, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and may issue the necessary permit. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1004) 
Sec. 110-165. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2013-009 , adopted Apr. 15, 2013, repealed § 110-165, entitled "Court review of city council action", which derived from § 1005 of an ordinance adopted Sept. 12, 1994. 
Secs. 110-166-110-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 110-181. - Authority to amend this chapter. 
(a)  The city council may amend the regulations, restrictions, boundaries, or any provision of this chapter. 
(b)  No amendment shall become effective until it is first submitted to and approved or disapproved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1101) 
Sec. 110-182. - Initiation of amendments. 
(a)  An amendment may be initiated by the city council or planning commission by introduction of a resolution, or by any official, board or other person by presentation of a petition to the planning commission. 
(b)  A map amendment (rezoning) may be initiated by the owner of the property proposed for rezoning by filing an application with the planning and zoning director. The planning commission or city council may also initiate such map amendments. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1102) 
Sec. 110-183. - Application for amendments. 
(a)  The proper form on which to file an application for any amendment (map or text) shall be obtained from the planning and zoning director. The completed application and all applicable fees required to cover legal and administrative costs as set forth in the schedule of fees shall be filed with the planning and zoning director at least 32 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the request will be heard. Any recommendation purporting to be an application for amendment shall be regarded as mere notice of intention to seek an amendment until such time as it is made on the required form. Such application shall have attached to it the information required in paragraph (b) below. 
(b)  Application for a map amendment (rezoning) shall contain all of the following information in order to be considered complete. (See section 110-68 concerning application requirements for PD, Planned Development District rezonings.) 
(1)  A plot plan or survey to scale showing existing and proposed structures and uses, access drives, parking, and loading areas, easements, utilities existing zoning and future land use designation and any other supportive documentation required by the planning commission; 
(2)  A list of all adjacent property owners as shown on the tax rolls; and 
(3)  Any additional information the applicant feels to be pertinent. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1103; Ord. No. 2015-034 , 9-21-15) 
Sec. 110-184. - Site development plan. 
(a)  Applications to rezone property for R-2, R-3, R-5, MH, C-1, C-2, C-3, I-L, I-G, or WP shall be accompanied by a detailed site development plan prepared by a registered surveyor containing the following elements: 
(1)  Survey plat showing the dimensions of the property to be rezoned. 
(2)  Location and dimension of existing structures, rights-of-way, marshlands, boundaries, watercourses, lakes and jurisdictional wetlands. 
(3)  Location and dimensions of proposed development including structures, types of uses, access drives, setbacks, easements, etc. 
(4)  Location and dimensions of proposed recreational areas and buffer zones, if any. 
(5)  Location and size of water, sewer, and drainage facilities. 
(6)  In the case of residential developments, proposed number of dwelling units and net acres available for building. 
(7)  In the case of commercial and industrial developments, proposed off-street parking and loading areas, signage, and outdoor lighting 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1104) 
Sec. 110-185. - Public hearings, public hearing procedures, and rezoning standards. 
(a)  Required public hearings. No official action shall be taken on any proposed zoning amendment unless a public hearing has been held. The public hearing shall be conducted by the planning commission. 
(b)  Procedure for calling a public hearing. 
(1)  Prior to scheduling of the required public hearing, applicants shall first complete all submission requirements provided by the planning and zoning director (e.g., forms, fees, deeds, maps, etc.) Incomplete applications shall not be processed. There shall be no amendment made to the application once submitted. 
(2)  The planning and zoning director shall then notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of the required public hearing. 
(3)  At least 16 but not more than 44 days prior to scheduled public hearings, the planning and zoning director shall publish in the newspaper of general circulation, notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
(4)  If a zoning amendment is for the rezoning of property, the public notice shall also include: 
a.  The location of the property; 
b.  The present zoning classification of the property; and 
c.  The proposed zoning of the property. 
(5)  Not less than 15 days prior to the date of a public hearing, the planning and zoning director shall post in a conspicuous location on the property in question a sign which shall contain information regarding the proposed rezoning; specifically the date, time, place, and purpose of the public hearing. 
(6)  No official action shall be taken on a proposed amendment by the city council until after the required public hearings have been conducted. 
(7)  The primary goal of conducting public hearings on proposed zoning amendments shall be to solicit pertinent factual information which will be beneficial in helping the planning commission and the city council judge the merits of each specific proposed amendment. 
a.  Notice to property owners. The planning and zoning director shall give notice of the date, time, place, and purpose of public hearings to be held by the planning commission on proposed amendments or supplements by mail to the owners of all properties abutting any part of the property proposed to be changed. The failure to notify as provided in this section, shall not invalidate any recommendations adopted hereunder. 
b.  Action of the planning commission. The planning commission may recommend that the application be granted as requested, or it may recommend a modification of the zoning amendment requested in the application, or it may recommend that the application not be granted. These recommendations shall then be certified to the city council. 
c.  Action of the city council. The city council shall consider the recommendations of the planning commission, and vote on the proposed amendment to the text or map of the zoning ordinance after the planning commission's public hearing. If the proposed amendment is not recommended by the planning commission, the favorable vote of a majority of the entire membership (four members) of the city council shall be required to make the amendment effective. The applicant and others so requesting shall receive notice of the decision of the city council through the planning and zoning director. 
d.  Conditions of zoning amendments. Upon consideration of the standards listed in subsection (d) below, the planning commission may recommend and the city council may require, such conditions, in addition to those required by other provisions of this chapter, as it finds necessary to ensure compliance with those standards and all other applicable requirements of this chapter. Violation of any of those conditions shall be a violation of this chapter. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, specifications for: type of landscaping/vegetation, increased setbacks and yards, specified sewage disposal and water supply facilities, hours of operation, operational controls, professional inspection and maintenance, sureties, location of piers, docks, parking and signs, and types of construction. 
e.  Denial of rezonings. If the decision of the city council is to deny the rezoning of property, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the defeat of the rezoning by the city council. 
f.  Action by city to rezone property to original zoning. When a map amendment (rezoning) has been granted for a parcel of land on request by the owner or his agent, and no building permit has been applied for within 12 months of the date of the rezoning, the planning and zoning director will initiate action to rezone the parcel to its original zoning. The procedures in this article shall be followed, except that no fees shall be paid. 
(c)  Procedure for conducting a public hearing. 
(1)  All public hearings on zoning amendments shall be chaired by either the chairman of the planning commission or the mayor of St. Marys or their designees. 
(2)  A secretary shall record the proceedings of the public hearing. If requested by any party, verbatim transcripts of the public hearing can be prepared, but, only if requested and purchased in advance by the requesting party. 
(3)  The record of the public hearing and all evidence submitted at the public hearing shall be recorded as such and become a permanent part of the particular zoning amendment's file. 
(4)  The chairman of the planning commission or his or her designee shall preside at the public hearing and shall identify speakers, maintain order, and conduct the public hearing. 
(5)  The process to be followed in conducting these hearings shall be as follows: 
a.  The presiding officer shall open the hearing by stating the specific zoning amendment being considered at the public hearing. 
b.  When there are a large number of individuals wishing to testify at a hearing, the presiding officer may invoke time limits on individual speakers. In such cases, these time limits shall apply to all speakers. 
c.  The presiding officer shall recognize the individual parties wishing to testify on present evidence and allow them to present this information. 
d.  Once all parties have concluded their testimony, the presiding officer shall adjourn the public hearing. 
(d)  Zoning amendment criteria. The following will be used to determine whether the rezoning is appropriate. 
(1)  The zoning request should be a logical extension of a zoning boundary which would improve the pattern of uses in general area. 
(2)  The request should not be an illogical extension of a zone boundary which would intrude a damaging salient of a commercial, industrial, or high-density apartment use into a stable neighborhood of well-maintained single-family homes, and would be likely to lead to neighborhood deterioration, the spread of blight, and requests for additional zoning of a similar nature which would expand the problem. 
(3)  The request should not result in spot zoning or generally be unrelated to either existing zoning or the pattern of development of the area. 
(4)  The request should not create traffic which would traverse established single-family neighborhoods on minor streets, leading to congestion, noise and traffic hazards. 
(5)  The request should conform to the general expectations for population growth and distribution. 
(6)  The request should not limit options for the acquisition of future planned public facility sites, roads, open-space, etc. 
(7)  This request should not result in major changes in existing levels of public service, and/or fiscal stability. 
(8)  This request should not achieve short term goals at the expense of long-term, development goals. 
(9)  This request should not result in changes to market values and/or tax rates of nearby properties. 
(10)  The request should conform to policies and recommendations contained in the St. Marys/Camden County Comprehensive Plan. 
A negative finding on one or more of these criteria shall not preclude approval of a rezoning. 
(Ord. of 9-12-94, § 1105) 
APPENDIX A - ATLANTA GAS LIGHT COMPANY FRANCHISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 10, 1998, deleted former app. A in its entirety and added provisions as a new app. A to read as herein set out. Former app. A consisted of the Atlanta Gas Light Company franchise, adopted Feb. 24, 1986. 
Amendments to the current franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise agreement. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Power to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

Sec. 1. - Grant of franchise. 
    The right is hereby granted to the Atlanta Gas Light Company, its successors and assigns, to lay, construct, extend, maintain, renew, replace, and repair gas pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances, and all appurtenances and appendages under, along, through, and across any streets, avenues, roads, public highway, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places in the city, and to use and occupy the said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places for the purpose of therein laying, constructing, extending, maintaining, renewing, replacing and repairing mains, pipes, valves, manholes, service boxes, posts, lamps, structures, appliances, and all appurtenances and appendages thereto, used and useful for the manufacture, transmission, distribution, and sale of gas within and through the present or future territorial limits of the city, such right, when exercised as herein provided, to continue until midnight on February 24, 2016. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Base year" means the fiscal year ending September 30, 1998. 
(b)  "Base year franchise fee factor" means the total franchise fees paid during the base year divided by the design day capacity as recorded by the company on the last day of the base year. 
(c)  "Design day capacity" means the sum of the individual capacity in dekatherms (Dt) attributable to all firm customers located within the city limits of the city, as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
(d)  "Firm customers" means all residential and business customers who purchase gas service that ordinarily is not subject to interruption or curtailment. 
(e)  "Fiscal year" means the 12 months ending September 30, of each year. 
(f)  "Inflation index" means the percentage in the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers as published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics, or any successor index, for the period from September 30, 1997, to the beginning of the then current fiscal year. The percentage shall be reduced by any productivity factor adjustment for the same time period determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission for the company. 
Sec. 3. - Franchise fee. 
    The total dollar amount of franchise fees paid by the company to the city shall be calculated as follows: 
    The current fiscal year total franchise fee shall equal the product of the design day capacity and the current franchise fee factor. The current franchise fee factor shall be equal to the product of the base year franchise fee factor and one plus the inflation index expressed as a decimal to three significant digits. 
    The following formula quantifies the payment: 
FF c = FFF by × (1 + (CPI-PFA)) × DDC c 
where 
FF c = total franchise fees due the city for the current fiscal year. 
FFF by = the base year franchise fee factor. 
CPI-PFA = the Inflation Index based on the cumulative change in the Consumer Price Index less the productivity factor adjustment determined by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
DDC c = the design day capacity as of the last day of the previous fiscal year. 
FFF by = FF by / DDC by 
where 
FF by = the total franchise fees paid in the base year 
and 
DDC by = the design day capacity of the base year. 
Sec. 4. - Responsibility for payment of franchise fee. 
    The company as the holder of the franchise privilege hereunder is responsible for the payment of all franchise fees payable hereunder, and shall file such reports and returns as required by the franchise ordinance as modified by this amendment. In addition, the company shall report annually the names of all gas marketers for which company is transporting natural gas on the distribution system within the city. 
    The franchise fee payments required hereunder shall be in lieu of any franchise fee license fee, occupation tax, or other payment for use of the rights of way by the company for the provision of gas service, but shall not prohibit imposition of a license fee or an occupation tax on gas marketers. 
Sec. 5. - Quarterly payments. 
    Effective for the fiscal year 1999, and for each fiscal year thereafter during the term of the franchise ordinance, the company shall remit to the city quarterly franchise fee installments. The installments shall equal to one-fourth of the total annual franchise fee calculated in accordance with this ordinance. 
    The quarterly payment is due and payable on or before the 30th day following the last day of each calendar quarter. 
Sec. 6. - Annual return. 
    The company shall file a return with its first quarterly installment in each fiscal year showing the details of the calculation of the annual franchise fee. 
Sec. 7. - Delay of inflation adjustment. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision in this ordinance, any inflation adjustments shall be made to the franchise fee only when the company changes its rates. 
Sec. 8. - Scope of ordinance. 
    All rights herein granted and authorized shall be subject to and governed only by this ordinance; provided, however, that the city expressly reserves unto itself all of its police power to adopt general ordinances necessary to protect the safety and welfare of the general public in relation to the rights hereby granted not inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Sec. 9. - Excavations; restoration, interference with traffic. 
    Atlanta Gas Light Company, grantee upon making an opening upon any of the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places in the city, for the purpose of laying, repairing, or maintaining has mains, shall use due care and caution to prevent injury to persons, and shall replace and restore all public ways to their former condition as nearly as practicable, and within a reasonable time, and shall not unnecessarily obstruct or impede traffic upon the streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other places of said city. 
Sec. 10. - Indemnity of city. 
    Atlanta Gas Light Company shall save and keep harmless the said city from any and all liability by reason of damage or injury to any person or persons whomsoever, on account of negligence of the grantee in the installation, maintenance, and repair of its mains and pipelines along said streets, avenues, roads, public highways, alleys, lanes, ways, parks, and other public places in the city provided the grantee shall have been notified in writing of any claim against the city on account thereof and shall have been given ample opportunity to defend the same. 
APPENDIX B - CAMDEN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH COMPANY, INC. FRANCHISE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Camden Telephone and Telegraph Company, Inc. franchise, as adopted by the mayor and council on October 6, 1955. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise agreement. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. 1. - Grant of franchise. 
    That Camden Telephone and Telegraph Company, Inc., a corporation organized and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia, its successors and assigns, is hereby granted a franchise to: 
1.  Erect, construct, operate and maintain a telephone system, consisting of, without limitations, exchange, toll and trunk lines, conduits, cables, poles, voice radio circuits and exchanges, with all fixtures and appurtenances necessary or advisable for the proper operation and maintenance of said system within the limits of the city for the purpose of supplying telephone service for public and private use therein and to provide telephone service through and beyond the city; 
2.  To use the streets alleys and other public places of the city, or the space below such streets, alleys or public places, for such purposes; 
3.  To make all necessary excavations in the public streets, alleys or other public places and thoroughfares and to cut and trim all trees and shrubbery insofar as may be necessary to keep them clear of the poles and wires of the telephone system. 
    This franchise is granted on the following terms: 
    FIRST: The telephone system shall be constructed, operated and maintained in a proper workmanlike manner so as to afford all reasonable safeguards to the public. 
    SECOND: All poles and wires, forming part of said telephone system, shall be so erected, operated and maintained so as not to interfere with traffic on the traveled portions of the streets or alleys; and the corporation, after the construction or reconstruction of said telephone system or any part thereof, shall restore to their original condition the streets or alleys on which said poles or wires have been erected, constructed, operated or maintained insofar as this is practicable. 
    THIRD: The corporation will comply with all reasonable rules and regulations of the city and with all ordinances now in effect or which may hereinafter be passed insofar as they do not conflict with the terms or purposes of the franchise herein granted. 
(Ord. of 10-6-55, § 1) 
Sec. 2. - Exclusive use of facilities. 
    The city hereby obligates that it will not grant any other person, corporation or partnership any right to obstruct any of the streets or public places of said city with signs, canopies, or similar obstructions that would interfere with the free, perfect and uninterrupted right to the use and enjoyment and the exercise of the rights herein conferred upon said corporation during the term of this instrument. 
(Ord. of 10-6-55, § 2) 
Sec. 3. - Effective date. 
    This franchise shall take effect from and after the time of passage and shall continue for a period of 35 years from said date. 
(Ord. of 10-6-55, § 3) 
APPENDIX C - GEORGIA POWER COMPANY FRANCHISE[1] 
  
    ORDINANCE GRANTING PERMISSION AND CONSENT to Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns, to occupy the streets and public places of the City of St. Marys, Georgia in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending poles, lines, cables, equipment, and other apparatus for transmitting and distributing electricity, and for other purposes. 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Georgia Power Company franchise, as adopted by the mayor and council on December 4, 1975. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise agreement. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Power to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

Sec. I. - Grant of franchise. 
    Be it ordained by the governing authority of the City of St. Marys, Georgia (hereafter referred to as the "city"), that the authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Georgia Power Company, its successors, lessees and assigns (hereafter referred to as the "company"), for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the said city as from time to time the company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as it may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of the company, to insure safe and efficient service. 
(Ord. of 12-4-75, § I) 
Sec. II. - Conditions imposed. 
    Be it further ordained that the rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
1.  The company shall pay into the treasury of the city (a) on or before the first day of March, 1976, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential and commercial rate schedules (as prescribed by the Georgia public service commission) within the corporate limits of the city during the year 1975 and four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under industrial rate schedules (as so prescribed) within the corporate limits of the city during the period July 1-December 31, 1975, and (b) on or before the first day of March of each year thereafter during the term of this franchise a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial and industrial rate schedules (as so prescribed) within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year, on condition that, in the event the city shall grant to any other entity the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions hereof. 
2.  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage of gross sales above provided for. 
3.  The company shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the said city would otherwise be liable. 
4.  The company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained herein, however, shall require the company to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
(Ord. of 12-4-75, § II) 
Sec. III. - Acceptance. 
    Be it further ordained that the company shall, within 90 days from the approval of this ordinance, file its written acceptance of the same with the clerk of said city, so as to form a contract between the parties. 
(Ord. of 12-4-75, § III) 
ADDENDUM. - ORDINANCE AMENDING FRANCHISE[2] 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND AN ORDINANCE ADOPTED ON DECEMBER 4, 1975 GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO THE GEORGIA POWER COMPANY 
    WHEREAS O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7) grants the authority to municipalities in Georgia to make contracts with and grant franchises to public utilities, and 
    WHEREAS, on December 4, 1975, the City of St. Marys, Georgia (hereafter referred to as the "city") adopted an ordinance granting permission and consent to Georgia Power Company (hereafter referred to as the "company") and its successors, lessees, and assigns to occupy the streets and public places of the city in constructing, maintaining, operating, and extending poles, lines, cables, equipment, and other apparatus for transmitting and distributing electricity and for other purposes (said ordinance being hereafter referred to as the "1975 ordinance"); and 
    WHEREAS, on February 9, 1975, the company accepted the franchise granted in the 1975 ordinance (hereafter referred to as the "franchise"); and 
    WHEREAS, the city and the company now wish to amend the franchise to address certain issues that may arise under the franchise and to extend the term of the franchise and for other purposes; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, the city hereby adopts this ordinance amending franchise as follows: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is an ordinance adopted July 11, 2005, which amends the Georgia Power Company franchise, as adopted on December 4, 1975. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

Sec. I. - [Additional terms and conditions.] 
    Be it further ordained that in addition to the terms and conditions set forth in the 1975 ordinance, the company's occupancy and use of the streets, alleys, and public places of the city as authorized in the 1975 ordinance are subject to the following terms and conditions: 
1.  For purposes of paragraph 2 of this section I, the term "distribution facilities" means poles, lines, wires, cables, conductors, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections, and other apparatus installed by or on behalf of the company (whether before or after the adoption of this ordinance amending franchise) in the streets, alleys, or public places of the city for the purpose of distributing electricity within the present and future limits of the city. Distribution facilities do not include any of the following: (i) electric transmission lines with a design operating voltage of 46 kilovolts or greater (hereafter referred to as "transmission lines"); (ii) poles, towers, frames, or other supporting structures for transmission lines (hereafter referred to as "transmission structures:); (iii) transmission lines and related wires, cables, conductors, insulators, or other apparatus attached to transmission structures; (iv) lines, wires, cables, or conductors installed in concrete-encased ductwork; or (v) network underground facilities. 
2.  In the event that the city or any other entity acting on behalf of the city requests or demands that the company relocate any distribution facilities from their then-current locations within the streets, alleys, and public places of the city in connection with a public project or improvement, then the company shall relocate, at its expense, the distribution facilities affected by such project or improvement. The company's obligations under this paragraph 2 shall apply without regard to whether the company has acquired, or claims to have acquired, an easement or other property right with respect to such distribution facilities and shall not affect the amounts paid or to be paid to the city under the provisions of the 1975 ordinance. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this paragraph 2, the company shall not be obligated to relocate, at its expense, any of the following: (i) distribution facilities that are located on private property at the time relocation is requested or demanded; (ii) distribution facilities that are relocated in connection with sidewalk improvements (unless such sidewalk improvements are related to or associated with road widenings, the creation of new turn lanes, or the addition of acceleration/deceleration lanes); (iii) streetscape projects or other projects undertaken primarily for aesthetic purposes; or (iv) distribution facilities that are converted from an overhead configuration or installation to an underground configuration or installation. 
3.  The city and the company recognize that both parties benefit from economic development within the city. Accordingly, when it is necessary to relocate any of the company's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission structures, or other facilities) within the city, the city and the company shall work cooperatively to minimize costs, delays, and inconvenience to both parties while ensuring compliance with applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the city and the company shall communicate in a timely fashion to coordinate projects included in the city's five-year capital improvement plan, the city's short-term work program, or the city's annual budget in an effort to minimize relocation of the company's facilities. Such communication may include, but is not limited to, (i) both parties' participation in the Georgia Utilities Coordinating Council, Inc. (or any successor organization) or a local utilities coordinating council (or any successor organization) and (ii) both parties' use of the National Joint Utility Notification System (or any successor to such system mutually acceptable to both parties). 
4.  With regard to each streetscape project undertaken by or on behalf of the city, the city shall pay the company in advance for the company's estimated cost to relocate any of the company's facilities (whether distribution facilities, transmission lines, transmission structures, or other facilities) in connection with such project. For each streetscape project, the company shall estimate in good faith the amount of incremental base revenue, if any, that the company will realize as a result of new customer load or expansion of existing customer load attributable to such project; and such estimate shall be based on tariffs in effect at the time that construction of such project begins and shall not include fuel recover charges, non-electric service billings, or taxes. If such estimate indicates that the company will realize incremental base revenue, the company shall do one of the following, whichever results in greater cost savings to the city: (i) reduce the city's advance payment to the company for relocation costs by ten percent; or (ii) where the city has developed a bona fide marketing plan within 12 months after construction of such project begins, either refund the amount of the company's incremental base revenue during such 12-month period to the city or credit such amount against any future payment due from the city to the company. The city and the company acknowledge and agree that the amount of any refund or credit calculated pursuant to clause (ii) of the foregoing sentence of this paragraph 4 shall not exceed the amount of the city's advance payment to the company for relocation costs associated with such project. 
(Ord. of 7-11-05, § I) 
Sec. II. - [Right to select electric supplier.] 
    Be it further ordained that nothing contained in this ordinance amending franchise shall limit or restrict the right of customers within the corporate limits of the city to select an electric supplier as may hereafter be provided by law. 
(Ord. of 7-11-05, § II) 
Sec. III. - [Filing of amendment.] 
    Be it further ordained that the company shall, within 90 days from the approval of this ordinance amending franchise, file the company's written acceptance of the same with the clerk of the city, so as to form an amendment to the franchise between the company and the city. 
(Ord. of 7-11-05, § III) 
Sec. IV. - [Conflicting laws and ordinances repealed.] 
    Be it further ordained that upon such acceptance all laws and ordinances, and all agreements between the company and the city with respect to the company's occupancy and use of the city's streets, alleys, and public places, in actual conflict herewith be and the same shall thereupon stand repealed and terminated, respectively. 
(Ord. of 7-11-05, § IV) 
APPENDIX D - OKEFENOKE RURAL ELECTRIC MEMBERSHIP CORPORATION FRANCHISE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Okefenoke Rural Electric Membership Corporation franchise, as adopted by the mayor and council on October 13, 1986. Amendments to the franchise are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original franchise agreement. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Power to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); limitation on action expanding the power of regulation over any business activity regulated by the Public Service Commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6. 

Sec. I. - Grant of franchise. 
    Be it ordained by the governing authority of the City of St. Marys, Georgia (hereafter referred to as the "city"), that the authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to Okefenoke REMC, its successors, lessees and assigns (hereafter referred to as "Okefenoke"), for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city within the present and future limits of the said city as from time to time Okefenoke may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for light, heat, power and other purposes for which electric current may be or become useful or practicable for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as it may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of Okefenoke to ensure safe and efficient service. 
Sec. II. - Conditions imposed. 
    Be it further ordained that the rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
1.  Okefenoke shall pay into the treasury of the city (a) on or before the first day of March, 1987, a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial and industrial rate schedules within the corporate limits of the city during the period September 1-December 31, 1986, and (b) on or before the first day of March of each year thereafter during the term of this franchise a sum of money equal to four percent of the gross sales of electric energy to customers served under residential, commercial and industrial rate schedules within the corporate limits of the city during the preceding calendar year, on condition that, in the event the city shall grant to any other entity the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions hereof. 
2.  The amount, if any, of any tax, fee, charge or imposition of any kind required, demanded or exacted by the city on any account, other than ad valorem taxes on property and license taxes on the sale of home appliances, shall operate to reduce to that extent the amount due from the percentage of gross sales above provided for. 
3.  Okefenoke shall fully protect, indemnify and save harmless the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the said city would otherwise be liable. 
4.  Okefenoke shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power by the city. Nothing contained herein, however, shall require Okefenoke to surrender or limit its property rights created hereby without due process of law, including adequate compensation, for any other purpose at the instance of the city or for any purpose at the instance of any other entity, private or governmental. 
Sec. III. - Acceptance. 
    Be it further ordained that Okefenoke shall, within 90 days from the approval of this ordinance, file its written acceptance of the same with the clerk of said city, so as to form a contract between the parties. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the city used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 10- 6-55 1-3 App. B, § 1-App. B, § 3  7-11-57 9-5003 70-17  9- 4-58(1) 7-401-7-403 70-18  9- 4-58(2) 7-503(2) 70-5 7-503(4) 70-6 7-503(6) 70-7 7-506(2)(a) 70-8 7-507(3) 70-17  9-25-58 8-301-8-304 46-66-46-69 8-306 46-70  2- 4-60 1 2-126 3 2-127  2- 2-61 I 22-151 III, IV 22-152, 22-153  1- 3-63 2-211-2-214 12- 4-75 I App. C, § I II, III App. C, § II, App. C, § III  9- 7-78 101-105 86-1-86-5 201, 202 86-21, 86-22 301-312 86-31-86-42 401-404 86-61-86-64 501-503 86-81-86-83 601-604 86-101-86-104 701, 702 86-121, 86-122 art. 8 86-141 901, 902 86-151, 86-152  4- 5-79(1) 98-14  4- 5-79(2) 98-76-98-81 98-101-98-106 98-126-98-134 98-156-98-171 1 90-157 2 90-156  6-21-79(Res.) 2-186-2-189  7-19-79(1) 8-112 14-3 8-1101 14-1 8-1114 14-8  7-19-79(2) 1 22-212 2, 3 22-211 4-14 22-213-22-223 11-13-79(Res.) 2-146, 2-147 12- 6-79 1 22-77 2 22-76 3, 4 22-78, 22-79 6-11 22-81-22-86  1- 5-81 1 22-182 2 22-181 3-6 22-183-22-186 8-10 22-188 11-14 22-189-22-192  8-11-81(1) 70-10  8-11-81(3) 18-2  9- 3-81 2-212, 2-213 18-1 11- 5-81 1.1 22-111 2.1 22-112 3.1 22-113 4.1-4.3 22-114-22-116 5.1-5.5 22-117-22-121 6.1, 6.2 22-122, 22-123 7.1, 7.2 22-124, 22-125 8.1-8.3 22-126-22-128 11-23-81 2-146, 2-147 12- 3-81 1-6 90-42-90-47  4- 1-82 86-22, 86-32  5- 6-82 1-7 50-36-50-42 10- 4-83(1) 90-131-90-136 10- 4-83(2) II 94-1 10-18-83 1 102-26 2-12 102-28-102-38 12-20-83 1-3 90-101-90-103  2-21-84 102-28 1-8 2-37-2-44 10-15 2-46-2-51 16-24 2-53-2-61  7- 3-84 90-48  8-25-84 I 62-38 II(A), II(B) 62-61, 62-62 II(D) 62-63, 62-64 II(E)-II(I) 62-65-62-69 III(A)-III(E) 62-86-62-90 IV(A)-IV(R) 62-111-62-128 V(A)-V(C) 62-151-62-153 V(E) 62-154 VI 62-178 VI(A), VI(B) 62-176, 62-177 VII 62-37 XI 62-36  9- 4-84 94-2  7- 2-85 1-1-1-1-1-6 46-36-46-41  8-20-85 18-1 11- 5-85 1 70-11 11-19-85 2-36  2-24-86 1 App. A, § 1 1(a) App. A, § 1(a) 2-8 App. A, § 2-App. A, § 8  9-22-86 90-71 90-75 2 90-73 3, 4 90-74 10-13-86 18-1 12-22-86 18-1  1- 7-87 70-16  3-23-87 1-3 98-13  6-22-87 1-17-19, 1-17-20 106-36, 106-37 1-17-30 106-38 1-17-32, 1-17-33 106-40, 106-41 1-17-50, 1-17-51 106-42, 106-43 1-17-52, 1-17-53 106-45, 106-46 1-17-72 106-44 10-26-87 1 82-61 3-7 82-63-82-67 11- 9-87 2-231-2-236  1- 7-88 1 26-2 2 26-1 3, 4 26-3, 26-4  5-23-88 art. 1, § A-art. 1, § D 54-37-54-40 art. 2 54-36 art. 3, § A 54-41 art. 3, § B 54-43 art. 3, § C 54-71 art. 3, § D 54-66 art. 3, § E 54-42 art. 3, § F 54-68 art. 3, § G 54-67 art. 3, § H 54-74 art. 4, § A 54-69 art. 4, § B 54-72 art. 4, § C 54-70 art. 4, § D 54-73 art. 5, § A-art. 5, § E 54-91-54-95 10-24-88 46-36 46-41 58-1 70-1-70-4 70-15 78-2, 78-3 78-36-78-39 78-42 78-66-78-80 11-14-88 I 74-37 II 74-36 III, IV 74-38, 74-39 11-28-88 I 10-1 II 10-2 III-VIII 10-4-10-9 VIII 10-10 X-XIV 10-11-10-15  1- 5-89(1) 1 10-3  1- 5-89(2) 86-151  3-23-89 1-18 26-36-26-53  3-27-89 101 6-36 201 6-37 301 6-38 401 6-39  7-24-89 62-120 62-128  8-28-89 106-43, 106-44 11-13-89 1-5 2-256-2-260 12-11-89(1) 1-6 10-46-10-51 12-11-89(2) II 46-92, 46-93 IV-VI 46-94-46-96 VIII 46-98 IX(C) 46-99  1-22-90 86-41(2)  2-12-90(1) 98-2-98-8 98-10 98-56  2-12-90(2) 2-42, 2-43 2-45, 2-46 2-49-2-52  3-11-91 106-44  6-10-91 1, 2 70-12, 70-13 3 70-5 4, 5 70-14, 70-15  7- 8-91 1-8 46-121-46-128  8-12-91 38-2 10-14-91 2-43 1, 2 90-36 3-7 90-37-90-41  4-13-92 90-71 90-75  5-11-92 94-3  7-13-92 1-6 90-131-90-136 10-12-92 1, 2 90-36 3-6 90-37-90-40  1-11-93 94-4  3- 1-93 78-66  4-26-93 94-4  5-10-93 1 
2 2-311 
42-36 
42-38 3 42-61 42-66 3(a)-3(c) 42-62-42-64 4 42-37 5 42-91 5(a)-(c) 42-94 5(d) 42-65 5(e), 5(f) 42-92, 42-93  8-23-93 1 46-38  9-13-93 106-39  9-13-93(Res.) 1-3 26-5  9-27-93 art. 1, § A-art. 1, § D 54-37-54-40 art. 2 54-36 art. 3, § A 54-41 art. 3, § B 54-43 art. 3, § C 54-71 art. 3, § D 54-66 art. 3, § E 54-42 art. 3, § F 54-68 art. 3, § G 54-67 art. 3, § H 54-74 art. 4, § A 54-69 art. 4, § B 54-72 art. 4, § C 54-70 art. 4, § D 54-73 art. 5, § A-art. 5, § E 54-91-54-95 10-25-93 2-37 2-40  4-25-94 1 38-3  5- 9-94(1) (A), (B) 90-72, 90-73  5- 9-94(2) 1 14-1 2 14-66 3(a), (b) 14-2 3(c) 14-36 3(d)-(f) 14-37 3(g), (h) 14-38 3(i) 14-39 4 14-68 4(a) 14-67 4(c) 14-69 5, 6 14-5, 14-6 7 14-8 8 14-7 9(a), 9(b) 14-3, 14-4  5-23-94 1, 2 70-18  9-12-94 art. 1 110-1 201-204 110-2 301-305 110-3-110-7 401, 402 110-8 501, 502 110-51, 110-52 art. 6 110-61 601-615 110-62-110-76 701-717 110-91-110-107 801-807 110-121-110-127 901-908 110-141-110-148 1001-1005 110-161-110-165 1101-1105 110-181-110-185 1201 110-9 10-10-94 1 98-12 11-14-94 1.1.1, 1.1.2 50-66 2.1.1 50-67 2.1.2 50-69 2.1.3 50-68 2.1.4-2.1.7 50-70-50-73 III 50-74  2-13-95 1-3 2-86  3-13-95 I-VII 2-37-2-43 VIII 2-45 IX 2-44 X-XX 2-46-2-56 XXI 2-57 
2-61  3-27-95 I 
II 74-37 
74-36 III, IV 74-38, 74-39 app. A 74-40 app. B 74-41  4-10-95 1-6 18-21-18-26  5-22-95(1) 1 18-1, 18-51 att. A 18-52-18-57, 18-81-18-87, 18-101-18-110, 18-130, 18-141-18-145, 18-161  5-22-95(2) 1-3 30-1-30-3  9-11-95 II-IX 46-92-46-99  9-25-95 1, 2 94-1 10-23-95 1, 2 90-49 11-13-95(1) art. 2 22-24 302 22-21 401, 402 22-22, 22-23 403 22-26 404 22-25 405 22-27 501(1)-(3) 22-28 501(4) 22-29 502-507 22-30-22-35 508(1), (2) 22-36 508(3), 508(4) 22-37, 22-38 509-512 22-39-22-42 513 22-57 601 22-56 602, 603 22-43, 22-44 701-704 22-45-22-48 801, 802 22-49, 22-50 901-903 22-51-22-53 1001, 1002 22-54, 22-55 11-13-95(2) I 98-1 II 98-51 III 98-53, 98-54 IV 98-55 V 98-2-98-11 98-52 98-56  5-13-96 110-70(b)(5)  6-10-96 1, 2 94-5  6-24-96 I 98-1 II 98-51 III 98-53, 98-54 IV 98-55 V 98-2-98-11 98-52 98-56  7- 8-96 2-36 11-11-96 1-39 22-76-22-110.4 12- 9-96 Adopting ordinance, p. xiii  3-10-97(1) 1       Rpld 6-36-6-39, 22-181-22-192, 22-211-22-223 ch. 22, art. III (note), ch. 86 (note), ch. 110(note), ch. 18, art. III (note), ch. 46, art. IV (note), 90-49(note), 78-66(2)a, e  3-10-97(2) 1 90-171 2 90-181, 90-182  6-23-97 2       Rpld 46-66-46-70       Added 46-66-46-84  8-11-97       Rpld 50-36-50-42  9-11-97 94-5  3-23-98 1       Rpld 10-1-10-15 2       Added 10-1-10-43  7-13-98 I 98-1 II 98-51 III 98-53, 98-54 IV 98-55(b) V 98-2-98-11, 98-52, 98-56  8-10-98 1       Rpld App. A       Added App. A  9-15-98 1 10-40(c) 10-26-98 1 94-6  4-26-99 1 46-80(b)  8- 9-99 1 94-7  8-24-99 1 98-7(c)  2-14-00 I-VII 2-37-2-43 VIII 2-45 IX 2-44 X-XXI 2-46-2-57 XXII 2-61  2-28-00 1 106-44(1), (8)  6-12-00 78-1-78-3, 78-36-78-42, 78-66-78-80  6-12-00 I 98-1 II 98-51 III 98-53, 98-54 IV 98-55(b) V 98-2-98-11, 98-52, 98-56  7-10-00 98-11, 98-52, 98-56  9-18-00 94-5  1- 8-01 II-IX(C) 46-92-46-99  5-22-01 1(A) 46-100-46-115 1(B) Ch. 46, Art. V (note)  8-13-01 1 94-8  8-13-01 I 98-1 II 98-51 III 98-53, 98-54 IV 98-55 V 98-2-98-11 98-52, 98-56 11-12-01 1, 2 90-131, 90-132 3-5 90-134-90-136  1- 3-02 1 2-37 2 2-40  5-13-02 1       Rpld 10-1-10-43, 10-46-10-51 2       Added 10-1-10-43, 10-46-10-51  9- 9-02 1       Rpld 14-1-14-8, 14-36-14-39, 14-66-14-69       Added 14-1-14-14, 14-51-14-56, 14-81-14-88, 14-121-14-133  6-10-02 22-25, 22-26  9- 9-02 1       Rpld 110-105 2 110-77  9-23-02 1 2-37  3-10-03 1 110-77(i)(16)  3-10-03 1 110-144  4-28-03 1(Exh. A) 50-1-5-14, 50-41-50-53  5-12-03 1 10-18 2 10-5 3       Rpld 10-21  6-26-03 1 110-8(b), 110-145(4), (5)  8-11-03 1 2-40 10-13-03 46-135-46-149 11-10-03 1 110-69(a)(12) 2 110-70(a)(1) 3 110-68 4 110-69(d)  1-12-04 1       Rpld 30-3       Added 30-3 2 30-4  1-12-04 1, 2 98-4(f), (h)  3-22-04 1 58-3  3-22-04       Rpld 82-36 1-7       Added 82-36-82-42  3-22-04 1 94-9-94-13  3-22-04 1 94-12(r)  4-26-04 1 98-11(b) 2 98-11(c), (d)  6-14-04 1(3-1)-(3-15) 2-371-2-385  6-14-04 1       Rpld 46-92-46-99 2       Added 46-92-46-99.2  6-14-04 IV 98-55(b)  7-26-04 1(55-1)-(55-6) 98-301-98-306 10-25-04 1 46-180-46-185 12-13-04 1 10-2 12-13-04 1-3 38-2 12-13-04 III 98-53, 98-54  1-31-05 1 110-100(c) 2 110-62(d)  3-28-05 1 2-62  4-25-05 1(50-37)-(50-47) 50-91-50-101  4-25-05 1 98-2 2 98-10(4) 3 98-52  5-23-05 94-5  6-13-05 1 90-71 2       Rpld 90-75       Added 90-75  7-11-05 App. C, Addendum, §§ I-IV  8-22-05 1 46-141(d)(4)g.2.v 2 46-143(c) 3 46-146(19) 4       Added 46-146(24) 5 46-141(d)(4)k 6       Added 46-141(d)(4)l 11-28-05 1, 2 70-9(a), (b)  1- 9-06(1) 1 2-62  1- 9-06(2) Ex. A       Added 46-200-46-209  1- 9-06(3) Ex.A       Added 46-220-46-227  3-13-06 50-80-50-85       Added 50-121-50-126  6-12-06(1) 98-51(1), (3)  6-12-06(2) 98-53, 98-54 98-55(b)  7-24-06 1       Added 102-39  8-14-06 1 110-69(a)(12) 10- 9-06 1 2-36(a) 11-13-06 1       Added 30-3(23)-(25) 11-13-06(2) 1 110-8 2 110-69 3 110-69(a)(12) 4       Added 110-69(13) 5 110-69(c) 6       Dltd. 110-69(d) 7 110-70(a)(1) 12-11-06 1 98-51  1- 8-07 1       Added 98-57  1-14-07 1 10-31(2)  2-26-07(1) 1       Added 22-181-22-210  2-26-07(2) 1       Dltd 102-26-102-39       Added 102-26-102-50  3-12-07 1 98-2(e)  3-26-07 1, 2 98-57(b)  4- 9-07 1-4 98-2(a)  5-14-07 1 46-83  5-14-07(2) 1, 2 46-83  6-11-07(1) 98-53, 98-54 98-55(b)  6-11-07(2) 1 10-5(c) 2       Added 10-5(h)  6-11-07(3) 1-3 2-312  6-11-07(4) 98-2(d), 
98-7, 98-9  7- 9-07 1, 2 110-9  7- 9-07(2) 1 2-62  7-11-07 94-5  1-14-08(1) 1 2-36  1-14-08(2) 1-4 98-57(c)-(e)  2-11-08 1 98-7  2-25-08(1) 1, 2 98-57(d)  2-25-08(2) 1       Added 98-350-98-372  2-25-08(3) 1       Dltd 106-36-106-46       Added 106-36-106-50  3-10-08 1       Added 26-50.1  3-24-08 1 2-60  4-14-08(1) 1       Added 30-3(26)-(31) 2 30-3(8)  4-14-08(2) 1, 2 94-10, 94-11 94-12(m) 3 94-13 4, 5       Added 94-14, 94-15  5-12-08 110-72(a)(11), (12)  6- 9-08(1) 1 10-2 2 10-5(b)(1)a.-d., 3 10-5(c)(3) 4, 5 10-7(e)(5), (h) 6       Added 10-7.1 7 10-12 8       Added 10-14(h) 9       Added 10-16(d) 10 10-17(a) 11       Added 10-31(7)  6- 9-08(2) 1, 2 98-53, 98-54  6- 9-08(3) 1, 2       Added 106-75-106-103  7-14-08 1 2-62(a), (b)  7-28-08(1) 1 38-2(b)  7-28-08(2) 1       Dltd 86-1-86-152       Added 86-1-86-165 10-27-08 1       Added 2-286 11-10-08(1) 1 2-50(2), (4) 11-10-08(2) 1       Dltd 2-351-2-385       Added 2-351-2-376 11-24-08(1) 1 2-213(a) 11-24-08(2) 1, 2 10-31 11-24-08(3) 1       Dltd 54-36-54-95       Added 54-36-54-93 12- 8-08 1       Added 86-6  3- 9-09 1 2-371(c) 2 2-372(b)  4-27-09 98-2(d), 98-7(b) 98-9, 98-10(1) 98-53-98-55 98-57(c), (d)  7-13-09 94-5(a)  8-24-09 1 2-351-2-376  3- 8-10 1       Dltd 62-1-62-178       Added 62-1-62-200  5-10-10(1) 98-53, 98-54  5-10-10(2) 2 102-28.A 3       Added 102-28.B 4 102-29 6 102-32 7 102-40, 102-41 8 102-42 9       Added 102-43(h)  5-24-10 1       Added 110-2(e) 10-11-10 1 30-3(18) 10-25-10(1) 2-36-2-38 2-40       Dltd 2-42 2-43 2-45, 2-46       Dltd 2-48 2-49 2-54 2-58 2-60 10-25-10(2) 98-53 2-22-11 2-372 3-7-11(1)       Dltd 10-1-10-51       Added 10-0-10-51 3-7-11(2) 1       Rpld 18-1, 18-2       Rpld 18-51-18-161 2       Added 18-1-18-4 3-21-11(1) 2-60(c) 3-21-11(2) 42-36, 42-38       Rpld 42-61-42-66 42-91-42-94 3-21-11(3) 98-2(b)-(e) 4-4-11       Dltd 46-92-46-99.2       Added 46-92-46-99.2 5-2-11(2) 78-68 5-2-11(3) 98-2(a)       Added 98-2(f) 98-9 98-11 98-52-98-55 98-80 5-16-11 110-62(a)(4) 6-20-11 2-372(a) 2-374 6-20-11(2) 10-34 7-18-11(1)       Added 22-211-22-223 7-18-11(2)       Added 110-70(b)(6)       Added 110-146(6) 12-5-11       Dltd 22-181-22-187       Added 22-181-22-189 1-23-12       Dltd 30-1-30-4       Added 30-1-30-13 3-19-12 98-57  5- 7-12 2-41 2-50(7) 8-20-12(1)       Added 2-400-2-404 8-20-12(2) 98-51 11-5-12 1       Added 110-78 2013-001  1- 7-13 98-51(b) 98-53 2013-002  2- 3-13 2 98-57(d) 2013-009  4-15-13       Rpld 110-165 2013-016  6- 3-13 98-55(a) 2013-019  6-17-13       Added 94-8.1 2013-022  7- 1-13       Dltd 46-66-46-84       Added 46-66-46-78 2013-024  9-16-13 98-57.1 Table 2013-029 10-21-13       Added Ch. 87, §§ 87-1-87-8 2013-034 11-18-13       Added 10-13(i) 2013-035 12- 2-13 1 14-1 2 14-7 2013-036 12-16-13       Added 110-125(f) 2014-001  1- 6-14       Dltd 54-1-54-93       Added 54-1-54-9 2014-003  2- 3-14       Added 110-78 2014-004  2- 3-14 1 1-2 2014-008  3- 3-14 46-36(7) 46-38(b) 2014-011  4- 7-14 50-2, 50-3 50-5 50-7 50-11, 50-12 50-41-50-43 2014-012  4- 7-14 18-1(a) 2014-018  5-13-14       Added 10-40 2014-020  6- 2-14 46-141(d)(3) 2014-021  6- 2-14 62-36 62-63 62-114, 62-115 62-199(a) 2014-022  6- 2-14 110-78(c)(2) 2014-025  6- 2-14       Rnbd 110-78       as 110-79 2014-027  6-16-14 98-57 2014-040  9-15-14       Added 110-62(b)(7) 2014-043  9-15-14       Added 98-2(g) 2014-046 10-20-14 46-141 46-146 2014-047 10-20-14 62-114(b)(6)t. 2015-001  1- 5-15 10-10(a) 2015-002  1- 5-15 106-44 106-47 2015-003  1- 5-15 58-3 106-85 2015-007  2- 2-15 22-87 2015-015  5- 4-15 110-8 2015-016  5-18-15 90-74 2015-020  6- 1-15 18-1 2015-021  6-15-15 110-8 Ord. of  7- 6-15 62-114(b) 2015-025  7-20-15       Added 46-300-46-311 2015-027  8- 3-15 110-125 2015-028  8- 3-15 110-70 2015-034  9-21-15 110-183 2015-042 11- 2-15 110-69, 110-70       Added 10-76-10-80 Ord. of ; en;2-17-16 22-182-22-189 Ord. of  3-21-16 110-70 Ord. of  5- 9-16 110-68 Ord. of  7-18-16 110-78 Ord. of  8- 1-16 90-37, 90-38 90-42, 90-43 90-46 Ord. of  8-15-16 46-140 Ord. of  8-15-16 90-41 Ord. of 11- 7-16       Rpld 22-182-22-189       Added 22-182-22-194 Ord. of 12- 5-16       Added 40-1 2017-001  2- 6-17 10-3 2017-3-6-001  3- 6-17 30-3 30-5-30-10 2017-3-6-002  3- 6-17 86-64 2017-6-5-003  6- 5-17 10-3(c)(8) 10-4(c) 2017-7-17-001  7-17-17 98-51 98-55 2017-9-21-002  9-21-17 98-57 2017-10-16-001 10-16-17 62-35-62-90       Dltd 62-110-62-130       Added 62-110-62-130       Dltd 62-151-62-154       Added 62-151-62-158       Dltd 62-176-62-178 62-199, 62-200 2017-10-16-003 10-16-17 54-3(b)(1) 2017-11-6-003 11- 6-17       Added 94-7(g) 2017-12-4-002 12- 4-17 10-34(d)       Added 10-34(e) 2018-3-19-001  3-19-18       Added 74-1 2018-7-16-001  7-16-18 38-2(b)  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter, Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-3 1-10 1-1-7 1-3 1-3-1-1-3-3 1-2 1-3-3 46-94 2-10-105 22-49 tit. 3 10-47 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 10 3-1-2 et seq. 10-3 3-3-20(b)(2)(B) 10-32 3-3-21 10-5 3-3-23 Ch. 10 3-3-40 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. III 3-4-3 Ch. 6 3-4-26 46-141 3-4-36 10-76 3-5-38 10-79 3-6-25.1 46-141 4-3-1 et seq. Ch. 14 4-3-3 et seq. 14-12 4-8-1 et seq. 14-81 4-8-2 et seq. 14-81 4-8-3 et seq. 14-81 4-8-5 et seq. 14-82 4-8-6 Ch. 14 4-8-6 et seq. 14-11 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 14 4-8-20 et seq. 14-13 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 14 5-4-3 86-165 6-3-20 et seq. R L, Art. I 6-3-25 R L, Art. I 6-3-27 R L, Art. I tit. 7, ch. 1, art. 5(a) 90-102 8-2-21 Ch. 18 8-2-25 Ch. 18 18-1 Ch. 50 8-2-26 Ch. 18 8-2-50 Ch. 18 Ch. 50 8-2-131 110-8 8-2-200 Ch. 50 8-2-200 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. II 10-1-622(1) 22-21 10-14-01 110-68 10-14-01 et seq. 110-68 12-2-8 46-95 12-3-50 Ch. 62, Art. II 12-3-50 et seq. Ch. 62 12-3-50.1, 12-3-50.2 Ch. 62, Art. II 12-3-70 et seq. Ch. 62 Ch. 62, Art. II 12-4-72 46-94 12-4-120 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VI tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2 46-95 tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 6 46-95 12-5-20 et seq. 46-93 12-5-23 46-96 12-5-30 46-95 12-5-30(f) 46-93 46-95 12-5-440 et seq. 46-93 ch. 12-7 46-93 12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 46-95 12-7-6 46-94 12-7-6(b) 46-94, 46-95 12-7-6(c) 46-95 12-7-7(e) 46-96 12-7-7(f)(1) 46-96 12-7-7.1 46-94 12-7-8(a) 46-93 46-96 46-97 12-7-17(9), (10) 46-96 12-7-19(b)(1) 46-99 12-7-19(b)(4) 46-99 12-7-20 46-96 46-99 12-8-2 Ch. 98 12-8-20 et seq. 58-1 Ch. 78 Ch. 98 12-8-31.1 Ch. 78 12-8-60 et seq. Ch. 78 15-21-73 1-12 16-1-1 et seq. Ch. 70 16-6-8 Ch. 22, Art. III 16-6-10 Ch. 22, Art. III 16-6-17 Ch. 22, Art. III 16-6-24 70-13 16-7-20 et seq. Ch. 30 16-7-25 70-11 16-7-40 Ch. 78 16-10-24.1 Ch. 50 16-11-34 Ch. 82, Art. II 16-11-36 70-13 16-11-41 Ch. 10 16-11-44 Ch. 22, Art. III 16-11-103- 
16-11-105 70-10 16-12-4 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. III 16-12-80 46-146 62-123 16-12-23 Ch. 22, Art. III 16-13-32.2 58-1 16-112-2 58-3 20-5-20 et seq. Ch. 66 21-1-1 Ch. 6, Art. II 21-2-132 Char. § 3-102 21-3-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III 21-3-51 Char. Art. 3, 
Ch. 1 21-3-63 Char. § 2-101 21-3-125 Ch. 2, Art. III 21-3-163 2-86 24-7-21 1-2 ch. 25, art. 10 50-125 25-2-1 et seq. Ch. 50 25-2-12 50-42 25-2-12(a), (b) 50-42 25-2-12.1 50-7 25-2-22.1 50-7 25-2-13 Ch. 62, Art. II 25-3-2 et seq. Ch. 50 25-3-4 Ch. 50 25-4-2 et seq. Ch. 50 25-6-1 Ch. 50 25-7-1 et seq. Ch. 50 25-10-1 et seq. Ch. 50 26-2-373 Ch. 58 30-3-1 et seq. Ch. 18 31-3-4(4) Ch. 58 31-3-6 Ch. 58 tit. 31, ch.11 50-1 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. II 31-19-6(2) Ch.14, Art. II 32-4 Char. § 5-402 32-4-92 Ch. 82 32-6-1 Ch. 82, Art. III 32-6-24(a)(1) 94-6 32-6-51 Ch. 6 32-6-70 et seq. Ch. 6 32-6-75 46-146 62-123 33-3-5 90-131 33-3-5(1) 90-135 33-8-4 90-134 33-8-8 et seq. 22-49 33-8-8.1 Ch. 90, Art. V 90-134 33-8-8.2 Ch. 90, Art. V 90-135 33-8-8.2(a) 90-135 36-1-16 Ch. 78 36-1-20(a) 54-1 36-12-1 et seq. 30-12 36-12-5 30-12 36-18-1 46-94 36-18-3 Ch. 26 36-30-2 Ch. 2, Art. VI 36-30-8 1-12 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 38 36-32-1(c) 1-12 36-32-10 Ch. 10 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-34-2(2) Ch. 74 36-34-2(7) Ch. 26 App. A App. C App. C, Add. App. D 36-34-3 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 6 Ch. 82 36-34-5 Ch. 98 36-35-1 et seq. 1-2 Ch. 2 36-35-3 1-2 36-35-6 1-12 App. A App. C, App. D 36-35-6(a)(2) Ch. 70 36-35-6(a)(2)(A) Ch. 38 36-35-6(a)(2)(B) Char. § 6-103 1-12 36-37-1 Ch. 2, Art. VI 36-37-6 Ch. 2, Art. VI 36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 82 36-39-7 Ch. 98 36-40-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 Ch. 62, Art. II 36-40-20 et seq. Ch. 98 36-42-3 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 36-43-3 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 36-60-3 Ch. 22, Art. III 36-60-6 Ch. 30 36-60-6.1 Ch. 30 36-60-12 Ch. 50 36-60-13 Ch. 2, Art. VI 36-62-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 2-146 36-62-2 2-146 36-63-1 et seq. Ch. 78 Ch. 98 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 6 36-66-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 5 2-211 2-214 Ch. 110 36-66-2 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 5 Ch. 110 36-67A-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 5 Ch. 110 36-69-2 et seq. Ch. 34 36-70-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 5 Ch. 110 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 36-88-3 87-3 36-88-4 87-3 87-7 36-88-6 87-1 36-88-7 87-4 36-88-8(a) 87-3 36-88-9 87-4 36-91 Char. § 5-402 37-8-1 et seq. Ch. 10 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 34 38-3-70 Ch. 34 tit. 40 94-15 40-1-1 94-1 94-6 40-2-95 Ch. 106 40-5-24 94-11 40-6-1 et seq. Ch. 94 40-6-7 Ch. 82, Art. II 40-6-14 46-68 40-6-76 Ch. 82, Art. II 40-6-183 94-5 40-6-249 Ch. 78 40-6-252 70-16 40-6-253 Ch. 10, Art. II 40-6-253.1 58-1 40-6-277 Ch. 106, Art. II 40-6-371 Ch. 94 40-6-371(a)(19) Ch. 34 40-6-372 Ch. 94 40-6-372-40-6-376 94-1 40-6-391 Ch. 10 40-8-4 94-12-94-14 40-8-35 94-12-94-14 40-8-71(c) 46-68 40-13-1 et seq. Ch. 94 40-13-22 Ch. 38 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 41-2-7 Ch. 18 41-2-7-41-2-17 46-100 41-2-8(7) 46-101 41-2-8(9) 46-100 41-2-12 46-110 Ch. 22, Art. III 41-3-1 Ch. 22, Art. III tit. 43 22-32 43-12-1 Ch. 22, Art. VII 43-14-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 43-14-8.1(b) Ch. 42, Art. II 43-17-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VII 43-21-1 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. III 43-21-61 Ch. 22, Art. III 43-22-1 et seq., 
43-32-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VI, 
Ch. 22, Art. VII 43-34-1 et seq. 22-21 43-37-1 et seq., 
43-46-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VI, 
Ch. 22, Art. VII 43-49-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. VI 44-5-60 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 5 Ch. 110 44-10-1 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. II 44-10-1-44-10-5 62-64 44-10-20 et seq. Ch. 62, Art. II 44-12-130 et seq. 
44-14-430 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. V 
Ch. 22, Art. VI 44-14-14 46-300 46-302 44-14-160 46-304 45-5-1 Char. § 2-104 Char. § 3-201 45-8-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 45-11-1 1-11 46-3-1 et seq. 22-49 46-5-2 Ch. 26 46-7-15 22-49 46-7-85.10 106-76 47-17-60 et seq. 1-12 tit. 48, art. 5 Adopting ord. 90-49 48-0-4040 46-109 48-2-40 22-48 48-2-40-48-2-43 22-44 48-4-76(a) 90-49 48-4-77-48-4-81 90-49 48-5-2 Ch. 90 48-5-40 R L, § 1 48-5-47(b) 90-171 48-5-48 90-181 48-5-50.1 R L § 3 48-5-350 et seq. Ch. 90 48-5-355, 48-5-356 22-49 48-5-358 Ch. 82 Ch. 98 48-5-478 90-182 48-6-93 22-49 90-101 48-6-93(d) 90-103 48-13-1 et seq. Ch. 22 Ch. 90 48-13-5-48-13-26 22-22 48-13-6 22-44 48-13-7 22-23, 22-24 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) 22-21 
22-39 48-13-10.1 Ch. 106, Art. II 48-13-21 22-44 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. III 48-13-51 et seq. 90-71 48-13-51(a)4(f) 90-75 tit. 50, ch. 14 R.L., Art. IV, § 8 50-5-100 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. VI 50-8-7.3 Ch. 78 50-8-30 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 3 50-12-40 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 6 50-14-1 2-36 50-14-1(d) 2-36 50-14-3 2-36 50-18-70 et seq. 2-401 22-43 50-18-90 et seq. 2-62 51-2-6 Ch. 14 52-6-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 2-127 52-6-11 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 52-7-21 110-78  
