CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SOCIAL CIRCLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2018 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 2014 Code, as supplemented through 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 2014 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publisher is most grateful to Susan M. Roper, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Social Circle, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 2018. 
ORDINANCE NO. 2017-12 
AN ORDINANCE TO CODIFY THE ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SOCIAL CIRCLE, GEORGIA TO BE KNOWN AND DESIGNATED AS "CITY CODE OF SOCIAL CIRCLE, GEORGIA 2017". 
    TITLE This provision is designated to set forth the General Code of Ordinances of the City of Social Circle which includes the following items: 
General Provisions, Elections, Administration, Taxation, City Court and Enforcement of Ordinances, Public Health and Safety, Land Building Regulations, Traffic and Parking, General Offenses, Alcohol and Entertainment Regulations, Regulations of City Owned Utility Systems, Miscellaneous Regulations, Natural Gas, Cable Television Franchise, Effectivity and Validity of Code, a copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit "A". 
    WHEREAS , the Mayor and Council are authorized to adopt a code of Ordinances for the City of Social Circle pursuant to Section 2.25 of the City Charter, and 
    WHEREAS , it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Social Circle to maintain such a code of Ordinances and this new code shall be entitled the "City Code of Social Circle, Georgia," and also designated as "City Code of the City of Social Circle, Georgia 2017, 
    THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOCIAL CIRCLE HEREBY ORDAINS , that the "City Code of Social Circle, Georgia" be designated as "City Code of Social Circle, Georgia 2017," and is hereby adopted as the Official Code of the City of Social Circle, Georgia pursuant to the authority of Section 2.25 of the Charter of the City of Social Circle, Georgia as enacted by the General Assembly of Georgia. 
    The City Clerk is hereby authorized to retain the services of an electronic municipal code compilation company for the purpose of satisfying the electronic display requirements of the Georgia Code and the updating procedures required by Section 2.25 of the City's Charter. 
SO ORDAINED this 20 th day of June, 2017. 
/s/ Hal W. Dally 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Susan M. Roper 
      City Clerk   APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ Anthony O. L. Powell 
      City Attorney 
      Webb, Tanner & Powell P.C.     
  
Adopted by the City Council at a regular meeting on June 20, 2017. 
 4  Council members voting in favor 
 0  Council members voting against 
 0  Council members abstaining 
ORDINANCE NO. 2018-5 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE OFFICIAL CODE OF THE CITY OF SOCIAL CIRCLE, GEORGIA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
    BE IT ORDAINED BY THE: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled the "Official Code of the City of Social Circle, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 17, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before Feb. 20, 2018, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by confinement for a maximum term not to exceed six months, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the City to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after Feb. 20, 2018, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective October 16, 2018. 
  
Passed and adopted by the City Council this 16 th day of October, 2018. 
  
/s/ Hal W. Dally 
      Mayor   ATTEST: 
/s/ Susan M. Roper 
      City Clerk     
APPROVED AS TO FORM: 
/s/ Anthony O. L. Powell 
      City Attorney 
      Webb, Tanner & Powell P.C.     
Adopted by the City Council at a regular meeting on October 16, 2018. 
 4  Council members voting in favor 
 0  Council members voting against 
 0  Council members abstaining 
  
Certificate of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the City of Social Circle Mayor and Council, held on the 16 th day of October, 2018. 
/s/ Susan M. Roper 
      City Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 2018-3  8-21-2018 Included 1 2018-4 10-16-2018 Included 1 2018-5 10-16-2018 Included 1 2018-6 10-16-2018 Included 1 2018-7 12-18-2018 Included 1  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Purpose; how Code designated and cited. 
(a)  General. The mayor and council of the City of Social Circle, Georgia ("city") desires to maintain a system by which all regulations of the city are easily accessed and understood by law enforcement officers and other city and county employees, local elected officials, and members of the general public. It is also the stated intention of the mayor and council that all regulations of the city be kept in a manner that will provide the same accessibility and understanding of such regulations in posterity. 
(b)  Amendment of the Official Code of the City of Social Circle, Georgia. This document, the Official Code of the City of Social Circle, has been created and is hereby amended in order to fulfill the stated purpose identified in subsection (a) above. 
(Former § 1-001(1.1, 1.2)) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions. 
    Advise and consent. Whenever the term "advise and consent of the council" is used in this Code, it shall be construed to mean an affirmative vote of the majority of a quorum of the council. 
    Building inspector means the building inspector of the city. 
    City means the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
    City council or council means the mayor and city council of the city. 
    City manager means the person hired by the council as the chief administrative officer of the city, to whom all city employees are responsible with respect to performance of their job duties. 
    Clerk means the person hired by the council and appointed by the council as the clerk or the acting clerk of the city. 
    Code means the Official Code of the City of Social Circle, Georgia, adopted as such by the council. 
    County shall mean Walton County, Georgia. 
    Court or city court means the city court of the city. 
    Judge or recorder means the judge of the city court. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the city. 
    Mayor and council (or council ) means the mayor and council of the city. 
    Misdemeanor means a violation punishable by a fine not in excess of $1,000.00, confinement not exceeding six months, or both. 
    Official means the mayor or a member of the council. 
    Ordinance means a legislative act of the council of a general and permanent nature. 
    Owner, when applied to a building or to land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person includes a person, corporation, entity, firm, partnership, association, organization, and any other group acting as a unit. 
    Personal property includes every type of property except real property. 
    Property includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
    Real property includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to mean only such time as may be necessary for the prompt performance of the act required. 
    Resolution means a legislative act of the council of a special or temporary character. 
    Sidewalk means an improved portion of street between the curb and the adjacent property, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    State means the State of Georgia. 
    Street means any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, viaduct or bridge, and the approaches thereto, within the city. 
    Tenant or occupant, when applied to a building or to land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies the whole or a part of, such building or land, either alone or with others. 
(Former § 1-001(2.1-2.26)) 
Sec. 1-3. - Amendments; hearings. 
(a)  Amendments to the Code. The council may from time to time amend the Code. The council may read and consider the proposed amendment at a regularly scheduled or properly called special meeting of the council. Following the reading, the council may vote to adopt, adopt with modifications, disapprove or table the proposed amendment. If the vote is for adoption, then the city manager shall make the amendment a physical part of the Code. Said amendment shall immediately upon adoption by the council become part of this Code. 
(b)  Public hearings; other requirements. In addition to the requirements in subsection (a) above, certain sections of this Code require that a public hearing be properly called, advertised and conducted concerning certain proposed amendments, prior to the council's consideration and adoption of said amendments. These public hearing requirements, along with any other provisions of this Code pertaining to such amendments, shall be adhered to by the council. 
(c)  Amendments to Code. The council may also from time to time adopt regulations that currently do not exist in the Code, or otherwise make revisions or changes to the structure or content of the Code itself. In so doing, the council shall follow the procedures set forth in subsection (a) above. In addition, the council shall conduct a public hearing if such a hearing is required by law or by the charter of the city. If the council votes to adopt new regulations, or votes to otherwise make revisions or changes to the structure or content of the Code, then the city manager shall make the regulations a physical part of the Code. Said new regulations shall immediately upon adoption by the council become part of this Code. 
(Former § 1-003(1.1-1.3)) 
Sec. 1-4. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
(1)  General rule. All words and phrases shall be construed and understood according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(2)  Delegation of authority. Whenever this Code requires the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the Code require otherwise. 
(3)  Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done as provided in this Code or in any order issued thereunder, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last, except if the last day is Sunday or a holiday it shall be excluded; when any such time is expressed in hours, Sunday, from midnight to midnight, shall be excluded. 
(4)  Overlapping provisions. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
(Former § 1-003(2.)) 
Sec. 1-5. - Violations and penalties. 
(b)  Penalties. 
(1)  Penalties specified by Code section. The monetary and/or civil penalties to be imposed upon persons who violate the Code are specified within the individual sections of this Code, except as otherwise established by the council or by law. 
(2)  Penalty where no penalty provided. Any person who violates this Code for which no penalty has been set forth shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or by confinement for a maximum term not to exceed six months, or both. 
(3)  Each day violation occurs constitutes separate offense. Except as otherwise specified herein, any violation of this Code shall constitute a separate offense each day it occurs, and be subject to a separate penalty for each day of violation. 
(c)  Enforcement. 
(1)  City manager. Except as otherwise specified herein, the city manager is responsible for daily administration of the Code. This includes, but is not limited to, ensuring the Code is viable and up to date, applying the Code, and informing the council on any need to amend the Code. 
(2)  Citations. Except as otherwise specified herein, the city manager should see that any person violating this Code is issued a citation to appear in the city court. 
(Former § 1-004) 
Sec. 1-6. - Severability. 
(a)  Severability. 
(1)  General. If any chapter, section, paragraph, phrase or clause or any part of the Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, or if the provisions of any part of said document as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the portions of this document not so held to be invalid, or the application of the Code to other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared as the intent of the council that the Code would have been adopted had such invalid portion not been included herein. 
(2)  Conflicts between specific and general provisions. Where there is an apparent conflict in this Code between specific and general provisions, the specific shall control. 
(b)  Repeal of conflicting provisions. All Codes and ordinances, or parts thereof, in conflict with the contents of this Code, and not preserved hereby, are hereby repealed, and this Code shall remain in effect until amended or repealed by the council. 
(Former § 1-002) 
Chapter 2 - ELECTIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Adoption of state rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations promulgated by the state election board which pertain to municipal elections, together with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code contained in O.C.G.A., tit. 21, are hereby adopted as the rules, regulations, and provisions that shall govern the conduct of municipal general and special elections in this city. 
(Former § 2-001) 
Sec. 2-2. - Expenses. 
    Such funds as are necessary for the conduct of elections and for the performance of the duties that are specified by this chapter shall be budgeted and appropriated annually, and from time to time. 
(Former § 2-002) 
Secs. 2-3-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION 

Sec. 2-26. - Election superintendent. 
(a)  Appointment. The election superintendent and his deputies shall be appointed by the council, as necessary, and shall serve at the pleasure of same. The election superintendent shall generally supervise and direct the administration of this article. All appointments shall be entered on the minutes of the council meeting at which they are made. 
(b)  Qualifications. The election superintendent and his deputies shall be electors of the city and shall be able to read, write, and speak the English language. Such appointees, while so serving, and within a period of six months after so serving, shall not be eligible for any nomination or office to be voted for at a primary or election. 
(c)  Oath. Prior to performing any duties, the election superintendent and all deputies shall swear to faithfully perform their duties, such oath to be administered by an officer authorized by law to administer the oath. 
(d)  Term of office. Persons appointed as election superintendent or deputy election superintendent shall serve for four years and until their successors are appointed and qualified, except in the event of resignation or removal as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Powers. The election superintendent and all deputies shall exercise those powers and duties and shall be subject to such regulations as are set forth in the Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 
(f)  Resignation or removal. The election superintendent and all deputies shall have the right to resign at any time by submitting a resignation to the council. The council shall have the right at any time to remove one or more of such deputies for cause after notice and hearing. If any election superintendent or deputy resigns or is removed for cause, all duties and authority as such shall terminate instantly. In the event of death, resignation, removal of the election superintendent or any deputies, the council shall appoint a successor who shall serve out the unexpired term. Each such appointment shall be entered on the minutes of the council meeting at which the appointment is made. 
(Former § 2-003) 
Sec. 2-27. - Elector qualifications. 
    Any person desiring to vote in any election must register as an elector at least 15 days prior to the primary or election at which he desires to vote; be a citizen of Georgia; be at least 18 years of age; and be a resident of the city. 
(Former § 2-004) 
Sec. 2-28. - Registration lists and records. 
    The county board of registrars shall be responsible for maintaining city voting registration cards. The form of the registration cards shall conform to the Georgia Election Code. The completed registration cards shall be kept in the main office of the county board of registrars. The other papers of the election superintendent shall be kept in the office of the election superintendent at city hall and shall be open to public inspection during usual business hours. 
(Former § 2-005) 
Sec. 2-29. - Challenge of registration list. 
    Any elector of the city shall have the right to challenge the registration of any person whose name appears on the registration list, in the manner set forth in the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-006) 
Sec. 2-30. - Permanency of registration. 
    Registration of an elector will be per the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-007) 
Sec. 2-31. - Absentee registration. 
    Absentee registration shall be per the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-008) 
Secs. 2-32-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CANDIDATES 

Sec. 2-51. - Notice of candidacy. 
    Each candidate desiring to have his name placed on the ballot for an office to be filled shall file per the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-009) 
Sec. 2-52. - Qualification fees. 
    The qualification fee for candidates filing a notice of candidacy in any general or special election for mayor and/or city councilman, shall be the maximum amount allowed by the Georgia Election Code, which fee shall be paid at the time of filing. 
(Former § 2-010) 
Sec. 2-53. - Campaign financing disclosure. 
    All candidates shall keep all such records and file such reports required by the Georgia Campaign and Financial Disclosure Act. 
(Former § 2-011) 
Secs. 2-54-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VOTING 

Sec. 2-76. - Election officials. 
(a)  Appointment. The following election officials shall be appointed by the council and receive compensation as provided by same: 
Municipal election superintendent; chief manager; two assistant managers; clerks, as necessary. 
(b)  Qualifications and powers. The municipal election superintendent and all poll officers shall meet such qualifications and exercise all such powers and duties as are provided in the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-012) 
Sec. 2-77. - Election districts. 
    The area comprising the corporate limits of the city shall be divided into election districts as determined by Home Rule. 
(Former § 2-013) 
Sec. 2-78. - Polling places. 
    The polling place within the city shall be located in the city and shall be designated by the council. 
(Former § 2-014) 
Sec. 2-79. - Date of election. 
    All municipal elections shall be held per the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-015) 
Sec. 2-80. - Write-in-votes. 
    Write-in votes shall be permitted in municipal elections, per the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-016) 
Sec. 2-81. - Absentee ballots. 
    Absentee ballots shall be used per the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-017) 
Sec. 2-82. - Contested elections. 
    Elections conducted pursuant to this may be contested as provided in the Georgia Election Code. 
(Former § 2-018) 
Secs. 2-83-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RECALL 

Sec. 2-101. - General. 
    The mayor or any city councilman shall be subject to recall as provided by state law. 
(Former § 2-019) 
Sec. 2-102. - Procedure for recall. 
    Recall of any elected officer from office shall be brought about in the manner provided by state law. 
(Former § 2-020) 
Chapter 3 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Exercise of governmental authority. 
    The corporate governmental powers of the city shall be exercised by the council as provided by Charter and by this chapter. 
(Former § 3-001) 
Sec. 3-2. - Library fund restrictions. 
    On September 11, 1990, effective date October 1, 1990, the mayor and council of the city established a trust for the benefit of the beneficiary, Social Circle, for its city library, known and described under the trust as the William H. Stanton Memorial Library ("library"). 
    In January, 2017 legal action is being filed to dissolve the trust, because the total revenue, interest, dividends and other cash accumulations to the trust had been consumed by the fees and expenses paid to SunTrust Bank. The superior court is being asked to terminate the trust, and award the entirety of the trust funds to the city. The funds are then to be maintained exclusively and perpetually in a separate earmarked account, solely for the purposes described hereinbelow. 
    Consistent with said trust, and also with the original testamentary trust, the income only, of the funds from the trust, shall be utilized, and only for the following purposes, with the corpus/principal of the funds being maintained intact in perpetuity: 
(1)  Maintenance of the new library building (current or future replacement Social Circle library) which shall include, but not be limited to, the cost of adequate fire and extended coverage insurance on the said building, books, furniture and fixtures; 
(2)  Purchase of books for the said library; 
(3)  Purchase of items and devices designed to aid persons who are blind, or who have impaired eyesight or hearing deficiencies, so as to enable them more advantageously to use the library; and 
(4)  To assist in library problems and needs designated to develop cultural opportunities for the Social Circle community. No more than one-third of the said income may be used in any one year for the purposes set out above. 
    The city shall maintain the library's name as "The William H. Stanton Memorial Library", in perpetuity, and the conference/meeting room shall be designated and marked in perpetuity as "The Walthour Hall." 
(Ord. No. 2017-2, 1-17-2017) 
Secs. 3-3-3-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 

Sec. 3-26. - Administrative policy and procedures. 
(a)  Officers. Each officer shall perform all duties required of his office by state law, the Charter, and this Code, and such other duties not in conflict therewith as may be required. 
(b)  Department heads. All department heads shall: 
(1)  Be immediately responsible to the city manager for the effective administration of their respective department and all activities assigned thereto; 
(2)  Keep informed as to the latest practices in their particular field and institute, with the approval of the city manager, such new practices as would benefit the public; 
(3)  Submit quarterly and annual reports of the activities of their respective department to the city manager; 
(4)  Establish and maintain a system of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of departmental activities and to form a basis for the periodic reports to the city manager; 
(5)  Be responsible for the proper maintenance of all city property and equipment used in their respective departments. 
(c)  Departments. Each department shall cooperate with every other department and shall furnish, upon the direction of the city manager, any other department such service, labor, and materials as may be requisitioned by the head of each department, as its own facilities permit. 
(d)  Operation of administrative services. All units in the administrative services shall accomplish the following: 
(1)  Office hours. Generally be open between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on weekdays and shall be closed Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays. 
(2)  Make daily deposit. Make a daily deposit with the city treasurer of any monies received directly from the public. 
(3)  Payment of monies. Pay out monies belonging to the city in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Former § 3-003) 
Sec. 3-27. - Oaths. 
    All officers and employees required by Charter or some other provision of law to take an oath shall, before entering upon the discharge of their respective duties, take and subscribe the following oath before an officer authorized by law to administer oaths: 
"I, ___________, do solemnly swear or affirm that: 
I will faithfully execute the office of mayor/council person [strike one] of the City of Social Circle, and to the best of my ability support and defend the Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of Georgia, and the Charter, ordinances, and regulations of the City of Social Circle; 
I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state or any political subdivision or authority thereof; 
I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I by the laws of the State of Georgia am prohibited from holding; 
I am otherwise qualified to hold said office according to the Constitution and laws of Georgia; 
I have been a resident of my district and the City of Social Circle for the time required by the Constitution and laws of this state; 
I will perform the duties of my office in the best interest of the City of Social Circle to the best of my ability without fear, favor, affection, reward or expectation thereof." 
Sworn to this ___ day of _______, 201___, 
      (Official taking oath)         Witness       In addition to those named in the Charter, any officer authorized by law to administer an oath (i.e. judges of the superior, probate, magistrate, and municipal court) may swear a municipal officer. A written copy of the oath shall be filed with the city clerk. A formal public ceremony, if desired, may be held at a different time. Finally, some officials may wish to follow optional traditions such as placing their hand on religious or secular material of their choosing (in some instances officials have been sworn while placing their hand on the laws and Constitution of the applicable government) while taking the oath, or by adding at the end, "so help me God." 
(Former § 3-004) 
Sec. 3-28. - Bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provide by law, the council may require any department head, city official, or employee, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, to give good and sufficient bond in any amount decided by the council. Said bond shall be payable to the city for the faithful performance of said duties and to protect the city from corruption, malfeasance, misappropriations, or unlawful expenditures in office. Said surety bonds shall be obtained from a surety company licensed to do business in Georgia which appears in the Federal Circular 570 and is approved by the council. The premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Former § 3-005) 
Sec. 3-29. - Compensation. 
    Each officer and employee of the city shall receive such compensation as may be provided from time to time by the council. 
(Former § 3-006) 
Sec. 3-30. - Election. 
    The mayor and the council shall be elected for four-year terms. Each shall serve until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(Former § 3-007) 
Sec. 3-31. - Qualification for office. 
    Any person whose principal place of residence is within the corporate limits of the city and who is both a qualified voter of the city and at least 18 at the time of election and meets all other legal requirements shall be eligible for the office of mayor or council. 
(Former § 3-008) 
Sec. 3-32. - Vacancies. 
    In case of a vacancy in the office of mayor or council from failure to elect, death, removal, or any cause whatsoever, such vacancy shall be filled as provided by law. 
(Former § 3-009) 
Sec. 3-33. - Council meetings. 
    The council shall hold regular meetings on the third Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m., unless otherwise ordered by the council; provided, that the mayor may convene the council whenever, in his opinion, the public business requires it, and he shall do so upon the application of three members of the council. It shall be the duty of each member of the council to attend each meeting of the council, unless prevented by some unavoidable circumstance. Per the Georgia Sunshine Laws, 2012 Rewrite, HB 397, Open and Public Meetings Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 50-14-1 et seq.) and the Open Records Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 50-18-70 et seq.), the following apply: The meeting agenda will be available to the general public a week in advance, and a notice containing such information will be posted and maintained in a conspicuous place available to the public at the regular meeting place and on any city website. The agenda shall list all items to be considered and briefly state what action is requested. All items timely submitted by city officials and staff to be on the agenda shall be placed on the agenda, and no one shall prohibit such a timely request from appearing on the agenda. Public requests to have an agenda item require clearly advising the clerk of the nature and details of the item including a summary of their position, and to provide all supporting documentation to be referenced in the meeting. To appear on a regular monthly meeting's agenda, the item must be submitted to the clerk by 1:00 p.m. on Tuesday of the week prior to the meeting. The agenda, together with data, reports, and memoranda, should be sent early enough to reach each member at least three days before the meeting. Any item received after the deadline will be held over for the next meeting unless a majority present at the meeting vote to add it to the agenda. Failure to include on the agenda an item which becomes necessary to address during the course of a meeting shall not preclude considering and acting upon such item. Public requests are to be added to the agenda as Item IV of the agenda titled, "Citizen Request." 
    For specially called meetings, the agenda shall consist only of the item or items specifically indicated as the purpose of the called meeting. When any called meeting is to be held, the city will give due notice thereof, the posting of a written notice for at least 24 hours at the place of regular meetings and giving of written or oral notice at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting to the legal organ in the county where regular meetings are held and, upon written request from any local broadcast or print media outlet whose place of business and physical facilities are located in the county, notice by telephone or facsimile to that requesting media outlet at least 24 hours in advance of the called meeting. When special circumstances occur and are so declared by the mayor and council at the meeting, they may hold an emergency meeting with less than 24 hours' notice upon giving such notice of the meeting and subjects expected to be considered at the meeting as is reasonable under the circumstances including notice to said legal organ, in which event the reason for holding the meeting within 24 hours and the nature of the notice shall be recorded in the minutes. Any oral notice required or permitted by this subsection may be given by telephone. A summary of the subjects acted on and those members present at a meeting shall be written and made available to the public for inspection within two business days of the adjournment of a meeting. The minutes of a meeting shall be promptly recorded and such records (other than executive session minutes) shall be open to public inspection. Said minutes shall, at a minimum, include the names of the members present at the meeting, a description of each motion or other proposal made, and a record of all votes, who voted for and against. Official minutes of the meetings shall be maintained in the city hall. Copies of contracts, maps, or similar material or documents related to actions taken may be included in the minutes, or incorporated by reference to an alternate location, in which case, such documents shall be stored in a central location identified by ordinance or resolution. Open Records shall be maintained per the state Records Retention Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 50-18-90 et seq. See O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(a). Records must be produced within three business days of an open records request if possible. If not, the response must be made within three business days as to when the records will be produced, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(A). Requests can be made orally or in writing. O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(B). All written requests shall go to a records custodian, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(1)(B), the city clerk. The legal organ is notified of such, and the custodian is posted on any city website, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(b)(2). The three-day response period starts when the custodian gets the request. Charges for search, retrieval, redaction and production of copies is at the rate of the lowest paid full time employee able to respond, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(1), the first 15 minutes are free. The city charges for redacting records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(1). Fees for copying records are $0.10/page for letter or legal size documents. For odd-size printed documents, the actual cost of producing the documents is charged. For electronic records, the city charges the actual cost of the media on which the records or data are produced, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(2). The city charges for requested records, even if not picked up, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(c)(3). If estimated cost of producing records is over $25.00, the clerk shall notify the requestor within three business days of the request as to the estimated amount. The city can defer search until the requestor agrees to pay. If estimated cost of production is over $500.00, the city requires prepayment before the search, retrieval, review or production of records, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(d). If costs are not paid to the city, it requires prepayment for all new requests, until the previous charges are paid, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(d). If records are sought as part of litigation, the request must be in writing and copied to the city attorney. The city will prepare a duplicate set of the requested documents to the city attorney unless the city attorney elects not to receive them, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(e). Requests for emails shall contain information reasonably calculated to allow the clerk to locate the requested messages such as name, title, office or specific data base to be searched, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(g). The city shall not prepare new reports, summaries, or compilations not in existence at the time of the request, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-71(j). Personal email addresses, unlisted phone numbers, cell phone numbers found in public records are exempted and will be redacted, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(20)(A). The exemption for home address, home telephone numbers, SSN, DOB, credit card, bank account, and similar personal data is extended to former and current employees, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-72(a)(21). When any meeting is closed to the public, the specific reasons for such closure shall be entered in the minutes, the meeting shall not be closed except by a majority vote of a quorum, the minutes shall reflect the names of the members present and the names of those voting for closure, and that part of the minutes shall be made available to the public as any other minutes. Any portion of the meeting not subject to any such exception, privilege, or confidentiality shall be open to the public, and the minutes of such portions not subject to any such exception shall be open to public inspection as provided in Georgia Law. Executive session minutes must be kept, but are confidential unless reviewed by a court in chambers. The executive session minutes will specify each issue discussed in executive session. If matters are discussed subject to the attorney-client privilege, the fact that an attorney-client discussion occurred and the subject shall be identified, but the substance of the discussion need not be recorded or identified, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2)(C). If a non-exempt topic is brought up in executive session, the mayor must immediately rule the discussion out of order. If the non-exempt discussion continues, the mayor must adjourn the meeting. The mayor and council shall execute and file with the official minutes of the meeting a notarized affidavit stating under oath that the subject matter of the closed portion was devoted to matters within the exceptions provided by law and identifying the specific relevant exception. Criminal penalty for violation of the Sunshine Laws is up to $1,000.00. The penalties will increase to $2,500.00 for subsequent violations in the same calendar year. 
(Former § 3-010; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 2, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 3-34. - Personnel management system policies-Incorporation by reference. 
    The City of Social Circle Personnel Policy approved by the council on December 10, 2001, is hereby incorporated into this Code by reference in its entirety and made a part hereof as if it were set out in its entirety herein. Said policy replaces and supersedes any prior personnel policy or policies. All employees shall serve at the pleasure of a majority vote of the council. 
(Former § 3-014) 
Sec. 3-35. - City manager. 
(a)  Creation of city manager position. Pursuant to the powers granted in accordance with the constitution and the laws of Georgia, the position of city manager was created by an amendment to the Charter of the city to carry out the duties and responsibilities of an administrative nature. Except as otherwise stated in any employment contract, said city manager shall serve at the pleasure of a majority vote of the council. 
(b)  Minimum qualifications established. The city manager shall have the following minimum qualifications: 25 years of age; and Possess a bachelor's degree in government or business administration or related fields, provided that four years experience in the operation or management of a business or a portion thereof may be substituted for such bachelor's degree. 
(c)  Duties and responsibilities of city manager. The city manager shall have the following duties and responsibilities: To promote, facilitate and enforce this Code and all other city ordinances, resolutions, laws, regulations and rules; to coordinate matters and communications between the mayor and council and department heads of the city; to keep the mayor and council fully and regularly advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city and maintain accurate records reflecting the city's financial affairs; to assemble city department budget requests and present a compilation of same, along with an annual budget recommendation, to the mayor and council; to inspect, coordinate and represent the city in the performance of contracts and purchase of materials and supplies for the city within limitations and under such rules and regulations as may be imposed by the council, provided that the city manager is authorized to make purchases and contracts for the city in amounts not exceeding $2,600.00, except in emergencies up to $10,000.00, to be ratified by mayor and council at next council meeting thereafter; to prepare advertisements for bids and compile bids for contracts and purchases subject to any competitive bidding requirements; to maintain an inventory and maintenance schedule for city property; to coordinate, advise and recommend to the mayor and council in matters of personnel and compensation; to perform such other duties and responsibilities as may be delegated by the mayor and council; and to hold no other office or employment for remuneration while so engaged. 
(d)  City manager's salary. The minimum salary for the position of city manager shall be $30,000.00 with the actual salary being determined by the council based on the experience and qualifications of the person hired for such position. 
(e)  Council to have specific powers with regard to those of the city manager. The council reserves unto itself exclusive jurisdiction in the following: To levy taxes; to make appropriations; to fix the rates of all charges and fees; to authorize the incurring of indebtedness; to order work done where the cost is to be assessed against benefited property and to fix the basis for such assessment; to authorize contracts and purchases exceeding $2,600.00; to establish, alter, or abolish public roads, private ways, and bridges, according to law; to approve the insolvent lists for the city; to accept, for the city, the provisions of any optional statute where the statute permits its acceptance by the council of the city; to exercise all powers, duties and authorities imposed upon or vested in the council in respect to land subdivision, zoning and planning; to create and change the boundaries of special taxing districts authorized by law; to fix the bonds of city officers where the same are not fixed by statute; to enact any ordinances or other legislation; to determine the priority and authorization for capital improvement; to call elections for the voting of bonds or other indebtedness as provided by general law; to appoint members of all city boards and commissions; and to exercise all powers and authorities vested by law. 
(Former § 3-015) 
Sec. 3-36. - Liability insurance and contracts of indemnity for public officials. 
(a)  Council authorized to purchase insurance. The council is hereby authorized, in its discretion, to purchase policies of liability insurance or contracts of indemnity insuring or indemnifying the mayor and members of the council, and selected supervisors, administrators, employees or other elected or appointed city officers against personal liability for damages arising out of the performance of their duties or in any way connected therewith, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights or violation of civil, constitutional, common law or other statutory rights, whether state, federal or local. The amount of such insurance or indemnity and the persons chosen for coverage shall be at the discretion of the council. 
(b)  Council authorized to defend city officials in legal actions. 
(1)  Authorization stated. In lieu of obtaining the insurance or indemnity referred to in subsection (a) above or in addition thereto, the council may undertake to defend any actions brought or maintained against the mayor and/or members of the council and/or against supervisors, administrators, employees or other elected or appointed city officers, arising out of the performance of their duties or in any way connected. The council may expend state, federal and local funds for such purposes, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, court costs, deposition costs, witness fees and compensation and all like costs, expenses and fees. The amount and type of such defense shall be at the sole discretion of the council. 
(2)  Exceptions. The council shall not furnish a defense to any person charged with a criminal offense involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which the city has an interest. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, the council may, in its discretion, reimburse any person charged with a criminal offense, involving theft, embezzlement or other like crime with respect to the property or money of or in which the city has an interest, if such person is found not guilty of such a crime or if the charges against such person are dismissed or nolle prossed. 
(Former § 3-017) 
Sec. 3-37. - Worker's compensation policy for volunteer firemen. 
    Insurance for firefighters. Volunteer firefighters working for and on behalf of the city shall be covered by and under the worker's compensation policy which covers the workers and employees of the city. 
(Former § 3-018) 
Sec. 3-38. - City employees' retirement system. 
    The ordinance approved August 9, 1983, establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the city, and setting forth the joint trust agreement and the contract for the administration of said plan by the city and the joint municipal employees benefit system, as amended, is hereby incorporated into this Code by this reference and is made a part hereof as if it were fully set out herein. 
(Former § 3-019) 
Sec. 3-39. - Employee benefits. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 47-5-40, the city hereby subscribes to a plan of employee benefits consisting of group health, dental, live and accidental death insurance, offered through the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. Said benefits shall be provided to eligible employees and dependents as defined by the insurance carrier under Policy Numbers 1016955, 1002814 and 1005551 (health) issued by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Georgia (or successor), and Policy Number 80338 (life & AD&D) issued by Greater Georgia Life Insurance Company (or successor) to the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System. The city agrees to include only qualified active employees of the City of Social Circle, on the original census of participants and on participant enrollment forms provided to GMEBS. The city subscribes to the PPO 90/80, PPO 80/60 and the HMO Plans. The city agrees to remit to GMEBS the monthly contributions necessary to keep in force the coverage provided. Such contributions shall be due and payable on the first day of each month and late fees or charges, as established by the GMEBS board of trustees, shall be collected on any contributions not received by the 15th day of each month. The city agrees to provide 30 days advance written notice to GMEBS of its intent not to continue participation in the employee benefit program. The plan year for the provision of employee benefits offered by the city to its employees shall begin on the first day of April, 2003, with the next renewal plan year beginning on the first day of April, 2004. The renewal date in succeeding years shall be established by GMEBS in accordance with its operating rules and regulations. 
(Former § 3-020) 
Secs. 3-40-3-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-14, § 1, adopted July 18, 2017, repealed the former article III, sections 3-76-3-87 in its entirety, which pertained to the code of ethics and derived from the prior code § 3-002(a)-(l). 

Secs. 3-76-3-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS, COMMITTEES AND COMMISSIONS 

Sec. 3-111. - Standing committees. 
    The council is authorized to create standing committees as necessary. 
(Former § 3-011) 
Sec. 3-112. - Rules for the conduct of business. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, Roberts' Rules of Order Newly Revised shall govern the conduct of council meetings. Except as otherwise provided, Roberts' Rules of Order Newly Revised shall be a general guide for meetings. Prior to each meeting, each member should: Study the data, reports, and memoranda accompanying the agenda; review his/her own research and observations on the issues, as well as pertinent ordinances; review alternative solutions to each problem; look for the best solution, determine what positions others are likely to take, and consider where and how much he or she is willing to compromise; be ready to discuss his or her position. The performance of the presiding officer is the key to effective, businesslike meetings. He or she sees that meetings are orderly, conducted per the rules of procedure, and that they progress at an appropriate speed. At the same time, the presiding officer is responsible for ensuring members and citizens have ample opportunity to express their views. Members share with the presiding officer the responsibility for properly conducted meetings. This includes having respect for one another's views. It also requires willingness to compromise, where possible, for the good of the city. 
(1)  Call to order. The mayor, or in his absence the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for meeting, and shall immediately call the council to order. 
(2)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the council, the city clerk or a deputy may call the roll of the members. The names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(3)  Quorum. A majority of all the members of the council shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the council, and an affirmative vote of a majority shall permit the conduct of all business except that for which a greater vote has been mandated by this Code or general law. 
(4)  Order of business. The business of the council shall generally be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order: call to order by presiding officer; roll call; approval of minutes of previous meetings; petitions and communications; reports of standing committees; reports of special committees; unfinished business; new business; adjournment. 
(5)  Reading of minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a member of the council, such minutes may be approved without a reading if the clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. 
(6)  Reports by committees. Any business coming before the council may be referred to the proper committee for investigation and report. It shall be the duty of such committee to examine all matters referred to such committee, and make a report thereof at the next regular meeting of the council, or show good cause why no report is made. Such reports shall not be in writing unless so directed by the presiding officer. 
(7)  Manner of addressing council. No member, while the council is in session, shall speak on any subject unless recognized by the presiding officer. Every speaker shall address the chair, and no member shall interrupt anyone who is speaking, except to call him to order or for explanation. 
(8)  Limitations on addressing council. Any person not a member of the council, who desires to address the council shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer to do so, and then shall step up in front of the podium, give his name and address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and direct his remarks to the council as a body rather than to any particular member, limiting such remarks to three minutes, unless additional time is granted by the council. 
(9)  Code amendments, ordinances, resolutions, contracts and agreements. Unless otherwise provided in this Code, all Code amendments, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, and agreements of the city should generally be prepared, approved, introduced, and adopted in the following manner. 
a.  Preparation. All Code amendments and ordinances should be prepared by the city attorney, and should not be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested by the mayor, or prepared by the city attorney on his own initiative. 
b.  Administrative staff approval. All Code amendments, ordinances, resolutions, and contract documents should, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney or his authorized representative, and should have been examined and approved for administration by the mayor or his authorized representative where there are substantive matters of administration involved. 
c.  Introduction and adoption. 
1.  Ordinances, amendments, resolutions, and other matters or subjects requiring action by the council must be introduced and sponsored by a member of the council, except that the mayor or city attorney may present such to the council, and any council member may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such be adopted. 
2.  An ordinance, amendment, resolution, or contract shall be deemed adopted or approved when it receives the affirmative vote of a majority of the council. For the purposes of tallying such vote, an abstention shall not be counted. The mayor shall cast the deciding vote in the event of a tie. 
(10)  Recording vote. The yeas and nays of the members present shall be recorded in the minutes on any questions taken. 
(11)  Questions of order. The presiding officer shall decide all questions of order, but any council member who is dissatisfied with the decision may appeal to the council in the manner provided by Roberts' Rules of Order New Revised for appealing from decisions of presiding officers. 
(12)  Executive session. The council may, at any time, upon call therefor by the presiding officer or upon motion duly carried by a council member, meet in executive session per Georgia law. Attendance at such session shall be limited to the mayor and members of the city council and such invitees as shall be invited by the majority vote of the council. 
(13)  Legal effect. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, a majority of a quorum at any meeting of the council may vary any provisions of this section. The legal effect of any action taken by the council at any meeting shall not be affected in any way by the failure of the council to follow any rules or provisions of this section unless the council minutes show such failure was brought to the attention of the council at said meeting prior to the taking of the subject action. 
(Former § 3-012; Ord. No. 2017-15, § 1, 8-15-2017) 
Sec. 3-113. - Legislative authority generally. 
    The council shall exercise the legislative functions of the city, and may pass any Code amendment, ordinance or resolution that it deems best for the city; provided that the same is not in conflict with the Charter of the city, the Constitution or laws of the State of Georgia, or the Constitution or laws of the United States of America. 
(Former § 3-013) 
Sec. 3-114. - Municipal planning commission. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  General. The purpose of this section is to facilitate a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development. 
(2)  Planning commission maintained. There is hereby maintained the Social Circle Planning Commission, sometimes hereinafter referred to as the "planning commission." 
(b)  Organization and membership. 
(1)  Membership. The planning commission consists of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of the city be at least 18 years of age; be appointed by the council; and not be serving as mayor or on the council. 
(2)  Terms. The terms of the members are for four years, except that in the appointment of the first planning commission, one of the members was appointed for a term of two years, two of the members were appointed for a term of three years, and two of the members were appointed for a term of four years. In the event that the planning commission becomes inactive, disorganized, or suffers from a mass resignation of its members, the council shall appoint new members to terms as though it were establishing the first planning commission. 
(3)  Vacancies. Any vacancy in membership shall be appointed for the remainder of the term by council, which shall also have the authority to remove any member for any reason at any time, with or without cause. 
(4)  Compensation. All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(5)  Organization. The planning commission shall elect a chair from among its members. The term shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. The planning commission shall also appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city. 
(6)  Rules. The planning commission shall follow the requirements of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law and be guided by Robert's Rules of Order, latest revision, and may, at its discretion, establish further reasonable rules of procedure, and shall determine its place and time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission shall be open to the public. 
(7)  Employees and finances. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the council. 
(c)  Powers and duties of the planning commission. The planning commission shall have all powers, duties and responsibilities provided for in this Code and by law. All actions of the planning commission shall be merely advisory and shall have no binding effect. 
(d)  Meetings of the planning commission. 
(1)  Regular meeting. All regular meetings of the planning commission shall be held at a time and place decided by a majority of the planning commission. 
(2)  Special meetings. The chair of the planning commission shall call special meetings thereof whenever in his opinion the public business may require it, or at the express oral or written request of any three members of the planning commission. Whenever a special meeting is called, the clerk of the planning commission shall notify each member of the planning commission and any other entity legally required to be notified, including without limitation the legal organ(s). 
(3)  Agenda. All reports, communications, requests, amendments, other documents, or other matter to be submitted to the planning commission shall at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting, be delivered to the city clerk, whereupon said clerk or the planning commission shall then prepare a list of such matters according to the order of business and furnish each member of the planning commission a meeting agenda as far in advance as time for preparation will permit. Any matter not on said agenda shall not be considered by the planning commission. 
(4)  The presiding officer-Election and duties. The presiding officer of the planning commission shall assume the chair upon his election by the members of the planning commission. The chair shall preserve strict order and decorum at all meetings. He shall state every question coming before the planning commission, announce the recommendation of the planning commission on all subjects, and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the planning commission, in which event a majority vote of the planning commission shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. The chair shall not vote on any question except in the event of a tie vote or to create a constitutional majority. The members of the planning commission shall elect a vice-chair who shall serve as chair pro tem in the event of the absence of the chair. 
(5)  Call to order-Presiding officer. The chair or in his absence, the chair pro tem, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall then call the meeting to order. In the absence of the chair or chair pro tem, the city clerk shall call the planning commission to order, whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the members of the planning commission present. Upon the arrival of the chair or chair pro tem, the temporary presiding officer shall immediately relinquish the chair. 
(6)  Roll call. Before proceeding with the business of the planning commission, the city clerk may call the roll of the members. The names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(7)  Quorum. A majority of the members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum at meeting. 
(8)  Order of business. Promptly at the beginning of each meeting, the members of the planning commission shall take their regular stations, and the business of the planning commission shall generally be taken up using the following as a guide as to order: roll call; approval of minutes of previous meeting; new business; unfinished business; miscellaneous; and adjournment. 
(9)  Reading of the minutes. Unless a reading of the minutes is requested by the chair or a member of the planning commission, such minutes may be approved without reading if they have been provided to the members before the meeting. 
(10)  Presiding officer may debate. The presiding officer may debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed on all members and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a planning commission member by reason of his action as the presiding officer except as otherwise specified in this section. 
(11)  Obtaining the floor. Every member desiring to speak shall address the chair, and upon recognition by the presiding officer, shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all personalities and indecorous language. 
(12)  Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless it is to call him to order, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined and, if in order, he shall be permitted to proceed. 
(13)  Privilege of closing debate. The individual initiating a request shall have the privilege of closing the debate. 
(e)  Addressing the planning commission. 
(1)  General. Any person planning to address the planning commission shall first secure the permission of the presiding officer. 
(2)  Addressing the commission after motion made. After a motion is made by the planning commission, no person shall address the planning commission. 
(3)  Manner of addressing planning commission; time limit. Each person addressing the planning commission shall stand, shall give his name and address in an audible tone of voice, and unless further time is granted by the planning commission, shall limit his address to five minutes. All remarks shall be addressed to the planning commission as a body and not to any member thereof. No person, other than the planning commission and the person having the floor, shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member of the planning commission, without the permission of the presiding officer. No question shall be asked except through the presiding officer. 
(4)  Silence constitutes affirmative vote. Unless a member of the planning commission states that he is not voting, his silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote. 
(e)  Decorum. 
(1)  By planning commission members. While the planning commission is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither delay or interrupt the proceedings, disturb any member while speaking, nor refuse to obey the orders of the planning commission or its presiding officer. 
(2)  By persons. Any person making personal, impertinent or slanderous remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the planning commission shall be barred from further audience before the planning commission, unless permission is granted by a majority vote of the planning commission. 
(3)  Enforcement of decorum. The Walton County Sheriff, or such member or members of the sheriff's department as he may designate, or a representative of the city department of public safety, shall be sergeant-at-arms of the planning commission meetings and shall carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the planning commission meeting. Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant-at-arms to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest. 
(g)  Miscellaneous. 
(1)  Special committees. All special committees shall be appointed by a majority of the planning commission. 
(2)  Adjournment. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and decided without debate. 
(3)  Legal effect. The legal effect of any action taken by the planning commission at any meeting shall not be affected in any way by the unintentional failure of the planning commission to follow any rules or provisions of this section, if the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law was not violated, unless the planning commission minutes show such failure was brought to the attention of the planning commission at said meeting prior to the taking of the subject action. 
(Former § 3-016) 
Sec. 3-115. - Recreation planning and advisory commission. 
(a)  Purpose. 
(1)  To advise the county commission on the broad range of recreation and leisure time needs of the residents of the city. 
(2)  The commission shall provide advice, counsel, and assistance to the Walton County Parks and Recreation Department with regard to recreation needs of city residents, conduct fund raisers for the Social Circle Booster Club, provide oversight on Booster Club finances and concession operations, administer and account for Booster Club funds, and identify potential recreational activities and programs for Booster Club financial support. 
(b)  Membership. The commission shall consist of nine members, each of whom shall be residents of the city or within the school district of the Social Circle City Schools. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve without pay for a term of four years. 
(c)  Annual reports. The commission shall submit to the mayor and council an annual report of fees and revenues from fund raisers, concessions, gifts and bequests, both real and personal property or donations. Such revenue and other receipts shall be subject to an annual audit by the city. 
(d)  Officers; powers. Upon appointment the commission shall meet and organize by electing one of their members chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission shall have power to adopt bylaws, rules and regulations to carry out the purposes of the commission. 
(Former § 3-021) 
Sec. 3-116. - Main Street commission. 
(a)  Purpose. This article is created by the mayor and city council of the City of Social Circle, Georgia (hereinafter referred to as "mayor and council") to provide an organizational structure for the joint participation of private and public interests in the economic development of the business district of the city. The commission established by the ordinance from which this section derives shall be exclusively empowered with overseeing the Main Street Program, as that term is described in the rules, regulations and guidelines of the state department of community affairs. The Main Street commission is further charged with raising and overseeing the use of contributed private capital through deductible charitable contributions to the city given for the dedicated purpose of paying for Main Street Program initiatives within the Main Street district. 
(b)  Creation, appointment and compensation. A commission of the city is hereby created by official action of the mayor and council. The commission shall be the exclusive board of directors of the Main Street Program whose title shall be "Social Circle Main Street Commission" (hereinafter referred to as the "Main Street commission"). The registered office of the Main Street commission shall be city hall in the City of Social Circle with the address of P.O. Box 310, Social Circle, Georgia. The operational office of the Main Street commission shall be the Social Circle Visitors Center. This entity is a subsidiary commission of the city and all contributions to this organization shall be deemed gifts to the City of Social Circle, Georgia and deductible under the current statues and regulations of the Internal Revenue Code. All financial accounts of the Main Street commission shall be deemed public funds, subject to the annual review of the auditors of the city and shall be maintained under the standards of fund accounting for cities required under the Official Code of Georgia for cities. 
(1)  Membership, qualifications and terms of office. 
a.  The Main Street commission shall consist of 15 members, each of whom shall serve a maximum term of three years. Twelve members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor and council. One commissioner shall serve as the representative of the historical preservation commission ("HPC") and be appointed by the HPC. One commissioner shall serve as a representative of the city's downtown development authority ("DDA") and shall be appointed by the DDA. One commissioner shall serve as a representative of the city planning commission and shall be appointed by the planning commission. The mayor of the city and the city manager shall serve as the city representatives to the commission with the authority to participate in discussions, but not vote or be counted toward a quorum. The commissioner serving as the planning commission representative is the only member that shall not have the power to vote. To ensure continuity of the Main Street commission, the initial terms are staggered as provided on Exhibit "B" attached to Ord. No. 2017-3 and incorporated herein by reference. In future appointments, the commission positions shall be referred to by the seat number affixed to the attached list. The commissioners shall have the following standards for appointment: 
b.  At least four members shall be residents of the city. 
c.  At least two members shall be business owners in the Main Street district. 
d.  At least one member shall own property in the Main Street district. 
(2)  Appointment, vacancies and removal. 
a.  When appointing Main Street commission members, the city clerk shall take action as may reasonably be required to inform city residents, business owners in the Main Street district and property owners in the Main Street district that an opening exists on the Main Street commission, including the publication of a notice in the principal newspaper of general circulation in the city. The city clerk shall accept applications from interested individuals. Acting as a committee of the whole, the mayor and council, chaired by the mayor, shall review the applications, interview applicants, and recommend a short list of potential candidates. Confirmation shall be by a majority vote of the mayor and city council. 
b.  If a member is unable to complete a term of office, then an appointment to fill the unexpired term shall be made in the same manner as making an initial appointment. A member so appointed shall serve the remainder of the unexpired term of his or her predecessor. 
c.  If a member is absent from three consecutive regular monthly meetings of the commission, without a Main Street commission approved excuse, the offending commissioner may be subject to being removed and replaced by official action of the mayor and council after a written request is made by the main street commission seeking removal of the absent commissioner. Members may participate via teleconference, with the approval of Main Street, if they are unable to attend a meeting. Industry appointees may send a substitute if they are unable to attend a Main Street meeting. 
(3)  Members shall serve without compensation, but may be reimbursed for reasonable expenses as approved by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Powers and duties. The Main Street commission shall: 
(1)  Make an annual report to the mayor and council on the economic condition of the Main Street district. 
(2)  Make recommendations to the mayor and council on economic and development issues concerning the city's business district. 
(3)  Search for local, state, federal, and private grants and other funds for the economic development of the Main Street district. 
(4)  Create and maintain a plan for the Main Street district incorporating the Georgia Main Street Association's four-point approach of organization, promotion, economic restructuring, and design as set forth in the Annual Standards for Accreditation, a copy of which is attached to Ord. No. 2017-3 as Exhibit "C". 
(5)  Faithfully fulfill all the conditions and terms of the Main Street memorandum of understanding as amended in the future and as set forth initially in the document attached to Ord. No. 2017-3 as Exhibit "D". 
(6)  To budget, invest, and when dedicated funds are held by others for the Main Street program, to oversee the budgeting and investment of such funds contributed to the Main Street Program including, but not limited to, the funds held by Social Circle Main. 
(7)  To generally carry on, conduct, promote, operate and undertake any transaction or operation necessary to carry out the powers and duties outlined herein. 
(8)  To make every effort to fulfill and to continue to fulfill in the future all the Annual Standards for Accreditation set forth in the documents attached hereto as the Georgia Main Street 2016 Annual Standards for Accreditation as amended in the future. 
(9)  To make all records available and assist the city auditor in the financial review of all contributions, public expenditures, investments, revenues and expenditures of the Main Street commission. 
(10)  To work with the state department of community affairs in administering the Main Street program consistent with and pursuant to its other standards for the Main Street program. 
(11)  To conduct all meetings subject to the notices and terms of the Georgia Open Meetings Law and to keep and make available all records, minutes and other written items, including communications, for review and copying pursuant to the Georgia Open Records Law. 
(d)  Assistance by the city. The city, through the action of the mayor and council, shall provide technical and clerical assistance as the Main Street commission by maintaining a permanent and complete record of the activities of the Main Street commission in the records of the clerk of the city. 
(e)  Bylaws, officers and quorum. The Main Street commission shall have the authority to supplement this section by adopting rules and procedures, such as bylaws, for the transaction of its business. The Main Street commission shall have the prerogative to adopt reasonable rules and bylaws without amendment to this section or the vote of the mayor and council. The Main Street commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The Main Street commission shall meet at least monthly. Meetings and notices of meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Georgia Open Meeting and Records Act, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-70. 
(1)  A quorum shall consist of a majority of the current appointed and serving members. For purposes of establishing a quorum, commissioners appointed by the HPC, DDA and planning commission shall be counted. A vote of a majority of the members attending the meeting is needed to take action. 
(2)  The Main Street commission shall elect a chair and such other officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. Officers shall serve one-year terms and shall be eligible for reelection. The Main Street commission shall elect its initial officers at the first meeting following their appointment and thereafter in February of each year. 
(Ord. No. 2017-3, §§ 1-5, 2-21-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 20174-3, §§ 1-5, adopted February 21, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 3-116 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 3-117-3-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-21, §§ 1-8, adopted September 19, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article V, sections 3-131-3-138 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-131. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in public purchasing and contracting with the city, to give city staff objective rules to follow in expending the resources of the city, to maximize the purchasing value of public funds in procurement, and to provide safeguards for maintaining procurement and contracting systems of quality and integrity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 1, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3-132. - Eligibility. 
    Every new contractor contracting with the city, and any subcontractor that contractor hires, must register with the federal work authorization program, or E-Verify, in order to be eligible to perform work for the city. Contracts between the city and contractors, and between the contractors and their subcontractors, must be accompanied by sworn affidavits attesting to affiant's registration with E-Verify and compliance with E-Verify's citizenship requirements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 2, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3-133. - Utilization of facilities agreements. 
(a)  The city manager or any designee of the city manager is authorized to approve and execute facility use agreements that involve the request of a single party to use a city facility (park, town green, etc.) for a one-time event. 
(b)  The city manager is authorized to approve and execute programming agreements that involve the request of an organization to use a city facility (park, town green, etc.) for a series of connected events that span an entire season (e.g. a soccer organization's use of the park for the fall season). 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 3, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3-134. - Sole source procurement. 
    A contract may be awarded without competition when the city manager determines, in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required supply, service or constructed item. The city manager shall conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and other terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each contractor's name, the amount and type of each contract, and a listing of the item(s) procured under each contract. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 4, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3-135. - Emergency procurements. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the city manager may make or authorize others to make emergency procurements of supplies, services, or construction items when there exists a threat to public health, welfare, or safety; provided that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and for the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. This provision shall not abrogate the city's requirements as specified in the Official Code of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 5, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3-136. - Financial policy city manager authority. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to make all expenditures and purchases for regular budgeted items approve by the city council with the express limitation that a capital expenditure that has not been specifically identified in the budget must be identified by specific action of the mayor and city council by resolution prior to purchase. 
    The city manager is also authorized to spend and purchase items that are non-pre-budgeted goods and services up to $25,000.00 without mayor and council approval provided there is contingency funds available from the budget or other approved non-budget revenue sources including reserves. 
    Notwithstanding the terms of this paragraph, the city manager is required to follow all other bidding requirements of this article. With the approval of the city manager, department heads are authorized to purchase goods and services up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 6, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3-137. - Bids and proposals. 
    The two primary procurement methods for the city shall be competitive sealed bidding and competitive sealed proposals. All procurements shall be made via one of these two methods unless the procurement falls under the sole source procurement, or emergency procurement sections above, which serve as exceptions to these two primary methods. The terms and conditions of the purchasing section of the financial policies of the current budget are incorporated into this article as Schedule 1 attached to Ord. No. 2017-21 and incorporated herein by reference. 
(1)  Competitive sealed bidding. An invitation for bids shall be issued and shall include specifications, and all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. Adequate public notice of the invitation for bids shall be given a reasonable time, not less than 15 calendar days prior to the date set forth therein for the opening of bids. The public notice shall state the place, date, and time of bid opening. Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The amount of each bid and such other relevant information as the city manager deems appropriate shall be recorded. The record and each bid shall be open to public inspection. 
Bids shall be unconditionally accepted without alteration or correction, except as authorized in this article. Bids shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids-no other criteria may be used in bid evaluation. Such requirements may include criteria to determine acceptability such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery, and suitability for a particular purpose. 
Correction or withdrawal of inadvertently erroneous bids before or after bid opening, or cancellation of awards or contracts based on such bid mistakes, may be permitted where appropriate. Mistakes discovered before bid opening may be modified or withdrawn by written notice received in the office designated in the invitation for bids prior to the time set for bid opening. After bid opening, no changes in bids shall be permitted unless the bidder can show by clear and convincing evidence that a mistake of a nonjudgmental character was made, the nature of the mistake, and the bid price actually intended. In lieu of bid correction, a low bidder alleging a material mistake of fact may be permitted to withdraw its bid if: (1) the mistake is clearly evident on the face of the bid document but the intended correct bid is not similarly evident, or (2) the bidder submits evidence which clearly and convincingly demonstrates that a mistake was made. All decisions to permit correction or withdrawal of bids shall be supported by written determination by a city official. 
The contract shall be awarded with reasonable promptness by appropriate written notice to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in the invitation for bids. In the event the low responsive and responsible bid for a given project exceeds available funds as certified by the appropriate fiscal officer, the city manager is authorized, when time or economic considerations preclude re-solicitation of work of a reduced scope, to negotiate an adjustment of the bid price with the low responsive and responsible bidder, in order to bring the bid within the amount of available funds. 
(2)  Competitive sealed proposals. When the city manager, or other relevant department head, determines that the use of competitive sealed bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the city, a contract may be entered into by use of the competitive sealed proposals method. 
As provided in a request for proposals, discussions may be conducted with responsible offerors who submit proposals determined to be reasonably susceptible of being selected for award for the purpose of clarification to assure full understanding of, and conformance to, the solicitation requirements. 
Award shall be made to the responsible offeror whose proposal is determined in writing to be the most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No factors other than those set forth in the request for proposals may be used in the evaluation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 7, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 3-138. - State requirements. 
    The city hereby incorporates herein by reference the notice, bonding, and other procurement requirements of the state as specified in O.C.G.A. tit. 13, ch. 10 and tit. 36, ch. 91. Any project or contract governed by these statutes shall follow and satisfy the requirements therein, notwithstanding any conflicting provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 2017-21, § 8, 9-19-2017) 
Chapter 4 - TAXATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SPECIFIC TAXES LEVIED 

Sec. 4-26. - Ad valorem tax. 
(a)  Rate of levy. The council may set and levy to meet the ordinary current expenses of the city an annual ad valorem tax upon all real and personal property within the city. 
(b)  Assessment and fair market value. All property subject to municipal ad valorem taxation shall be assessed at 40 percent of its fair market value. The basis for fair market value shall be 100 percent of the fair market value determined for the property for city ad valorem tax purposes. 
(c)  Appeal of assessment. Any taxpayer may appeal from an assessment by the board of tax assessors to the board of equalization as to matters of taxability, uniformity of assessment, and value, and if still dissatisfied may appeal to the Superior Court of Walton County from a decision of the county board of equalization. All such appeals shall be made in the manner provided by law. 
(d)  When taxes are due and payable. Ad valorem taxes shall become due on the 20th day of October each year and shall be deemed delinquent if not paid within 60 days after said due date. Tax bills showing the assessed valuations, amount of taxes due, tax due dates, and information as to delinquency dates and penalties shall be sent to all taxpayers at least 30 days prior to the due date, but failure to send a tax bill shall not invalidate any tax. Delinquent taxes shall bear interest at 12 percent per annum from due date. 
(e)  Failure to pay tax. The city shall issue an execution against any person who has defaulted in the payment of any ad valorem tax. The execution thus issued shall be a lien on all the property of such person, both real and personal, and shall be placed in the hands of the city officer responsible for collection by levy and sale. 
(f)  Against whom charged. Taxes are to be charged against the owner of the property if known, or against the specific property itself if the owner is not known. Life tenants and those who enjoy the use of the property are chargeable with the tax. 
(g)  Exempted property. The property exempt from ad valorem taxation under law shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxation. 
(Former § 4-001) 
Sec. 4-27. - Malt beverage excise tax levied under Georgia law. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of malt beverages within the city an excise tax in the sum of $0.05 per 12 ounces and in similar proportion of bottles, cans, and containers of various sizes. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The malt beverage excise tax is levied against and shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in malt beverages in the municipality. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The malt beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of malt beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size and type of container. Any tax remaining unpaid at the expiration of 15 days from the due date shall be delinquent. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city and failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Former § 4-002) 
Sec. 4-28. - Alcoholic beverage excise tax levied under Georgia law. 
(a)  Rate of levy. There is hereby set and levied on the sale of alcoholic beverages, excluding fortified wine, an excise tax in the sum of $0.80 per wine gallon and in similar proportion for bottled containers of various sizes. 
(b)  Against whom levied. The alcoholic beverage excise tax shall be paid by each licensed wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages in the municipality. 
(c)  Due date and required report. The alcoholic beverage excise tax shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of, and payment shall be accompanied by a report itemizing the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages sold for the preceding calendar month by size of container. 
(d)  Enforcement. The tax levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city and, in addition, any failure of payment of such tax shall be grounds for revocation or refusal of the business license of the delinquent taxpayer. 
(Former § 4-003) 
Sec. 4-29. - Insurers license fees assessed under Georgia law. 
(a)  General. The purpose of this section is to impose license fees on insurers conducting business within the city; to impose a gross premiums tax on insurers operating within the state; and other purposes. 
(b)  Insurers license fees. 
(1)  Definition. For the purposes of this section, the term insurer means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(2)  Fee levied. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of $40.00. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered in subsection (b)(3), which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount of $100.00 per year. 
(3)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of $14.00 per location. 
(4)  Insurance agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc. not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (b)(2) hereof in the amount of $100.00 for each such location within the city. 
(c)  Gross premiums tax. 
(1)  Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer doing business within the state writing life, accident and sickness insurance in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this paragraph shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this paragraph is in addition to the license fees imposed by this section. 
(2)  Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer doing business within the state, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in Subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5, in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. "Gross direct premiums" as used in this subsection (c)(2) shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this subsection is in addition to the license fees imposed by this section. 
(d)  Administrative provisions. 
(1)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsection (b) shall be due March 1 each year. 
(2)  Clerk to notify insurance commissioner. The clerk forwarded a duly certified copy of this section 4-29 to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its original enactment. 
(3)  Effective date. This section became effective on January 1, 1995, having formerly been known as a separate ordinance pertaining to insurer's fees and originally adopted by the council at its regularly called meeting of January 9, 1995. 
(Former § 4-004) 
Sec. 4-30. - Public utility franchise taxes. 
(a)  Electric utility franchises. The authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to each electric supplier within the meaning of O.C.G.A. §§ 46-3-1 et seq., ("company") their successors, lessees and assigns, subject to the terms and conditions set forth hereinafter, for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city as from time to time each such company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, insulators, transformers, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing electricity for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places from time to time as each such company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of each such company, to ensure safe and efficient service. The foregoing notwithstanding, the definition of company shall not include any entity with whom the city has a written franchise agreement. 
    The use by any company of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the city for the operation of any of its electric distribution systems, and the grant of requisite street franchise rights, is expressly conditioned upon payment by such company of franchise fees pursuant to this section, and continued use and occupancy of such city property for said purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful, and the city shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this section by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
    Provided further, that the rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
(1)  Each company shall pay to the city on or before the 20th day of each month, a sum of money equal to five percent of the gross sales of electric energy to all of such company's customers served within the corporate limits of the City during the preceding month. The five percent rate herein specified shall be reviewed at the first council meeting in January of each year and may be changed by majority vote of the council to such other levels as are allowed or mandated by law. Such a rate change shall take effect on February 1st of the year in which such rate change is approved. The city should provide the company with written notice of any such rate change. 
(2)  The percentage of gross revenues prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of, ad valorem taxes upon the property of the company in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(3)  In the event the city shall grant to any other electric utility the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions. 
(4)  Each company shall fully protect, indemnify and hold harmless (including payment of the city's reasonable attorney's fees and court costs) the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, by such company, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the city would otherwise be liable. Provided however, the city shall not be indemnified for damages arising from the willful misconduct of the city itself. 
(5)  Each company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power of the city. 
(6)  The grant of rights, permission and consents by the city in this section to any company is specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the city from such company in accordance with the rate, conditions and payment dates set forth in subsection (1) above, and failure by any company to timely pay said franchise fees shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted to such company by this section. From and after the original implementation of this public utility franchise tax, each company's continued use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the city for the aforesaid purposes shall evidence that company's acceptance of the franchise granted hereby and shall render that company liable for payment of all fees required by subsection (1). In the event of forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the forfeiting company shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the company removes all of its property from the city following such forfeiture. 
(7)  The city manager shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this section, and shall have the power to prepare and provide for the collection of the fees herein required. 
(8)  All work done by any company upon the streets, alleys and public places of the city shall be done under the supervision of the city, and any sidewalk, street pavement or other city improvement which may be displaced, obstructed or destroyed by reason of such work shall be properly replaced, reopened or repaired by such company to the satisfaction of the mayor and council of the city. 
(b)  Franchise tax on telephone and telegraph companies. The authority, right, permission and consent are hereby granted to each telephone and/or telecommunication company ( "company") providing telephone and/or telecommunication service within the city their successors, lessees and assigns, subject to the terms and conditions set forth hereinafter for a period of 35 years, to occupy and use the streets, alleys and public places of the city as the company may deem proper or necessary for the overhead or underground construction, maintenance, operation and extension of poles, towers, lines, wires, cables, conduits, appliances, equipment, connections and other apparatus for the business and purpose of transmitting, conveying, conducting, using, supplying and distributing telephone communications service for public or private use, and to re-enter upon such streets, alleys and public places as such company may deem proper or necessary to perform these functions, and to cut and trim trees and shrubbery when and where necessary, in the judgment of such company, to ensure safe and efficient service. 
    The use by the company of the streets, alleys, public places and other property of the city for the operation of any of its telephone communication systems, and the grant of requisite street franchise rights, is expressly conditioned upon payment by company of franchise fees pursuant to this section, and continued use and occupancy of such city property for said purpose without payment of such franchise fees shall be unlawful, and the city shall be entitled to enforce compliance with this section by appropriate proceeding at law or in equity. 
    The rights, permission and consents herein contained are made for the following considerations and upon the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
(1)  The company shall pay to the city on or before the 20th day of each month, a sum of money equal to three percent of the gross recurring local service revenues received from all of such company's customers served within the city during the preceding month. For the purposes of this section, the phrase "gross recurring local service revenues" shall include, but not be limited to, revenues from the following services, all as defined in company's tariff in effect on the date of passage hereof as applicable to the city: 
Basic Local Exchange Service, Directory Assistance Service, Operator Assisted Local Calls, ESSX Service, Touch Tone Calling Service, Interphone Services, Special Billing Services, Arrangement for Night, Sunday and Holiday Services, Custom Calling Services, Touch Tone Service, RingMaster Service, TicketTaker Service, Simplified Message Desk Interface, Message Waiting Indication-Audible, Surrogate Client Number, Telecommunications Service Priority (TSP) System, Electronic White Pages (EWP), Multiline Hunt Queuing, Hot Line Service, Warn Line Service, Automatic Number Identification, Custom Service Area (CSA), Answer Supervision, Caller Detail Information, Data Transport Service, Integration Plus Management Services (IPMS), Frame Relay Service, Switched Multi Megabit Data Service (SMDS), Native Mode LAN Interconnection (NMLI) Service. 
The three percent rate herein specified shall be reviewed at the first council meeting in January of each year and may be changed by majority vote of the council to such other levels as are allowed or mandated by law. Such a rate change shall take effect on February 1st of the year in which such rate change is approved. The city should provide the company with written notice of any such rate change. 
(2)  The percentage of gross recurring local service revenues prescribed to be collected shall be in lieu of all other license and business or occupation taxes, but shall not at any time be considered to interfere with, or in any way prevent the collection of ad valorem taxes upon the property of the company in the same manner as all other property, real and personal, in the city is taxed. 
(3)  In the event the city shall grant to any other telephone and/or telecommunication company the right to use and occupy its streets for like purposes, such use and occupancy shall be upon the same terms and conditions as those herein contained, including the payment provisions hereof. 
(4)  The company shall fully protect, indemnify and hold harmless (including payment of the city's reasonable attorney's fees and court costs) the city from all damages to person or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation or extension of poles, wires or other apparatus, by such company, or conditions of streets, alleys or public places resulting therefrom, for which the city would otherwise be liable. The city shall not be indemnified for damages arising from the willful misconduct of the city itself. 
(5)  The company shall, in constructing, maintaining, operating and extending its poles, wires and other apparatus, submit and be subject to all reasonable exercises of the police power of the city. 
(6)  The grant of rights, permission and consents contained in this section are specifically conditioned upon the payment of all sums due the city from the company in accordance with the rate, conditions and payment dates set forth in subsection (1) above, and failure by the company to timely pay said franchise fees shall constitute a forfeiture of all rights granted to such company by this section. The company's continued use and occupancy of the streets, alleys and public places of the city for the aforesaid purposes shall evidence the company's acceptance of the franchise granted hereby and shall render the company liable for payment of all fees required by subsection (1) hereof. In the event of forfeiture for failure to comply with such requirements, the forfeiting company shall nevertheless remain liable for all sums accrued until such time as the company has removed all of its property from the city after such forfeiture. 
(7)  The city manager shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this section, and shall have the power to prepare and provide for the collection of the fees herein required. 
(8)  All work done by the company upon the streets, alleys and public places of the city shall be done under the supervision of the city, and any sidewalk, street pavement or other city improvement which may be displaced, obstructed or destroyed by reason of such work shall be properly replaced, reopened or repaired by such company to the satisfaction of the council. 
(9)  Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
a.  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b)(8) and (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
b.  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail, end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(10)  Authorized designee. The manager, shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day-to-day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1, et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
a.  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies. 
b.  Report the receipt of a completed application to the council within 60 days of the receipt of such completed application. 
c.  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to ensure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and this section. 
d.  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and this section. 
e.  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once a year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation. 
f.  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(c)  Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. 
(1)  Franchise fee for state issued cable or video franchise. The city requires a franchise fee of five percent of gross revenues generated within the city for any cable or video state franchise issued in its corporate boundaries by the state. 
(2)  Authorized designee. The city hereby authorizes the city clerk, upon receipt of notice to the city of its right to designate a franchise fee for an applicant for or holder of an existing state franchise, to provide written notice to the secretary of state of each applicant for or holder of a state franchise within a service area that is wholly or partially located within the city limits of the five percent franchise fee rate applicable to such applicant or holder of a state franchise. 
(Former § 4-005) 
Sec. 4-31. - Local option sales tax. 
    The council is authorized to levy a local option sales tax as necessary. 
(Former § 4-006) 
Sec. 4-32. - Local option income tax. 
    The council is authorized to levy a local option income tax as necessary. 
(Former § 4-007) 
Sec. 4-33. - Municipal tax sales. 
(a)  Time, place, and manner of sale. The time, place, and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due the city shall be the same as that provided by law for sheriffs' sales for state and county taxes. 
(b)  Purchase by city. The clerk shall attend all sales of property for taxes due the city and in the event no person bids for the property for the tax amount due thereon, the clerk shall place a bid for such property for the city and, if the bid is accepted, take custody of the deed for the city. 
(c)  Redemption of property sold for taxes. Any person whose property is sold in obedience to an execution issued for the collection of city taxes shall have such rights of redemption of said property as are set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-1 et seq. 
(Former § 4-008) 
Sec. 4-34. - Financial institutions business license tax. 
(a)  Per O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1996, and each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon depository financial institution a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions. "Gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this section shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(b)  Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1st of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in said return. The due date for taxes levied by this section shall be April 1st of each year. 
(Former § 4-009) 
Sec. 4-35. - Occupation tax and business regulations. 
(a)  Occupation tax required for business dealings in Social Circle. For the year 2004 and thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession, or occupation in the incorporated area of Social Circle, Georgia, including an out-of-state business with no location in Georgia exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation. Registration of payment of such tax shall be displayed conspicuously in the taxpayer's place of business. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in Social Circle, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or to any officer of the Walton County Sheriff's Department or a representative of the city department of public safety, upon request. Payment of occupation tax shall not be a precondition to the operation of any business or practice of any profession in the city, said tax being for raising revenue. 
(b)  Construction of terms; definitions. 
    Administrative fee means the approximate reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
    Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities engaging in an occupation, profession, or business, for revenue raising purposes. 
    Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by Social Circle as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by Social Circle. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
    Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, or any other form of business organization, but excludes nonprofit organizations and state, federal or local governments or instrumentalities thereof. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who by law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
(c)  Administrative and regulatory fees. 
(1)  A non-prorated, non-refundable administrative fee of $100.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(2)  Regulatory fees may only be imposed in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. 
(d)  Occupation tax levied; restrictions. 
(1)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the incorporated area of Social Circle, based upon the following criteria: 
a.  The number of employees of the business or practitioner who are employed in the business or practitioner's dominant line of business in Social Circle. An employee who works for the same business or practitioner in more than one county or municipal corporation shall be counted as being employed in Social Circle if Social Circle is the local government entity in which the employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
b.  The number of employees of a business or practitioner includes all full-time positions and all full-time position equivalents as follows: An employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time position. The average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to determine the number of full-time position equivalents. 
(2)  Occupation tax schedule. The tax rate determined by number of employees for each business, trade, profession, or occupation is as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the mayor and council of the city: All businesses-$4.50 per employee. 
(3)  Exemptions. 
a.  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
b.  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the jurisdiction and who sell property inside the jurisdiction. 
c.  No occupation tax shall be required from the following: 
1.  Any disabled veteran of any war or armed conflict in which any branch of the armed forces of the United States engaged, whether under United States command or otherwise; 
2.  Any blind person; or 
3.  Any veteran of peace-time service in the United States armed forces who has a physical disability incurred during the period of such service. 
d.  No occupation tax shall be levied on any state or local authority, nonprofit organization, or vendor operating under a contract with a tax-exempt agricultural fair, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 2-2-8. 
(e)  Occupation tax on businesses with no location in Georgia. 
(1)  An occupation tax shall be levied on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within Social Circle for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located in Social Circle. 
(2)  The rate of taxation for businesses taxed under this section is the same as in subsection (d) above. For the purposes of computing the occupation tax on a business described in subsection (1) of this section, the number of employees of the business employed in Social Circle shall be computed based on the number of employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the incorporated area of Social Circle for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients. 
(f)  Reduction for businesses commenced after July 1. When any person commences business on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax that would have been imposed for the entire year. A practitioner of a profession or occupation who elects as his or her occupation tax the amount described in subsection (h)(2) below shall receive no reduction in such amount. 
(g)  More than one place or line of business. Where a business is operated at more than one fixed location in Social Circle, each location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. Such business is required to obtain the necessary registration and pay an occupation tax for each location. 
(h)  Professionals classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c). Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1-18) shall elect as their occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in subsection (d) above. 
(2)  A fee of $100.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this paragraph shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by January 1 each year. If no election is timely made, the occupation tax shall be imposed as set forth in subsection (d) above. 
(i)  Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the US, Georgia, a city or county of Georgia or instrumentalities of the US, shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(j)  Purpose and scope of tax. The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue, not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations covered by O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5-48-13-28. All other businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. This section does not apply to state or local authorities or non-profit organizations. 
(k)  Return required. The owner, proprietor, manager, or secretary of any business subject to the occupation tax for the upcoming calendar year shall, on or before December 31 of the preceding year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth each location at which business is conducted in Social Circle, the line or lines of business that the business conducts at each such location, the business tax identification number, the employees' social security numbers, and the number of employees of the business or practitioner, computed according to the above guidelines, for each line of business at each location. Any omission of federal tax identification number or social security number shall be reported to the state revenue commissioner. Where a business or practitioner has commenced operation after January 1, the return shall be filed no later than 30 days after commencement of such business. 
(l)  Failure to file return. Any person required to file an occupation tax return who fails to file by the date required shall be subject to a civil fine by a court of competent jurisdiction. The fine shall not exceed $200.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. 
(m)  Inspections of books and records; penalty for under-reporting. Social Circle, through its officers, agents, employees, or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made for the sole purpose of determining the number of employees of the business, and upon demand relevant books and records shall be made immediately available for such inspection. Failure to comply shall be punishable by a fine by a court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of city ordinances. The fine shall not exceed $200.00 and may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. Adequate records relevant to the number of employees of the business shall be kept in Social Circle for examination. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of under-reporting, the amount of the deficiency shall be treated as delinquent and shall be subject to the penalties and procedures for delinquent occupation tax amounts provided in subsections (o) through (r) below. This section shall not be construed as requiring any professional or business to divulge information protected under any privilege recognized by the laws of Georgia, including, but not limited to attorney-client privilege. 
(n)  Returns confidential. Except in judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, or as otherwise required by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to divulge or make known in any manner gross receipts set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required hereunder. Information revealing gross receipts shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents, or clerks of Social Circle using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers retained by the city shall be classed as "employees". Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of gross receipts, or the inspection of information revealing gross receipts by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the State of Georgia, the United States, and other local governments. 
(o)  When tax due; tax registration. 
(1)  Each occupation tax for 2004 and succeeding calendar years thereafter shall be payable January 31 of each year and shall, if not paid by May 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in subsection (p) below. If any person commences business for the first time in Social Circle after January 1, the tax shall be due and payable 30 days after the date of the commencement of the business, and delinquency shall occur upon nonpayment after 90 days from the due date. 
(2)  The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the city clerk upon receipt of all amounts due for the occupation tax. Each such registration shall be for the calendar year the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. 
(p)  Penalty for delinquency; interest on delinquent tax; other remedies. 
(1)  Should any occupation tax imposed by this chapter be delinquent, the person liable for the tax shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the tax due. 
(2)  Any occupation tax which becomes delinquent shall bear interest from the date of delinquency on the unpaid amount at 18 percent per annum. 
(3)  The city clerk may collect delinquent occupation taxes in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(4)  A court of competent jurisdiction for the enforcement of ordinances of Social Circle may impose a civil fine for failure to pay the occupation tax (or regulatory fee), not to exceed $500.00, which may be enforced by the contempt power of the court. Per City of Atlanta v. Barnes, this subsection (p)(4) shall not apply to attorneys. 
(q)  Registration to be revoked for failure to pay tax, file returns, permit inspection of books. Upon the failure of any business to timely pay occupation tax or to timely or truthfully make returns, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as above provided, any business tax registration granted under this chapter shall be automatically revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted for a business for which any part of the occupation tax is unpaid, or to a person who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by Social Circle in accordance with subsection (m). However, nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the operation of any business or practice of any profession in Social Circle, regardless of status of the occupation tax registration for such business or professional. 
(r)  Lien for delinquent occupation tax. 
(1)  The city clerk and/or designated tax collector, upon any tax or installment becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, shall issue execution for the amount of said tax and the penalty against the person liable for said tax, which said execution shall bear interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent. The lien shall cover the property in Social Circle of the person liable for said tax, all as provided by the laws of the city and Georgia. The lien of said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. 
(2)  The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of the defendant in Social Circle, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and costs. All proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by the laws of Social Circle and Georgia, including without limitation O.C.G.A. tit. 48, chs. 3, 4 and 5. 
(s)  Reserved. 
(t)  Social circle officials; subpoena and arrest powers. Social Circle's duly designated officers and inspectors have full subpoena powers regarding enforcement hereof. 
(u)  Businesses licensed by state. Each person subject to the occupation tax which is also licensed by the state shall post the state license conspicuously in its place of business. This requirement is not a precondition to the operation of any business or practice of any profession in the city. 
(v)  Businesses not covered by this chapter. The following businesses are not subject to occupation tax, registration fees or regulatory fees provided for herein, but may be assessed other types of taxes pursuant to other general laws of Georgia or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Georgia Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8, et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355. (Businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls.) 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in Georgia governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(w)  Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. An occupation tax shall not apply where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of Georgia or of the United States. 
(x)  Amendment, repeal of provision. This amendment shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or part, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Said amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. 
(y)  Applications of provisions to prior section 4-010. This amendment does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such Prior Code section 4-010 have not been paid in full. Any parts of ordinances or code sections heretofore and hereinafter passed which provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for therein, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(z)  Enforcement of provisions. It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to see that the provisions hereof relating to occupation taxes are observed. 
(aa)  Full force and effect until changed by governing body. This amendment shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the mayor and council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(bb)  Requirement of public hearing before tax increase. The council shall conduct at least one public hearing before increasing the rate of occupation tax set forth herein. 
(cc)  Public hearing in years of increasing revenue. In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the mayor and council shall hold one or more public hearings as part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(dd)  Exemption or reduction in occupation tax. The mayor and council may by subsequent amendment or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the mayor and council. 
(ee)  Conflicts between specific and general provisions. Where there is an apparent conflict in this amendment between specific and general provisions, the specific shall control. 
(ff)  Effective date. This amendment took effect on December 31, 2003. 
(Former § 4-010) 
Sec. 4-36. - Pawnbrokers and dealers in second-hand merchandise. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Dealer in second-hand merchandise means any private entity which holds itself or its place of business out as a buyer, seller or trader of used or distressed merchandise. 
    Licensee is deemed to include all persons, agents or employees operating under said license. 
    Pawnbroker means any private entity with which property is deposited as security for the payment of a debt. 
    Specific entities included in this section. Specifically included in the above defined categories shall be: 
(1)  Any dealer, salesperson, or buyer of gold, silver, jewelry, coins and/or other precious metals, whether said sales, trades or purchases are retail, wholesale or by any form of pawn; 
(2)  Any dealer, salesperson, or buyer of semi-precious metals to include, but not being limited to, iron, steel, copper, aluminum, brass, and wet-cell batteries, commonly referred to as "junk"; 
(3)  Any dealer, salesperson, or buyer of used parts designed for use with automobiles, trucks or other vehicles; and 
(4)  Any private entity providing selling space, singularly or in multiple units, indoors or outdoors, for the purpose of what is commonly referred to or known as a flea market operation shall, for the purpose of this section, be considered a primary license applicant, and as such, shall be held responsible for the provisions of this section concerning transactions made by lessees of said selling space in the same manner as if said lessees were agents or employees. 
    Specific entities excluded in this section. Specifically excluded from the above defined categories shall be: 
(1)  Wholesalers, buyers and sellers, who sell, trade or deal only with retail mercantile establishments; 
(2)  Private sales, commonly referred to as garage sales, when held on the seller's residential property for a period not exceeding 24 hours; 
(3)  Organizational sales by non-profit groups holding fund raisers with all funds going directly to the sponsoring organization; and 
(4)  State licensed used car or truck dealers or repair garages as to the dealing in used vehicle parts. 
(b)  Licensing requirements. 
(1)  Application to be submitted. Any private entity desiring to do business as a pawnbroker or dealer in second-hand merchandise shall make application and notice to the city, at least 72 hours prior to the opening or advertising of the business operation. 
(2)  Application requirements. All notices/applications shall include the following: 1) full name and address of the person, company or corporation; and 2) submission of standard fingerprint cards of principals, agents and employees to the clerk within 24 hours of the application of agents or employees operating in the city. The cost of processing the fingerprinting shall be deposited. 
(3)  Fee required. At the time of submission of an application to operate as a pawnbroker or dealer in second-hand merchandise the applicant shall pay the annual license fee as specified in section 4-35 of this Code). 
(c)  Traveling or itinerant dealers. 
(1)  Provisions applicable to traveling dealers. All of the provisions of this section shall also apply to any traveling or itinerant dealer, his agent, or employees intending to establish a temporary business of a type addressed by this section. 
(2)  Exceptions and specifications. The license fee for an itinerant dealer shall be $25.00, and the license issued shall be valid for a period not to exceed seven calendar days. No itinerant dealer, his agent, or employee may apply for or receive a temporary license more than once during any calendar quarter. Any dealer, agent or employee not previously furnishing fingerprint cards as required by this section must do so within 24 hours of any subsequent application. 
(d)  General regulations. 
(1)  Business hours. No licensee shall open his place of business or conduct any business between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; provided, however, that such a place of business may remain open until 10:30 p.m. on Fridays and until 11:00 p.m. on Saturdays. 
(2)  Premises to be open to police. It shall be the duty of every licensee to admit to his premises the sheriff or any deputy or police officer or a representative of the city department of public safety, or agent of the city who may desire at any time to search for articles missing or stolen, or to make any inspection authorized by this section, without a search warrant. 
(e)  Records requirements. 
(1)  Forms to be used, distributed. Each licensee shall have an adequate supply of pre-numbered three-part forms which, in addition to any records deemed necessary by the licensee, must be made, maintained and distributed by the licensee daily. Specific retention and distribution of forms shall occur as follows: 
a.  The original shall be maintained by the licensee as a permanent record to be kept for a minimum of ten years; 
b.  The second copy of the form shall be kept in the Walton County Sheriff's files or the city department of public safety's files, for comparison with items reported stolen; and 
c.  The third copy will be forwarded by the Walton County Sheriff's Department or the city department of public safety, to the communications record center for G.C.I.C. comparison as computer time availability permits. 
(2)  Licensees to provide accurate descriptions of merchandise. The licensees shall enter an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to them. The description shall include as a minimum: The name of the maker of the article; any identifying mark or number; and a statement of the kind and color of material of which it is made. 
(3)  Licensees to provide accurate descriptions of seller or depositor. The licensees shall also enter positive identifying information of the person who sold or deposited the article, including name, address, date of birth, race, estimated weight and height, and signature. Licensees may take such information from a valid driver's license or other such official form bearing a photograph of the person when completing the form. 
(4)  Entries to be timely made. The entries required in subsection (e)(1) above shall be made at the time of the transaction. Other records maintained by the licensee shall be kept current to reflect every transaction and they shall be made as soon as possible following each transaction. 
(5)  False entries. It is unlawful for any licensee to make any false entry in any records required by this section. 
(6)  Transactions with minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to receive any article in pawn, or purchase any article for resale, from any person under 18 years of age. 
(f)  Holding of goods. 
(1)  Goods to be held for ten days. Any licensee operating under this section who takes any kind of personal property, on pawn or buys such, taking full title thereto, shall hold the property so taken in pawn or sale for at least ten days before disposing of the goods by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise. 
(2)  Exception. This aforesaid provision cannot be waived by contract, but it does not apply nor is it intended to cover purchasers from reputable wholesale supply houses and manufacturers, or goods of a perishable nature. 
(3)  Surrender of stolen property. If is reasonably suspected that any item bought, sold or traded to, or received in any manner by licensees, is the subject of any crime, the licensees shall, upon demand of the sheriff or his designee, or a representative of the department of public safety, surrender the same to the Walton County Sheriff's Department or the city department of public safety. 
(g)  General operating requirements for junk dealers and junk yards. 
(1)  Application of this subsection. The general operating requirements as specified herein shall apply to all junk dealers. 
(2)  Appearance of junk yards. The following appearance requirements shall apply to all junk dealers in Social Circle: 
a.  No weeds in a junk yard shall be permitted to attain a height of more than eight inches; 
b.  Junk shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height, and shall be arranged to permit easy access to all such junk for firefighting purposes; 
c.  The area on the premises where junk is kept shall be enclosed, except for entrances and exits, with a solid, vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of eight feet measured from ground level; 
d.  The fence or wall shall not contain any poster or advertising of any kind except one sign of the licensee not exceeding nine square feet in size; and 
e.  Entrances and exits shall not be wider or more numerous than reasonably necessary for conduct of the business. 
(3)  Sanitary conditions to be maintained. The following sanitary conditions shall be maintained at all junk dealers: 
a.  No junk yard shall be allowed to become a nuisance; nor shall any junk yard be operated in such manner as to become injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the community or of any residents close by; 
b.  No water shall be allowed to stand in any place in such manner as to afford a breeding place for mosquitoes; 
c.  No garbage or other waste liable to give off a foul odor or attract vermin shall be kept on the premises; nor shall any refuse of any kind be kept on the premises, unless such refuse is saleable junk; 
d.  No junk shall be allowed become scattered or blown off the business premises; 
e.  No combustible material of any kind not necessary or beneficial to the business shall be kept on the premises; nor shall the premises be allowed to become a fire hazard; 
f.  Fuel and oil shall be removed from any scrapped engines or vehicles on the premise; 
g.  No junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in any incinerator not meeting the requirements of the city building codes; and no junk or other material shall be burned on the premises in the open; and 
h.  No noisy processing of junk or other noisy activity shall be carried on in connection with the licensed business on any Sunday holiday, or on any day between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(4)  Administrative requirements. The licensee shall permit inspection of the premises by law enforcement at any reasonable time. 
(h)  Penalties. Any licensee or agent or employee thereof violating this section shall be subject to punishment as a misdemeanor by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or by confinement in the Walton County Jail or other detention facility for a maximum term not to exceed six calendar months, or both, at the discretion of the presiding judge. 
(Former § 4-011) 
Sec. 4-37. - Freeport exemption. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2 there shall be exempt from taxation 80 percent of the value of the tangible personal properties set forth in this section for the year beginning January 1, 2005, and all subsequent years unless changed by referendum. Terms used below are defined by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2(a). 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in the state. The exemption provided for in this section shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing, processing or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within the state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. The exemption provided for in the subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse or dock, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this subsection shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. Such period shall be determined based on application of a first-in, first-out method of accounting for the inventory. The official books and records of the warehouse or dock where such property is being stored shall contain a full, true and accurate inventory of all such property, including the date of the receipt of the property, the date of the withdrawal of the property, the point of origin of the property, and the point of final destination of the same, if known. The official books and records of any such warehouse or dock, whether public or private, pertaining to any such property for which a Freeport exemption has been claimed, shall be at all times open to the inspection of all taxing authorities of this state and of any political subdivision of this state. 
(Former § 4-012) 
Sec. 4-38. - Hotel-motel excise tax. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Due date means from the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which tax is to be computed. 
    Guestroom means a room occupied or intended, arranged or designed for occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel means any structure or any portion of a structure, including but not limited to any bed and breakfast house, lodging-house, rooming-house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, inn, public club or private club, containing guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy, by guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. Such term does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
    Monthly period means the calendar month of any year. 
    Occupancy means use or possession or the right to the use or possession of any room or apartment in a hotel, or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the room. 
    Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has the right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license or use or other agreement or otherwise. 
    Operator means any person operating a hotel in this city, including but not limited to the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person otherwise operating such hotel. 
    Permanent resident means any occupant as of a given date who has or shall have occupied or has or shall have right of occupancy of any guestroom in a hotel for at least 30 consecutive days. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, nonprofit corporation or cooperative nonprofit membership, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number, excepting the United States of America, the state, and any political subdivision of either upon which the city is without power to impose the tax provided in this article. 
    Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the operator to the occupant, without any deduction whatsoever. 
    Return means any return filed or required to be filed as provided in this article. 
(b)  Rate of levy. There is set and levied on each occupant of a guestroom of any hotel located within the corporate limits of this city a tax in the amount of five percent of rent for such occupancy. This tax is imposed per O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(1)(A)(3). 
(c)  Collection of tax by operator. It shall be the duty of every operator of a hotel located within the city to collect the tax on occupants imposed herein. 
(d)  Exemption. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no tax shall be imposed upon a permanent resident, or upon rooms, lodgings or accommodations for a period of one or more days for use by state or local government officials or employees traveling on official business. 
(e)  Registration of operator. Every person engaging in or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register the business with the city clerk, on a form provided by the city clerk for such purpose. The required registration shall set forth the name which the operator transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business, and such other information as would facilitate the collection of the tax by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person, by a member or partner in case of ownership by association or partnership, or by an officer in the case of ownership by a corporation. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(f)  Certificate of taxing authority. Upon registration of an operator, the city clerk shall issue to such operator without charge a certificate of authority to collect the tax on occupants. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it relates. 
(g)  Due date and required report. All taxes levied by this article shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day succeeding each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross rent, rent from permanent residents, taxable rent, and amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax levied under this article shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and payment of the amount due if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be the same rate authorized for deductions from state tax under the "Georgia Retailers" and "Consumer's Sales and Use Tax Act". 
(i)  Determination if no return made; unsatisfactory return. 
(1)  Estimate authorized. If any hotel operator fails to file a return as required under the provisions of this article, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of gross rentals of such operator for the period for which the operator failed to file the return and such estimate shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(2)  Notice of determination. The city clerk or his designated representative shall give to the hotel operator written notice of his determination as provided in this section. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city clerk. Service by mail is complete when mailed by certified mail. 
(3)  Interest on amount found due. The amount of the determination made under this section shall bear interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month, or fraction of a month, from the 20th day of the month following the monthly period for which the amount or any portion of the amount should have been returned until the date of payment. 
(4)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the month following the monthly period in which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should expire last. 
(5)  Unsatisfactory return. The same rules shall apply if a return is made but is determined to be unsatisfactory by the city clerk. 
(j)  Required records. Each hotel operator collecting a tax under the provisions of this article shall keep all records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers for a period of at least three years, setting forth dates of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(k)  Administration and enforcement. 
(1)  Authority of the clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax imposed by this article. 
(2)  Records required from operators; form. Every operator renting guestrooms in this city to a person shall keep such records, receipts, invoices and other pertinent papers in such form as the mayor and council may require. 
(3)  Examination of authorized records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by the city clerk may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guestrooms to a person and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(4)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any persons or class of persons having in such persons' possession or custody information relating to rentals of guestrooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy; the date of occupancy and such other information as the city clerk may require. 
(l)  Action for collection of tax. 
(1)  Action for tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any portion of such tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, the mayor and council may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect such amount due, together with interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other incidental legal fees. 
(2)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the city clerk showing that he has been paid or a certificate showing no amount is due. 
(3)  Liability for failure to withhold, certificate of notice of amount due, time to enforce successor's liability. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(4)  Tax credit, or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this section, it may be offset by the city clerk. 
(m)  Penalties. Any operator or other person who fails to register as required in this articles or who fails to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction shall be punished as provided herein. 
(Former § 4-013) 
Sec. 4-39. - Prepaid wireless transactions. 
(a)  9-1-1 Charge on prepaid wireless transactions. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2, there is hereby imposed a prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charge as defined by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(a)(4) upon every prepaid wireless retail transaction occurring within the jurisdiction of the city within the county public service answering point in the amount of $0.75. 
(b)  Collection of 9-1-1 charge on prepaid wireless transactions. Prepaid wireless 9-1-1 charges collected by sellers shall be remitted to the commissioner of the department of revenue at the times and in the manner provided by O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 8 with respect to the sales and use tax imposed on prepaid wireless calling service. 
(c)  Administrative provisions. The city clerk is hereby directed to file with the state revenue commissioner a certified copy of the ordinance from which this section derives and amendments thereto, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(1), within ten days of enactment of the ordinance from which this section derives. 
(d)  Depositing of funds; use of funds. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134.2(j)(5), funds received by this city from charges imposed by this section shall be deposited in the Emergency Telephone System Fund maintained on behalf of the city by the county pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134 and kept separate from general revenue of the jurisdiction. All such funds shall be used exclusively for the purposes authorized by O.C.G.A. § 46-5-134(f). 
(Former § 4-014) 
Chapter 5 - CITY COURT AND ENFORCEMENT OF ORDINANCES 

Sec. 5-1. - Creation of city court. 
    The city court of the city shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by this Code or laws of Georgia, to subpoena witnesses, to punish witnesses for non-attendance, and try all offenses occurring within the territorial limits of the city including traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are now and hereinafter placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of and in accordance with the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. The presiding officer of such court shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the council and shall be known as the judge of the city court. The court shall be convened at the city hall or such other place within the city as designated by the judge of the city court, with the approval of the city manager. 
(Former § 5-001) 
Sec. 5-2. - Judge. 
    The judge of the city court shall be a member of the state bar of Georgia, shall be at least 25 years of age, and have practiced law for at least three years. The council shall provide for the compensation of the judge. The council shall have authority to appoint standby associate judges to serve in the absence of the city judge. Any standby associate judge shall possess the qualifications set forth above for the judge of the city court and have the same powers granted to the judge of the city court. 
(Former § 5-002) 
Sec. 5-3. - Sessions of court. 
    A regular session of the city court shall be held once each month at a fixed hour of a fixed day determined by the judge; provided, that any session may be dispensed with when there is no business pending in the court or no cases are ready for trial. The city court may hold special sessions when, in the judge's opinion, it is necessary or there is urgent cause for trial before the next regularly scheduled session of court. 
(Former § 5-003) 
Sec. 5-4. - Clerk of court. 
    There shall be a clerk of court who shall be appointed or removed by the council. The clerk of court shall: prepare all subpoenas and warrants and maintain a docket thereof that will show the name of the person on whom the subpoena or warrant was issued, its date, at whose instance it was issued and to whom it was delivered; be the custodian of the seal of the court and have authority to certify copies of all official records of the court and to maintain the proper books of accounts, including receipts and disbursements, which the court may maintain; and perform such other duties as may be imposed upon him/her by the judge. 
(Former § 5-004) 
Sec. 5-5. - Practice. 
    The city shall have the opening and conclusion of each case, unless the defendant introduces no evidence. The city shall announce first whether ready for trial and, if not ready, shall be held to as strict a showing for a continuance as the defendant. 
(Former § 5-005) 
Sec. 5-6. - Persons charged with offense; summons and trial. 
    Any person charged with an offense shall be informed by summons in writing served on him of the nature and cause of his accusation; shall have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his behalf; shall have a speedy trial; shall be confronted with the witnesses against him and have the privilege of cross examination as in the superior courts of the state. The same rules as to examination of witnesses and the evidence adduced as obtained in such courts, as far as they are applicable to examining courts, shall be applicable to cases before the city court. The party accused shall have the privilege of defending himself, by counsel or by himself, or both, whichever shall seem proper to him. 
(Former § 5-006) 
Sec. 5-7. - Form and execution of summons. 
    It shall be the duty of the clerk of court in all cases where complaint is made or information given of any violation over which the city court has jurisdiction, whether the party be confined in jail or not, to issue a summons directed to the accused requiring such person to appear in city court to answer such charge, which summons shall set forth the offense, and the time and place of trial, bear the name of the judge of the city court, be signed by the clerk of court, and directed to the sheriff of Walton County, Georgia or the city department of public safety, to be executed, which sheriff or his designee or a representative of the city department of public safety shall execute the same by serving a copy on the accused or leaving it at his place of residence. 
(Former § 5-007) 
Sec. 5-8. - Witness-Subpoena. 
    When the attendance of any witness may be required before the court, the clerk of court shall issue a subpoena, directed to the witness, stating the time and place of trial and the parties to the case, and bear the name of the judge, which subpoena shall be served as other summons by the Walton County Sheriff or his designee or a representative of the city department of public safety. 
(Former § 5-008) 
Sec. 5-9. - Same-Defaulting. 
    If any person so summoned as a witness shall fail, neglect, or refuse to attend a trial, or render at the time a sufficient excuse in the judgment of the court, the defaulting witness shall be liable to a fine not to exceed $50.00 and, if the cause shall be continued on account of the witness's absence, the court may issue an attachment against such witness requiring him to show cause on the day appointed for trial why he should not be further dealt with for contempt. Any law enforcement officer, by virtue of such attachment, shall arrest and confine the person, so as to have him before the court at such time as may be appointed for further hearing of the original complaint. 
(Former § 5-009) 
Sec. 5-10. - Continuances. 
    Where the ends of justice require it, cases may be continued. All continuances shall be addressed to the sound legal discretion of the court. 
(Former § 5-010) 
Sec. 5-11. - Plea of guilty in absence of defendant. 
    Any party against whom any complaint is lodged may plead guilty under such regulations and upon such terms as the court may prescribe and, if such party cannot attend trial, the court may pass such order or sentence in the case as if the party were present. 
(Former § 5-011) 
Sec. 5-12. - Persons implicated to be tried. 
    If, on the trial of any cause before the city court, it appears that any other person besides the one on trial has committed a violation within the jurisdiction of the city court, he may then and there be tried if present, unless the case is continued for legal cause. 
(Former § 5-012) 
Sec. 5-13. - Docket. 
    A docket shall be kept in the office of clerk of court on which shall appear the name of every defendant charged with a violation of this Code or any city ordinances, or of any other offense over which the city court has jurisdiction and, at the trial of all cases in the city court, the city court judge shall record opposite the statement of the case any sentence pronounced and the date; and the clerk of court shall enter, under the city court judge's sentence, the final disposition of the case, that is, whether the fine, if any, was collected and the date of such collection, and when and to whom such amounts were turned over by the clerk of court. 
(Former § 5-013) 
Sec. 5-14. - Enforcement of penalties against corporations. 
    Whenever a corporation shall commit any violation over which the city court has jurisdiction, a warrant shall issue against such corporation for violating such provisions, and the clerk of court shall issue a copy of such warrant, which shall be served by the Walton County Sheriff or his designee or a representative of the city department of public safety, upon any officer of the corporation in the city; and the deputy serving such copy shall at the time notify such person upon whom such service is made of the time and place of trial, and shall make an entry of such service upon the warrant, showing the time of service and upon whom the service was made, and return the same to the city court, and docket the case, which case shall stand for trial in the order which other cases against individuals are tried. If, on the trial, the defendant corporation fails to appear, or appearing fails to plead, the judge of the city court shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and trial shall proceed as though the defendant has appeared and pleaded. Upon conviction of any corporation, there shall be rendered judgment against it for the fine imposed by the presiding officer, together with all costs of prosecution, upon which judgment the clerk of court shall issue an execution against the defendant, which shall be levied and collected by the Walton County Sheriff or his designee or a representative of the city department of public safety, of said city as tax executions in favor of the city are now allowed by law to be levied and collected. 
(Former § 5-014) 
Sec. 5-15. - Appearance bond-Security requirement, maximum amount. 
    The city court judge, the Sheriff of Walton County, or his deputy or a representative of the department of public safety may take bond, with security or without security, at their discretion, in a sum not exceeding $1,000.00 for the appearance of any party accused of a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or any other offense over which the city court has jurisdiction, to stand to and abide by his trial before the city court, and also of witnesses to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in such court. 
(Former § 5-015) 
Sec. 5-16. - Same-Failure to give, subsequent confinement or guard. 
    If either party or witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security as required of them, or either of them, such person so failing or refusing may be confined to the jail of the county, or other place in Walton County, Georgia as may be directed by the city court judge, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify as the case may be. 
(Former § 5-016) 
Sec. 5-17. - Same-Forfeiture for failure to appear, service of rule. 
    All bail taken under this chapter shall be special bail, and the power of the security over the principal shall be the same as in the special bail. Upon the failure of any principal to appear in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city, or of any other offense over which city court has jurisdiction, or by a witness to appear and testify, the presiding officer shall pass a rule requiring the principal and sureties on such bond to show cause on a day therein named not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule, why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. A copy of such rule shall be served upon the principal and security or securities by Walton County Sheriff or his designee or a representative of the city department of public safety at least five days before the time therein set for hearing the same. 
(Former § 5-017) 
Chapter 6 - PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Storage of explosive or inflammable liquid or material. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is designed as a protective measure against fire and explosion and to protect the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the city. Nothing contained in this section shall allow the storage or sale of gasoline, naphtha or other explosive or inflammable liquid or material which in any way violates federal or state law. 
(b)  Storage and installation requirements. It shall be unlawful for any entity to install a storage tank of a greater capacity than 8,000 gallons above or below the surface of the ground, and to keep stored therein gasoline, naphtha or other explosives or inflammable liquid, or to install more than three storage tanks of 8,000 gallons each or a combined capacity of 24,000 gallons, above or below the surface of the ground, and to store therein gasoline, naphtha or other explosive or inflammable liquid or material, for sale at retail or distribution otherwise within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Penalties. Any entity found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000.00, or be imprisoned in jail for a period not exceeding 30 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the violation of this section shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or a temporary or permanent injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. Nothing in this section shall be construed as an election of remedies and it is hereby provided that the city may seek both the criminal penalties and the injunctive relief contemplated by this section for any violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Former § 6-003) 
Sec. 6-2. - Burial of dead bodies. 
(a)  General. This section is a health measure and will be strictly enforced by the city. It shall be unlawful for any individual, partnership or corporation to bury any dead body within the city, except as specified in this section. 
(b)  Burial requirements. Any excavation or grave in which a dead body is buried within the city must be covered with soil of not less than 18 inches on top of vault or burial casing in which body is placed; the ground around said excavation or grave shall be level. 
(c)  Penalties. Any individual, partnership, corporation and/or representative violating this section will guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be fined or punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed one year, or a combination of such fine and imprisonment. 
(Former § 6-005) 
Sec. 6-3. - Open wells. 
(a)  Filling and covering requirement. All property owners with open wells must fill the wells or cover them with concrete slabs that meet with the city's specifications. 
(b)  Penalties. Any individual, partnership, corporation and/or representative violating this section will guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be fined or punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed one year, or a combination of such fine and imprisonment. 
(Former § 6-006) 
Sec. 6-4. - Municipal cemetery. 
    The mayor and council have the power and authority to: Provide, own and furnish, in and near the city, cemeteries for the burial of the dead; regulate and control the interments in such cemeteries; exercise police control and to care for such cemeteries; and, provide city care to lots in such cemeteries. The mayor and council find that the historical and cultural heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity, and general welfare of the people of the city and of the public generally. The cemeteries, graveyards, and burial grounds are uniquely precious and vulnerable thus deserving of devoted stewardship; the city is richly blessed with the heritage and history of its people who are now deceased; that many native pioneers and early residents were integral to the community's development; and that the resting places and memorials of those who have passed are valuable to current and future generations. Therefore, with the intent of caring for and managing the cemeteries, graveyards, and burying grounds, and regulating the use of such areas for the utility, education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens; the mayor and council hereby ordain and enact into law this amended cemetery chapter. 
(1)  Definitions. The following phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
Municipal cemetery or cemetery is the municipal cemetery of the city, which includes Social Circle Cemetery East and Social Circle Cemetery West. 
Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
Resident shall mean anyone who has or formerly had his/her main dwelling in the city and has or previously maintained such residence for at least 60 consecutive days prior to purchasing a burial plot in the municipal cemetery. 
Superintendent is the utilities superintendent of the city. 
(2)  Authority. The superintendent shall manage, operate and maintain the municipal cemetery subject to any limitations and restrictions set forth herein or contained in any applicable laws. 
(3)  Rules and regulations. The council may establish rules and regulations for the use of the cemetery relating to: Subdividing the cemetery into burial plots; capacity of each plot; location of graves; and type of plantings, monuments and markers that will be permitted for the proper and most attractive development of the cemetery. These rules include without limitation the following: 
a.  The use of wire, iron stands, rocks, concrete containers, or breakable containers causes hazards to visitors, lawn maintenance personnel and machinery, and are strictly prohibited. 
b.  During the grass cutting season, between the first of March and the last of October, any flowers or floral arrangements, or any other items must be placed in the permanent vase on the flat marker. Any other types of flower or floral arrangement which cannot be put in these vases are not permitted. 
c.  No trinkets (small ceramic statuary, beads, crosses, lights, etc.) are allowed on any grave space or marker since these cause mowing and trimming hazards which may harm visitors and lawn maintenance personnel and machinery. The plot owner agrees to not attempt to establish a shrine to their loved one or around a grave, inurnment, or crypt. 
d.  The city reserves the right to: 
1.  Enter upon any area and remove any monument, effigy, structure, inscription, or other items placed on, upon or near any plot that is in violation of these rules and regulations. Any items removed will not be held for reclamation and will be deemed abandoned property and will be disposed of at the city's discretion. The city will have no liability for any loss or damage to any items placed on or near a plot in violation of these rules and regulations or removed by the city; 
2.  Remove floral arrangements that have become unsightly in the opinion of the city; and 
3.  Grade and improve all sections of the city cemetery. 
e.  The plucking of, or removal of, any plant or flower, either wild or cultivated, is strictly prohibited. Planting, mowing or maintenance of any kind by anyone other than the city or those whom are contracted by the city is strictly prohibited. 
f.  The city or any contract company for the city will not be held responsible for damages to any grave marker. 
g.  Any changes such as: address, phone number or ownership of family plot are the sole responsibility of the owner to notify the city of these changes. 
h.  The city must be notified when a marker is placed so that it may be placed within the boundaries of the grave. 
i.  In the perpetual care cemetery, coping shall be grass, marble or granite, not gravel. 
(4)  Duties of the superintendent. Direct cemetery. The superintendent shall: Look after and take proper care of the cemetery and see that no plot is used or occupied in violation of this section or of any rule or regulation; Collect and turn over fees-All fees and charges collected by the superintendent for duties and services performed in connection with the cemetery shall be for the use of the city and shall immediately be turned over to the city; Supervise interment-The superintendent shall supervise internment when it is necessary for him to do so. The superintendent is authorized to require the removal of any trees or shrubbery on privately owned plots which are causing damage to adjacent plots or to city-owned property. The superintendent is authorized to effect the removal and to assess the property owner for the cost of the removal. Payments of assessments shall be made to the city clerk. All private removal of trees and shrubbery from plots shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent and shall be at the expense of the respective plot owner. The city shall be held harmless from any damages occurring as a result of the removals. 
(5)  Rules for interment. No deceased person shall be interred in the cemetery until the superintendent has found: That a burial permit has been obtained from the public health officer as required by law; that the plot in which burial is to be made has been fully paid for; that the person arranging for such burial has the right to the use of such plot; that such plot is not used beyond its capacity; and that proper record is made of the name and age of the deceased person and of the exact location of the grave. One cremated remains may be included in addition to a casket in each burial plot, or four cremated remains in a burial plot if no casket. In either case, limited to one headstone per plot. 
(6)  Lot valuation. The city may place a value on all unsold plots in the cemetery, and may record such valuations on an official map or plan of such cemetery. There shall be no discrimination in the sale of lots on any basis, except that per resolution currently residents shall be charged a purchase fee of $800.00 per plot purchased and non-residents shall be charged $2,000.00 per plot purchased, unless changed by resolution. Any person desiring to purchase a plot(s) may do so upon payment of the price fixed for such plot or upon making arrangements, according to rules and regulations that may be established by the council, for the purchase of such plot on an installment plan. In the columbarium wall the fee is per resolution $700.00 per niche for a city resident and $1,750.00 per niche for a non-resident, unless changed by resolution. 
(7)  Records of ownership. The city manager may keep full and complete records of the ownership of all plots in the cemetery, of the burial capacity of each plot, sold and unsold, of the location of each grave, of the names of the persons buried in each grave that has been or shall hereafter be used, and of the date of each burial. 
(8)  Accounts. The city manager shall keep detailed accounts of receipts and expenditures of the cemetery. 
(9)  Reports. The city manager may make an annual report on the condition of the cemetery providing the council with all information necessary to determine the amount that should be appropriated for the cemetery in the budget. 
(Former § 6-007) 
Sec. 6-5. - Nuisances. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings respectively ascribed below: 
    Nuisance means anything which causes hurt, inconvenience, or damage to another, provided that the hurt, inconvenience or damage complained of shall not be fanciful or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but rather such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person; and the fact that the act done may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. 
(1)  Nuisance per se. An act, occupation, or structure which is a nuisance at all times and under any circumstances, regardless of location or surroundings. 
(2)  Private nuisance. A nuisance limited in its injurious effects to one of a few individuals. 
(3)  Public nuisance. A nuisance which damages all persons who come within the sphere of its operation, though it may vary in its effects on individuals. 
(b)  Proceedings to abate generally. Any nuisance existing within the corporate limits of this city, except for a nuisance hereinafter expected, shall be abated in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
(1)  Initiation. Proceedings to abate a nuisance, whether public or private shall be initiated by the filing of a complaint with the city clerk, which such complaint shall state the nature and location of the nuisance and the name and address of the complainant or complainants. In the case of a private nuisance, the complaint shall be filed by the person or persons injured by the nuisance; in the case of a public nuisance, the complaint shall be filed on behalf of the public by a city official or by a citizen specially injured by the nuisance. 
(2)  Notice of hearing. Upon the filing of a complaint as hereinabove provided, the city clerk shall issue a notice directed to the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance complained of is located and, if the person maintaining the same be a different person from the owner, then also to the person maintaining the nuisance, calling on such person to show cause, either personally or by attorney, at the time and place directed by the city clerk, why such activity alleged to be a nuisance should not be ordered abated and removed by the mayor and city council. Such notice shall be served at least two days prior to the date set for the hearing by any police officer of the city, and shall be made either personally or by leaving a copy at the party's most notorious place of abode. 
A copy of such notice shall also be mailed to the complainant or complainants. 
(3)  Order of abatement. If after hearing all the evidence, the mayor and council should decide that the activity complained of is a nuisance, the mayor shall issue an order directed to the police chief or any member of the police force, commanding that the nuisance be abated. A copy of such order of abatement shall be served on the party or parties maintaining the nuisance. 
(4)  Effect of noncompliance. In the event of a refusal to comply with the order of abatement issued by the mayor, the person or persons maintaining the nuisance shall be subject to arrest for violation of state law. 
(c)  Summary abatement. Nothing contained in the foregoing section shall prevent the mayor and city council from summarily and without notice ordering the abatement of or abating any nuisance per se in the law or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(d)  Findings regarding unsafe, unsanitary or abandoned buildings, dwellings or structures. Under the authority of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9, the mayor and council specifically adopt by incorporation herein by reference the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-8, 41-2-9, 41-2-10, 41-2-11, 41-2-12, 41-2-13, 41-2-14, 41-2-15, 41-2-16, and 41-2-17. These provisions are adopted as an official ordinance of the city as if specifically set forth herein in their entirety. 
(e)  Duties of city manager or her designee. Pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 41-2-10, the mayor and council of the city hereby designate the city manager or her designee as the public officer with the authority to enforce the provisions of § 4.4 of the City of Social Circle Code of Ordinances. The city manager or her designee may determine, under existing ordinances, that dwellings, buildings or structures are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such buildings, dwellings, or structures which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwellings, buildings or structures; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residences of this municipality. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; and 
(6)  Uncleanliness. 
    The public officer designated by this section may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
    Within the context of this section, the public official shall utilize the existing codes of the city to the standard for satisfaction of the provisions of this section including but not limited to the electrical codes, building codes and fire codes previously adopted by the city. 
(e)  Further duties of city manager or her designee. The city manager or her designee is hereby authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this section and O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through § 41-2-10 and O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 through § 41-2-17, including the following powers in addition to others granted in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 through § 41-2-10 and O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 through § 41-2-17: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(3)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(4)  To appoint and affix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of the ordinances and provisions adopted herein; and 
(5)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under the ordinance to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Ord. No. 2017-7, § 2, 4-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-7, § 2, adopted April 18, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 6-5 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 6-6-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 6-26. - Generally. 
(a)  Definition. 
    Emergency management shall mean the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disasters, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, fire fighting services, police services, medical and health services, rescue, engineering, warning services, communications, protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons, evacuation of persons from stricken areas, emergency welfare services, emergency transportation, plant protection, shelter, temporary restoration of public utility services, and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(b)  Office of the county emergency management director. It is the desire and intent of the city to be a part of the Walton County emergency management agency. The chairman, county commissioners of Walton County, with concurrence of the mayors of all cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment, by the governor, a director of emergency management for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
(1)  To represent the council of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management and to assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations; 
(2)  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments the Walton County Plan for Emergency Functions set forth in subsection (a). Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan and Nuclear Operations Plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of Walton County and the cities therein for approval, and then to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
(3)  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Walton County emergency management program, including the submission of required reports, to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
(4)  To submit reports required by the council in keeping with good management practices, e.g., financial, daily activity; and 
(5)  To obtain, with the authority of all governing officials, a facility to be used as the Walton County emergency operating center and to coordinate the activities of the Walton County emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of Walton County governing officials. 
(c)  Walton County emergency management agency. The Walton County Emergency Management Agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency functions describe in subsection (a) above are assigned as follows: 
DEPARTMENT/AGENCY FUNCTIONS County Board of Commissioners and City Mayors Direction and Control Walton County Clerk Administrative Services and Resources County Sheriff's Department; City Police Departments Police Services and Search and Recover Communications County and City Fire Departments Rescue, Fire and Hazardous Material Control Walton County Superintendent of Schools; Social Circle Superintendent of Schools Transportation Services Walton County Road and Bridges Department; City Street Departments Engineering Monroe Water, Light and Gas Commission and Walton County Sewerage and Water Authority Utilities, Petroleum and Solid Fuel Walton County Department of Family and Children Services Social Services Walton County Health Department Health and Medical Services Walton County Chamber of Commerce Emergency Public Information Walton County Emergency Management Agency Evacuation; Radiological Protection; Training; Damage Assessment; Public Property Assistance; Specific Hazards; and State Military Support Walton County Chapter American Red Cross Sheltering and Temporary Housing and Food Services  
    Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Former § 6-001(1.)) 
Sec. 6-27. - Emergency powers. 
(a)  Powers during an emergency or disaster. In the event of a man-made or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of the city, the mayor separately, or jointly with the chairman, county commissioners, or in their absences their legally appointed successors, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues, the following powers: 
(1)  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations pertaining to emergency management, and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
(2)  To seize or take for temporary use, any private property for the protection of the public; 
(3)  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any of such property or supplies among the inhabitants of the county and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
(4)  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(b)  Volunteers. All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this Code shall serve with or without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Former § 6-001(2.)) 
Sec. 6-28. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Former § 6-001(3.)) 
Sec. 6-29. - Mutual aid during local emergencies. 
(a)  Findings and purpose. 
(1)  Findings. The city provides fire protection services to the citizens of Social Circle through its fire department. On occasion local emergencies occur, during which there exist conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property, as caused by natural disasters, riots, civil disturbances or other emergency situations. These local emergencies present potentially major public safety problems, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city. Neighboring political subdivisions are likely to also be confronted with similar local emergencies, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of personnel, equipment and facilities of these jurisdictions. The state has provided for mutual aid during local emergencies through O.C.G.A. §§ 36-69-1, et seq. the Georgia Mutual Aid Act. 
(2)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism where the resources of the city can be combined with resources of a neighboring political subdivision during local emergencies, so that the life and property of all may be better protected and to demonstrate the desire of the citizens of the city to be good neighbors during times of local emergencies in neighboring political subdivisions. 
(b)  Mutual aid authorized. 
(1)  Requesting assistance from neighboring jurisdictions. The fire chief of the city may request assistance and cooperation from neighboring political subdivisions during local emergencies in the city pursuant to the Georgia Mutual Aid Act. 
(2)  Providing assistance to neighboring jurisdictions. The fire chief of the city shall cooperate with and provide assistance during local emergencies to neighboring political subdivisions of the state. 
(Former § 6-002) 
Secs. 6-29-6-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL, GARBAGE DISPOSAL AND YARD TRIMMINGS REGULATIONS 

Sec. 6-51. - Litter control. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Litter includes without limitation all sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description. 
    Public or private property includes without limitation the rights-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands or forests. 
(b)  Scope. 
(1)  Dumping litter on public or private property. It shall be unlawful to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city unless: the property is designated by the city for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized to use such property for such purpose; the litter is properly placed into a litter receptacle or container lawfully installed on such property; or the person is the owner or lawful tenant and has properly placed non-oversized litter at curbside for regular scheduled pickups, in a manner consistent with the public welfare. Oversized litter is that which does not fit in a standard garbage collection company supplied bin. 
(2)  Prima-facie evidence. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any vehicle, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
(3)  Rebuttable presumption. Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) above, whenever any litter is discovered to contain any items which display the name of a person thereon so as to indicate that the item belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be prima-facie evidence that such person has violated this section. 
(4)  Enforcement. All law enforcement agencies and officers of the city and any person, officer or constable appointed by the council are authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with the above regulations. 
(5)  Designation of containers for household garbage. As used in subsections (b)(5) and (6) of this section, household garbage means animal, vegetable and fruit refuse matter and other matter ordinarily generated as by-products of a household or restaurant, including but not limited to, tin cans, bottles, paper, cardboard, plastics and wrapping or packaging materials. The council may provide containers for the dumping of trash or garbage therein and shall be authorized to designate any or all such containers as being suitable for the dumping therein of household garbage only. 
(6)  Misuse or vandalization of container. If a container is clearly marked household garbage only, it shall be unlawful for any person to dump any refuse or other material into the container other than household garbage. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize, any containers provided by the city for the dumping of trash or garbage. Any person who violates subsections (b)(5) or (6) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(7)  Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: by a fine of not less than $300.00 nor more than $1,000.00; in the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street or highway or public right-of-way for a distance not to exceed one mile, all litter deposited by anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; or in the sound discretion of the court, the person may be directed to pick up all litter from any public park, private right-of-way or, with the prior permission of the owner, private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter. The court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this section. 
(Former § 6-004(1.)) 
Sec. 6-52. - Garbage disposal regulations. 
(a)  Collection containers provided by city. The city shall furnish to each single-family residence a roll-out cart and a recycling basket. The owner and lessee shall be responsible for replacing any damaged roll-out cart and/or recycling basket. If an owner or lessee shall move from the residence such owner or lessee shall notify the city and the cart will be reclaimed. The city may either provide roll-out carts and recycling baskets to individual residents of multifamily housing or a sufficient number of stationary dumpsters in each apartment complex for use by residents. All non-residential customers must use and pay for a dumpster or rollout cart for depositing household garbage. Such containers may be furnished by the city or a private vendor. No cardboard boxes may be placed in a container unless they are first demolished and folded so the boxes are flat. 
(b)  Size, bundling and placement of garbage. All household garbage shall be placed in the container. No construction/demolition debris, tires, magazines, ashes, wood, metal, yard trimmings, waste products or other related materials which are not household garbage may be placed in or around the containers. The city will not empty or pick up such containers, and the person depositing or allowing the deposit of such prohibited material shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and remain responsible for lawful disposal thereof. Residential owners and lessees who have been given a roll-out cart and recycling basket shall place the cart and basket near the curb or street by 5:30 a.m. on the day of collection in their area prior to the arrival of the sanitation vehicles and shall remove the cart by 7:00 p.m. of the same day. This requirement of curbside placement may be waived for any person who is physically unable to place the cart on the street. The city manager must approve all such waivers. 
(c)  Monthly charge imposed; persons liable. To defray the costs of collection of garbage and recyclables, monthly sanitary and health fees are herewith fixed and assessed against the owner and occupant of each residence in the city, unless the city, in its sole discretion acting through the city manager, determines it is not practical for the owner or occupant to use such services and such services are not used. The amount of the monthly charges shall be set by the council and a schedule of such charges is on file in the clerk's office, which schedule as amended is incorporated herein by reference. 
(d)  Evasion of monthly charge. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to place or cause to be placed on the premises of another, any garbage, to avoid the monthly sanitation and health charge. 
(e)  Termination of services for non-payment of charges. Any person failing to pay the monthly sanitary and health charge shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, in addition to other penalties, all garbage collection provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due may be immediately terminated by the city. 
(Former § 6-004(2.)) 
Sec. 6-53. - Yard trimmings disposal regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, office, restaurants, warehouses and other non-manufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
    Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into stable, odor-free humus. 
    Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill or transfer station. 
    Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas; includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but not construction/demolition debris, tires, wood, metal, solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
    Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any location where the final deposition of any municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
    Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal or transfer facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludge or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
    Yard trimmings mean leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(b)  Placement and disposal of yard trimmings-Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with other municipal solid waste within the incorporated area of the city. Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city. 
(c)  Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. Yard trimmings shall be sorted and stockpiled, or chipped, or composted, or used as mulch or otherwise beneficially reused or recycled to the maximum extent feasible. 
    The council hereby adopt the following required options for handling yard trimmings: 
(1)  Naturalized, low-maintenance landscaping requiring little or no cutting; 
(2)  Grass cycling by mowing it high and letting it lie; 
(3)  Stacking branches into brush piles for use as wildlife habitats and for gradual decomposition into the soil; 
(4)  Composting on site where material was grown, followed by incorporation of the finished compost into the soil at that site; 
(5)  Chipping woody material on the site where such material was generated; 
(6)  Collecting yard trimmings and transporting them to another site to be chipped or composted for later use; and 
(7)  Chipping woody material for later use as fiber fuel. 
(d)  Penalties. Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed six months, or a combination of such. 
(Former § 6-004(3.)) 
Secs. 6-54-6-75. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-7, § 1, adopted April 18, 2017, repealed the former section 6-54 in its entirety, which pertained to nuisances and derived from the prior code § 6-004(4.). 
 For current provisions pertaining to nuisances, the user's attention is directed to section 6-5. 
ARTICLE IV. - BODY CRAFTING 

Sec. 6-76. - Authority. 
    The legal authority for this is O.C.G.A. §§ 16-5-71, 16-5-71.1, 16-12-5, 31-3-4, 31-5-1, et seq. and 31-40-1, et seq. 
(Former § 6-008(1.)) 
Sec. 6-77. - Purpose and findings. 
    The unregulated operation of body craft studios and body craft procedures constitutes a health risk to the general public, and poses a significant risk of transfer of communicable diseases, infections, pathogens and other harmful agents to and among the citizens of Social Circle. Substandard and poor sanitary conditions exist in the body craft and tattoo industry that pose a health risk to the safety and welfare of the general public. These regulations include reasonable standards that will ameliorate the substandard sanitary conditions in this industry and safeguard the public health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of Social Circle and the individuals who utilize body craft and tattoo procedure rooms. There is a substantial need directly related to the public health, safety, and general welfare to comprehensively address these concerns through the adoption of the following regulations. 
(Former § 6-008(2.)) 
Sec. 6-78. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Antibacterial solution means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the FDA. 
    Antiseptic means any solution used to retard the growth of bacteria approved for application to human skin and includes all products labeled accordingly as approved by the United States FDA. 
    Biohazard means any infectious agent(s) or parts thereof presenting a risk to health or well-being, directly or indirectly, through infection or through disruption of the environment. 
    Board of health means the Newton County Board of Health. 
    Body crafting means physical body alteration by permitted establishments and by licensed operators using: body piercing, tattooing, and cosmetic tattooing. Branding, scarification, implants and suspension shall not be performed in a body craft studio. "Body crafting" does not include practices that are considered medical procedures by the Georgia State Medical Board, which shall not be performed in a body craft studio. Body crafting does not include the painting of the skin with tempura or temporary, non-indelible inks, paints or dyes. 
    Body craft studio means any building or structure where body craft is performed. 
    Body crafter means any person who performs body crafting. 
    Body crafter permit means the authorization granted to the body crafter to perform body crafting. Such permit is the property of the board of health. 
    Body piercing means puncturing or penetration of the skin or mucosa of a person with any sharp instrument and/or the insertion of jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening, except that piercing of the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems shall not be included in this definition. 
    CDC means Centers for Disease Control. 
    Cosmetic tattooing means to mark or color the skin by pricking in, piercing, or implanting indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa. "Cosmetic tattooing" shall include permanent cosmetics, micro-pigmentation, permanent color technology, and micro-pigment implantation. 
    City or town means Social Circle, Georgia, and includes the board of health and its duly authorized representatives or employees. 
    Currently licensed health care professional means professionals licensed by Georgia to perform health care services and includes licensed physicians, registered nurses (RN), licensed practical nurses (LPN), and licensed emergency medical technicians. 
    Department means the department of human resources of the State of Georgia. 
    Director means the director of the board of health or the director's designee. 
    Disinfection means a process that eliminates many or all pathogenic microorganisms, with the exception of bacterial spores from inanimate objects. Guideline for Environmental Infection Control in Healthcare Facilities: Recommendation of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC); U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2003). In the event that HICPAC or the CDC publishes materials or amends regulations applicable to this definition, this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions of these documents, regulations, and recommendations. 
    Easily cleanable means readily accessible, non-absorbent material and of such finish and fabrication that residue may be completely removed by non-mechanical low friction methods. 
    EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    FDA means the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
    Hand hygiene means hand washing, antiseptic hand wash, antiseptic hand rub, or surgical hand antisepsis. Guideline for Hand Hygiene in Health-care Settings: Recommendations of the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee and the HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR); October 25, 2002; 51 RRl6); 1-44. 
    Implant means to fix an object in or under human tissue. Body craft implants include, but are not limited to, three-dimensional body craft applications. This definition of implant does not include medical procedures by board-certified medical and dental personnel. 
    Instrument means any hand piece, needle, needle bar, sharp, device, or other object that is used or may come into contact with a client or may be exposed to bodily fluids during body crafting. 
    OSHA means the United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 
    Owner means the person or entity that owns, maintains or controls a body craft studio and who is responsible for the operation of the studio. 
    Permit means written authorization to operate a body craft studio. 
    Plan of correction means the plan to correct deficiencies in meeting this section. 
    Procedure room means the room in a body craft studio where the body crafter does body crafting. 
    Sanitary means no visible debris, residue or contamination, and reduced microbial contaminants. 
    Sanitized means an effective antimicrobial treatment by a process that provides sufficient chemicals or other suitable method on surfaces for enough time to reduce the microbial count to a sanitary level. 
    Sharps means any discarded article that may cause punctures or cuts to the skin or tissues. 
    Single-use means an instrument or article reasonably anticipated to come into contact with blood and compromised tissue surfaces during use. Such are not to be used on more than one customer or client for any reason, and must be disposed of after use as soon as is possible without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body crafter, the client or the environment. The Director shall determine and publish a list of instruments and articles that are considered single-use. 
    Standard precautions means guidelines and controls, published by CDC which include specific recommendations for gloves, masks, protective eye wear and/or other protective equipment when contact with blood or bodily fluids containing blood is anticipated. Standard precautions apply to blood, all body fluids, secretions, and excretions, excluding sweat, regardless of whether they contain visible blood, non-intact skin, and mucous membranes. (Guidelines for Isolation Precautions in Hospitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol (1996); 17:53-80. Additional references include Guidelines for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989; 38: No. S-6. Recommendation for Preventing Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures. MMWR, July 12, 1991; 40: No. RR-8. Recommendations for Prevention and Control of HCV Infection and HCV Related Chronic Disease. MMWR, October 16, 1998; 47: No. RR-19. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Blood-borne Pathogens Precautions Standard. 29 CFR 1910, 1030.) If CDC, OSHA, or other primary reference or regulatory authority publish materials or amend regulations applicable to this definition, this definition shall be deemed amended to include the latest versions. 
    Sterilization means reduction of microbial life at an order of 10 LOG 6 using equipment capable of delivering full efficacy to all surfaces in the unit chamber, including tubes, lumens, cracks, or other obscured surfaces, including those in packaging. 
    Sterilizer means a piece of equipment that performs sterilization as defined herein. 
    Sterilizer indicator means a device designed to give visual verification that sterilization temperature and/or pressure has been achieved during the sterilization procedure. 
    Studio means a body craft studio. 
    Suspension means piercing of human tissue or skin with hooks or other piercing apparatuses for supporting or bearing weight, either human or object. 
    Tattoo means to mark or color the skin by pricking in or piercing indelible pigments or dyes under the skin or mucosa and includes the definition of tattoo as defined in O.C.G.A. § 31-40-1(1) and as may hereafter be amended; also includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing. 
(Former § 6-008(3.)) 
Sec. 6-79. - Exemptions. 
    These rules shall not apply to a physician or osteopath licensed under O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 34, or a technician acting under the direct on-site supervision of licensed physician or osteopath. 
(Former § 6-008(4.)) 
Sec. 6-80. - Body crafting not allowed in mobile, transitory facilities. 
    Body crafting is not allowed in autos, tents, RV's, trailers, mobile, transitory, or other non-fixed facilities. 
(Former § 6-008(5.)) 
Sec. 6-81. - Responsibilities of body craft studio owner. 
    The owner shall comply with all requirements of this section, all requirements in O.C.G.A. §§ 31-40-1 et seq. and all applicable administrative rules and regulations of the department, including all applicable statutes, rules and regulations regarding disclosure of ownership. The owner shall comply with all city and Walton County Ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of Social Circle. 
(Former § 6-008(6.)) 
Sec. 6-82. - Body craft studio minimum floor plan requirements. 
(a)  All body craft studios shall be constructed, arranged, and maintained to protect the health and safety of its customers and staff. 
(b)  All body craft studios shall be constructed to allow the customer receiving the procedure privacy from observers. 
(c)  Insects, vermin, and rodents shall not be present at the body craft studio, building, or premises. Effective pest control measures shall be taken to prevent such. 
(d)  The body craft studio shall have adequate mechanical ventilation that complies with all applicable provisions of this Code and any other building codes. 
(e)  Walls and ceilings of the procedure room shall be painted or covered to allow effective cleaning. All paint and coverings shall be light color. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be painted or covered to allow to be easily cleanable. 
(f)  Floors shall be approved, nonabsorbent material, which will allow effective cleaning and disinfection. Floors in the procedure room areas shall not be covered by carpet or wood. 
(g)  A clean and sanitary toilet and hand washing facility with a self-closing door and exhaust fan shall be accessible to customers. Such facilities shall be separate from the procedure room. 
(h)  The procedure room shall be equipped with facilities to enable effective hand hygiene using methods currently approved and recommended by the CDC, such as a brushless alcohol-based scrub system or a sink providing hot and cold water under pressure through a mixing valve with no aerator, and with foot or wrist actuated controls. These facilities shall be for the body crafter for sanitizing his or her hands and preparing customers for body crafting. This area shall he supplied with supplies necessary for body crafting. 
(i)  An equipment-washing sink shall be in the studio, distinct from the hand sinks, and shall be in the equipment handling and assembly area. It shall meet National Safety Foundation standards. 
(j)  The procedure room shall have an artificial light source of at least 20 lumens, three feet off the floor. Body craft procedure areas, and equipment handling and assembly areas shall have an artificial light source at least 100 lumens at the level where the procedure is performed. 
(k)  The body craft studio shall utilize a hot water heater, capable of continuously heating water to 100°F and maintaining such temperature, to provide hot water to the studio. 
(Former § 6-008(7.)) 
Sec. 6-83. - Furnishings and fixtures. 
(a)  Furnishings of the body craft studio shall be maintained sanitary, intact, and functional. The studio shall be kept clean, neat, and free of litter and rubbish. 
(b)  Cabinets for storage of instruments, single-use articles, stencils, jewelry, studs and supplies shall be provided for each procedure room and designed, manufactured, and maintained to protect the contents from blood and body fluid contamination. 
(c)  Appropriate furnishings shall be provided in procedure rooms. Surfaces of all furnishings shall be smooth, nonporous, nonabsorbent, corrosion-resistant and easily cleaned and disinfected. 
(d)  Furnishings shall be disinfected with an EPA-approved disinfectant after each body crafting. 
(e)  Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the procedure room, except water as required to ensure the health and safety of the body crafter and/or the client. 
(Former § 6-008(8.)) 
Sec. 6-84. - Body craft studio supplies. 
(a)  Single-use sterile articles shall be in uncompromised, sterilized condition at the time of use, either by processing in a unit that meets the requirements for a sterilizer as defined herein, or packaged and sterilized by the manufacturer in an FDA approved facility. These shall be handled to prevent contamination including all requirements hereof and shall be stored separate from chemical supplies and facilities utilizing open supplies of running water. 
(b)  Any jewelry used in any procedure shall consist of a material rated by the American Society for Testing Materials or the International Standards Organization as suitable for permanent surgical implant, such as stainless steel, titanium, niobium, solid platinum or a dense low porosity plastic such as Tygon or PTFE. Copies of the jewelry manufacturer's documentation, which verify compliance with standards, must be available for inspection on request of the director. Solid 14 karat, or higher, white or yellow nickel-free gold may also be used. Purity verification must be available for inspection on request of the director. 
(c)  Only single-use sterile gauze shall be used. 
(d)  Single-use articles shall not be used on more than one customer, and must be disposed of after use as soon as possible without posing risk of contamination or exposure to the body crafter, the client, or the environment. 
(e)  Dyes and pigments shall be dispensed into single-use containers. 
(f)  After tattooing each individual, the remaining unused dye or pigment in the single-use container shall be discarded, along with the container, into a biohazard container. 
(Former § 6-008(9.)) 
Sec. 6-85. - Body craft studio permit requirement and application process. 
(a)  No body craft shall be performed outside the confines of a current and validly permitted body craft studio. The owner must apply to the director for a permit to operate in Social Circle at least 30 days prior to the anticipated date of operation of the body craft studio. 
(b)  The permit application shall be on forms promulgated by the director and shall not be accepted until complete in all respects, including payment of application fee set by the board of health. 
(c)  The application for a permit shall list the full legal names, home addresses, and telephone numbers of the owner(s) of the body craft studio. 
(d)  Any individual or entity with any interest in the body craft studio shall be fully disclosed, and the extent or amount of such ownership shall be provided to the director in the application. 
(e)  The application shall contain written proof that the studio complies herewith, plus with the building, gas, electrical, and plumbing codes and zoning ordinances. 
(f)  The application shall include owner's written statement of policies & procedures that ensures: 
(1)  No person under 18 shall perform body crafting upon any person; 
(2)  Body crafters shall not be under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs; 
(3)  No body crafting shall be performed on a person who appears to be under the influence; 
(4)  No person under 18 shall be permitted to access any body craft studio; 
(5)  No animals shall be allowed in a body craft studio, except service animals for disability; 
(6)  Each body crafter shall have a valid body crafter permit. 
(g)  The application for a permit shall be on forms provided by the board of health environmental health section. Such application shall be signed and verified by the owner. 
(h)  New studios. 
(1)  At least 30 days before date of opening, the owner of a new body craft studio shall submit an application to the board of health for a permit. 
(2)  The application for a new body craft studio shall include: 
a.  A quarter-inch per foot scale drawing of the body craft studio, signed by a registered engineer or architect. Such shall accurately show Hand sinks, bathroom(s), first-aid kits, waiting area(s), windows, doors, tables, chairs, room measurements, equipment. 
b.  A zoning certification from the city. The applicant shall comply with all applicable zoning, building, safety, fire, and other local codes and requirements; 
c.  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the studio; 
d.  A complete description of all body craft services to be provided; 
e.  The full or legal name under which the body craft studio is conducted; 
f.  Address of the body craft studio; if owner leases, name and address of landlord; 
g.  Name and home address of the owner; if the owner of the studio is an entity, the formation date and names and addresses of all partners/ shareholders/members and the name and address of registered agent. 
h.  List of names and home addresses of all staff who will be working in the studio; 
i.  Written policies and procedures of the body craft studio; and 
j.  Signed acknowledgement that owner has read, understands and will comply with this section. 
(3)  The applicant shall submit a non-refundable plan review fee set by the board of health. 
(i)  Existing studios. 
(1)  At least 30 days prior to the expiration of a body craft studio permit, the owner shall submit an application to the board of health for a new studio permit. No body craft studio shall be operated without a permit that is current. 
(2)  The application for a body craft studio permit for an existing studio shall include: 
a.  A complete description of all body craft services at the studio; 
b.  The full or legal name under which the body craft studio is operated; 
c.  The address; if leased, the landlord and the landlord's address; 
d.  The name and home address of the owner; if the owner of the studio is an entity, the formation date and names and addresses of all partners/ shareholders/members and the name and address of registered agent. 
e.  A list of names and home addresses of all of staff of the body craft studio; 
f.  A copy of the written policies and procedures of the body craft studio; and 
g.  Signed acknowledgement that owner has read, understands and will comply with this section. 
(Former § 6-008(10.)) 
Sec. 6-86. - Denial, suspension or revocation of body craft studio permit. 
(a)  Upon recommendation of the director or official action of the board of health, a permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the board of health, and considered null and void, if: 
(1)  The application contains false or misleading information or omitted material facts; 
(2)  The premises are in violation of any provision hereof, or other state or federal law; 
(3)  The studio is determined to be a threat or nuisance to public health, safety or welfare; 
(4)  The owner or body crafter violated the provisions of this section; or 
(5)  Violations of the conditions of the permit are committed. 
(b)  If a body craft studio permit has been revoked, a permit shall not be issued until all violations have been cured and all changes comport herewith as determined by the director. 
(c)  No body craft studio permit shall be issued to any applicant, business, or related entity who, within 12 months preceding the filing of an application, has been denied a permit or has had a permit revoked for any location due to fraudulent or untruthful information in any application or having omitted any material fact in any application. 
(d)  Any person substantially affected by any final order of the board of health denying, suspending, revoking or refusing to grant or renew any permit provided under this section may secure review by appeal to the department of human resources per O.C.G.A. § 31-5-1 et seq. 
(Former § 6-008(11.)) 
Sec. 6-87. - Body craft studio permit. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued to any owner not in full compliance with this Code or state law. 
(b)  The body craft studio permit must be obtained annually and expires 365 days from date of its issuance. The original permit shall be conspicuously displayed in public view on the premises. 
(c)  Permits are not transferable from owner to owner, or from location to business location, or from person to person. 
(d)  The holder of a body craft studio permit shall only hire, employ, or use individuals to perform body crafting who have complied with this section. 
(e)  Body craft studio permits are the exclusive property of the board of health. Permits may be confiscated by the board of health, or its designee, per this Code or state law. 
(Former § 6-008(12.)) 
Sec. 6-88. - Inspections. 
(a)  The director shall make inspections and issue written reports of such. The premises of any body craft studio and all records required to be maintained shall be available for examination by the director and properly identified representatives of the city during normal business hours to determine compliance. The owner shall have an employee knowledgeable as to the whereabouts of these records on duty during all hours of operation. 
(b)  Work necessary to receive a permit shall at all times be subject to inspection by the director. The owner shall ensure all work shall remain accessible for inspection until approved. Approval shall not be construed to be an approval of any violation or nullify any provisions of the Code or other law. Neither the director nor the city or county shall be liable for any expense in the removal of any material required to be moved for inspection. 
(c)  The director can examine structures, sites, and records associated with an application. 
(d)  Studio inspection shall be performed at least twice annually. Each inspection will carry an inspection fee set by the board of health and approved by the city. 
(e)  The director can enter the structure or premises at reasonable times per this section. If such structure or premises is occupied, credentials shall be presented to the occupant and entry requested. If such structure or premises is unoccupied, the director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the person having ownership or control and request entry. If entry is refused, the director shall have recourse to any remedy provided by law to secure entry. 
(f)  A copy of the most current inspection report shall be posted in an un-obscured manner in public view. The report shall be posted at five feet six inches, within 15 feet of the main door of the studio, and shall be approachable to within one foot. 
(g)  If an individual becomes aware of a body craft studio in violation of this Code, or other law, they may contact the director. The name, address, number, and other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless required to be disclosed by law. 
(h)  If an individual becomes aware of unlicensed performance of body crafting, they may contact the director. The name, address, number, and all other identifying information of the reporting individual will remain confidential, unless otherwise required to be disclosed by law. 
(Former § 6-008(13.)) 
Sec. 6-89. - Body crafting procedure. 
(a)  Body crafters shall comply with all standard precautions, as that term is defined in this section. 
(b)  Body crafters shall remove all jewelry prior to beginning any body craft procedure and secure their hair using a hat, cap, net, or holder prior to beginning a procedure. 
(c)  Prior to body crafting on each client, the body crafter shall ensure that his/her fingernails are closely trimmed and perform hand hygiene. This includes use of a CDC-approved method of hand decontamination (such as an alcohol brushless based system), washing the hands, or other means of hand hygiene through use of provided procedure room facilities per this section. 
(d)  Prior to the start of any craft procedure, the body crafter shall inspect his/her hands for hangnails, small cuts, sores, lesions, scabs and abrasions. If a cut, sore, lesion, or an abrasion is detected a bandage shall be applied for added protection before gloving. 
(e)  Single-use medical gloves shall be worn during the body crafting. They shall be donned so their integrity is not compromised. They shall be changed and properly disposed of each time there is an interruption in the procedure, the gloves become torn or punctured, or their integrity has been compromised so they pose a contamination risk. The body crafter shall perform hand hygiene before donning and after removing gloves. 
(f)  The body crafter shall adhere to standard precautions: eye protection, masks, disposable lap towels, smocks, aprons, and sleeve protectors shall be available and utilized as required by standard precautions as defined herein. 
(g)  Body crafters experiencing symptoms of illness, including diarrhea, vomiting, fever, rash, jaundice, or skin infections shall not perform any body crafting. 
(h)  To minimize exposure to infectious body fluids, solution used during procedures shall be sprayed onto a clean towel and applied to client or applied using a squeeze bottle. 
(i)  Only single-use razors shall be used to shave where the body crafting will be performed. 
(j)  All sharps shall be sterile at time of procedure and shall be visually inspected for integrity before and after use. If a sharp is not intact prior to use it shall be discarded. If a sharp is not intact or is not accounted for after use, the client shall be immediately notified and instructed to seek medical attention. This shall be noted in the client record. 
(k)  All fixed surfaces contaminated with blood shall be cleaned per OSHA blood-borne pathogens requirements, and then disinfected using an EPA-approved tuberculoidicidal disinfectant. 
(Former § 6-008(14.)) 
Sec. 6-90. - Tattoo preparation and care. 
(a)  Before placing the tattoo design, the body crafter shall treat the area with an antiseptic. 
(b)  If a paper stencil is used for transferring the design, the stencil shall be single-use disposable. 
(c)  If the design is drawn directly on the skin, it shall be applied with a single-use sterile instrument only. 
(d)  The completed tattoo shall be washed with a single-use towel saturated with antiseptic solution. 
(e)  After the area has dried, ensure that a layer of antiseptic is applied. 
(f)  After antiseptic, a bandage shall be applied using sealed, non-sticking absorbent pads. 
(g)  The client shall get written and oral instructions on how to care for the tattoo during healing. 
(Former § 6-008(15.)) 
Sec. 6-91. - Body piercing care procedures. 
(a)  Before piercing the skin, the body crafter shall apply an antiseptic solution to the skin. 
(b)  The client shall get written and oral instructions on how to care for the piercing during healing. 
(c)  A facility that limits its piercing to the lobe of the ear with pre-sterilized, single-use stud and clasp ear piercing systems shall be exempt from this section. Compliance with this exemption may be verified by inspection at the option of the director. 
(Former § 6-008(16.)) 
Sec. 6-92. - Sterilization. 
(a)  Instrument cleaning. 
(1)  All non-single-use instruments shall be sterilized after each use per manufacturer's recommendations. 
(2)  Employees shall wear heavy-duty, waterproof gloves while cleaning instruments. 
(3)  Used instruments shall be soaked in an enzymatic solution or cool water until cleaning can be performed. 
(4)  Instruments shall be disassembled for cleaning. 
(5)  All instrument components shall be cleaned, manually or in an ultrasonic cleaner, using the appropriate cleaning agent specific to the type of cleaning performed. 
(b)  Instrument packaging. 
(1)  Employees shall wear clean gloves while packaging or wrapping instruments. 
(2)  Instruments shall be wrapped or packaged with a sterilizer indicator on each package. 
(3)  All packages shall be labeled with time and date of sterilization. Packages shall no longer be considered sterile if the integrity of the package is damaged. 
(c)  Instrument sterilization. 
(1)  Except as provided in this subsection, all body craft studios shall utilize a sterilizer that shall be designed and labeled as a medical instrument sterilizer to achieve the sterilization definition. 
(2)  The operator's manual for the sterilizer shall be available on the premises at all times and the sterilizer shall be operated according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
(3)  The sterilizer shall be cleaned and maintained per manufacturer's recommendations. 
(4)  A sterilizer load log shall be maintained per manufacturer's recommendations for the life of the facility and available for inspection by the director and clients. The log shall contain the following documentation for each load: 
a.  A description of instruments in the load; 
b.  Date of sterilization, and time if more than one load is processed in a day; 
c.  Manufacturer's recommended cycle data; 
d.  An indication of the proper sterilization of instruments, as indicated by the appropriate color change of the sterilizer indicator on each package. The indicator used shall be compatible with the sterilization process being used; 
e.  Any action taken when appropriate color indicator change did not occur; 
f.  Maintenance log, including: 
1.  Date of service; 
2.  Sterilizer model and serial number; 
3.  Sterilizer location; 
4.  Name of person requesting service; 
5.  Description of malfunctions; 
6.  Name of person performing maintenance; 
7.  Description of services and parts replaced; 
8.  Results of biologic validation and testing; 
9.  Signature and title of person acknowledging completed work. 
(d)  Sterilization monitoring. 
(1)  Sterilizer monitoring shall be at least monthly, unless the manufacturer specifies more frequent monitoring, or after 40 hours of use, whichever comes first, using a commercial biological monitoring (spore) system. 
(2)  All biological indicators shall be analyzed by a laboratory that operates under FDA guidelines and is independent of the body craft studio, with reports sent to the studio. 
(3)  Biological indicator test results shall be maintained on the premises for the life of the studio and must be available for inspection by the director at all times. 
(4)  Upon a positive microbiological monitoring report, the sterilizer shall be immediately checked for proper use and function and the studio shall cease use of the sterilizer immediately. Three consecutive passed biological tests must be achieved before the studio is reopened. The studio can obtain a properly functioning sterilizer to re-open. 
(e)  Instrument storage. 
(1)  Hands shall be washed and gloved prior to handling sterilized instruments. 
(2)  After sterilization, instruments shall be stored in a dry, clean area reserved for sterilized instruments. 
(Former § 6-008(17.)) 
Sec. 6-93. - Disinfection of the body craft studio. 
(a)  Each body craft studio shall be kept clean and sanitary. 
(b)  The owner shall develop and implement a written cleaning protocol that includes appropriate facility decontamination plus any daily tasks or procedures. This protocol shall be based on types of surfaces to be cleaned, the types of possible contamination, the tasks or procedures to be performed, and location within the studio. Adherence to the protocol must be documented weekly, to be appended to the maintenance log. All workers shall adhere to the protocol. This protocol shall he available for review by county or city employees or inspectors during normal operation hours and to the general public upon request. 
(c)  All work surfaces shall be disinfected with an EPA-approved disinfectant at the start of each work day, after completion of body crafting on each individual, and the end of each work day. 
(d)  All coverings, such as bather films, plastic wrap, and aluminum foil shall be single-use only. 
(e)  Reusable receptacles such as bins, pails, and cans that have the likelihood of becoming contaminated shall be decontaminated weekly with a current, EPA-approved disinfectant. When contamination is visible, receptacles shall be cleaned and decontaminated immediately. 
(Former § 6-008(18.)) 
Sec. 6-94. - Disposal of waste. 
(a)  Contaminated needles shall not be bent, broken or their structure otherwise compromised. 
(b)  Sharps waste shall be safely discarded in a rigid and puncture resistant waste container that is leak proof on the sides and bottom with a self-closing lid, labeled with the international biohazard symbol and the word "BIOHAZARD" prominently displayed. Sharps waste shall be handled per all applicable laws, rules and regulations regarding biohazardous waste. 
(c)  Biohazardous non-sharps waste shall be discarded in a biohazard bag. Waste shall be removed and disposed of in per all applicable laws, rules and regulations regarding biohazardous waste. 
(d)  Non-biohazardous disposable waste shall be placed in lined, easily cleanable containers with tight fitting lids to prevent leakage or spillage. 
(e)  Non-biohazardous disposable waste shall be handled, stored, and disposed of to minimize direct exposure of personnel to waste materials. 
(f)  Self-closing waste containers lined with plastic bags manufactured specifically for each waste container shall be in each procedure room and restroom and be emptied at least once a day into a commercial dumpster. This dumpster must be emptied by a commercial contractor at least once per week. 
(g)  All sewage, including liquid waste, shall be disposed of by a public sewage system or a sewage system constructed and operated per applicable provisions of this Code or state law. 
(Former § 6-008(19.)) 
Sec. 6-95. - Client records. 
(a)  The owner shall maintain a written detailed client record that describes the body crafting procedures administered to each client for a minimum of five years after the procedure. Client records shall be made available for inspection by the director within five days of request. 
(b)  The client record shall be created prior to any body craft procedure being performed and shall have the client's name and signature, address, proof of age, body craft procedure performed, date, design, its precise location on the body, and name of the body crafter(s) and other persons performing and assisting in the procedure. It shall also describe whether any complications or incidents arose and detail what action was taken to resolve the incident. A copy of the client's valid state issued driver's license or photo identification must be maintained in the record. 
(c)  Each client shall be provided and sign an informed consent statement that fully explains the procedure prior to any body crafting. This shall be maintained by the owner in the client record, with a copy given to the client. 
(d)  A "disclaimer of liability" form promulgated by the director shall be signed by the client prior to any body crafting procedure. The owner shall keep a copy in the client's record, with a copy to the client. 
(e)  The client record shall also contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she is not under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs at the time of the body crafting. 
(f)  The client record shall contain a signed and dated statement by the client attesting that he or she has received, read, and understood a copy of an after-care procedures form. 
(g)  The client has the right to request and receive their entire client record. If the record is available on the premises of the body crafting facility the record shall be made available immediately upon request. If the record is not available on the premises, then the client's request for the client record must be fulfilled within five business days. 
(Former § 6-008(20.)) 
Sec. 6-96. - Body crafter requirements and permit. 
(a)  All persons performing body crafting shall only perform such in a validly permitted studio. 
(b)  All persons performing body crafting must first satisfy all of the following requirements: 
(1)  Current certification in emergency first aid, CPR, and blood-borne pathogen or infection control training, from agencies licensed by the state or federal authority. This is not required for body crafters who are licensed health care professionals; 
(2)  Reserved. 
(c)  All persons performing body crafting shall first apply for and obtain a permit from the director. 
(1)  The application shall be on forms provided by the director and shall not be considered accepted unless complete in all respects, including payment of any fees. Application fees shall be set by the board of health and approved by the city. 
(2)  The application shall include full legal name of the applicant, any aliases ever used, current home address and phone numbers and a copy of a valid driver's license or valid state-issued photo identification. 
(d)  Every owner must maintain on the premises an employee application for each body crafter, which shall immediately be available for inspection by the director, and shall include all of the following information pertaining to the body crafter: 
(1)  Copies of emergency first-aid, CPR, blood-borne pathogen or infection control certifications. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(e)  The studio permit must be obtained annually and expires 365 days from date of issuance. The permit shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in public view on the premises. 
(Former § 6-008(21.)) 
Sec. 6-97. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to violate any this section or this Code. 
(b)  No one can perform body crafting unless employed by a body crafting studio, with a current body crafter permit. No one can perform body craft outside of a permitted body craft studio. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to be under the influence of any alcohol and/or drugs while body crafting. 
(d)  The owner of a body craft studio is responsible for any act, omission or violation by any body crafter working on his premises, or performing body crafting as an independent contractor. 
(Former § 6-008(22.)) 
Sec. 6-98. - Body crafting and tattooing of certain persons prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall perform body crafting on anyone under 18, except piercing of the ear lobe in the presence of a documented parent or legal guardian with government issued identification. 
(b)  No person shall perform body crafting on an individual who is, or reasonably appears to be, under the influence of alcohol or drugs or is of unsound mind or body. 
(Former § 6-008(23.)) 
Sec. 6-99. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  This section shall apply to all matters related to body crafting and body craft studios in Social Circle. Where different sections specify different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most restrictive requirement shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall govern. 
(b)  The board of health, its officers, agents, and employees are responsible for the administration and enforcement of this section. 
(c)  Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be subject to a fine and/or imprisonment per this Code. Where any offense continues from day to day, each day's continuance thereof shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Former § 6-008(24.)) 
Secs. 6-100-6-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIRE STANDARDS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, adopted April 18, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as article V, sections 6-126-6-132 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 6-126. - State minimum fire standards; adoption of model codes. 
(a)  The State Minimum Fire Safety Standards adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the safety and fire commissioner pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 25-2-1 et seq., and O.C.G.A. §§ 8-2-200 et seq., including all subsequent revisions thereof (the "State Rules and Regulations"), are adopted herein by reference. 
(b)  The city has also adopted by separate ordinance the international codes including the International Building Code, International Fuel Gas Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Fire Code, International Existing Building Code, International Property Maintenance Code and Life Safety Code (herein "model codes"). Complete copies of the model codes set forth in subsections (a) and (b) of this section are on file at the Social Circle Fire Department Office, 165 East Hightower Trail Social Circle, Georgia 30025. [2] 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law or any local ordinance to the contrary, in the event of a conflict between the state rule and regulations and any other adopted by reference herein, the provisions of the state rules and regulations shall prevail. Subject to the forgoing, in the event of any conflict between any specific code or standard, the following shall act as the guide: 
Area Primary Supplement Occupancy Classification LSC IBC Building Construction types including allowable height, allowable building areas, and the requirements for sprinkler protection related to minimum building construction types. IBC LSC Means of Egress LSC None Standpipes IBC IFC Interior Finish LSC None HVAC Systems IMC None Vertical Openings LSC None Sprinkler Systems Minimum Construction Standard LSC None Smoke Alarms and Smoke Detection Systems LSC and State 
Statute None Portable Extinguishers LSC None Cooking Equipment LSC and 
NFPA 96 None Fuel Fired Appliances IFGC NFPA 54 Liquefied Petroleum Gas NFPA 58 IFGC Compressed Natural Gas NFPA 52 None LSC = Life Safety Code IFC = International Fire Code IBC = International Building Code IMC = International Mechanical Code IFGC = International Fuel Gas Code NFPA = National Fire Protection Association  
(Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Cross reference- Adoption of state minimum standard codes, § 7-12. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note- The model codes referenced herein were adopted by reference by the Mayor and City Council at the April 18, 2017 regular meeting. 

Sec. 6-127. - Applicability. 
(a)  The state rules and regulations and the model codes incorporated by reference in section 6-126, and the provisions of this article, shall be collectively referred to as the Social Circle Fire Standards. 
(b)  Social Circle Fire Standards shall apply to all buildings, structures, premises, facilities, occupancies, conditions and regulated activities as herein specified within incorporated Social Circle except one- and two-family dwellings. 
(c)  Every building and structure shall comply with the provisions of the Social Circle Fire Standards, or applicable portions thereof, which were in effect at the time such building or structure was constructed. A less restrictive provision contained in any subsequently adopted minimum fire safety standard may be applied to any existing building or structure. 
(d)  Every proposed building and structure shall comply with the Social Circle Fire Standards, or applicable portions thereof, that were in effect on the date the plans and specifications thereof were received by the fire marshal for review and approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Sec. 6-128. - Fire prevention bureau. 
(a)  Establishment and duties of fire prevention bureau. 
(1)  There is hereby created under the supervision of the city fire chief, the city fire prevention bureau. The purpose of the city fire prevention bureau is to better conserve property and safeguard human lives and to assist in the enforcement of various rules, regulations and ordinances of the city and the state pertaining to fire prevention and life safety. 
(2)  The fire marshal shall be the manager in charge of the fire prevention bureau shall be appointed by the fire chief on the basis of examination to determine qualifications. The appointment of the fire marshal shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. The fire marshal's employment shall otherwise be governed by the city personnel policy. The use of the term "fire marshal" shall mean the head of the fire prevention bureau. 
(3)  Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, the fire prevention bureau and the fire marshal shall be charged with responsibility for the direct administration and enforcement of all codes, regulations, and ordinances dealing with fire prevention and life safety, including but not limited to all provisions of the Social Circle Fire Standards. Further the term "authority having jurisdiction" or its equivalent, as may be used in the Social Circle Fire Standards under this section shall mean the fire prevention bureau and the fire marshal thereof. 
(4)  Every fire shall be reported in writing by city fire department staff to the fire prevention bureau. Such reports shall be in such a form as shall be prescribed by the fire chief. The fire prevention bureau shall investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire occurring in Social Circle in which property has been destroyed or damaged, or loss of life has occurred and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of the fire. The fire marshal shall notify any other proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of such cases. 
(5)  The fire marshal shall compile and keep a record of all fires and of all facts concerning the same including injuries, deaths, rescues of persons, and statistics to the extent such fires cause damage. The fire marshal shall make a monthly report of the activities of the fire department and the fire prevention bureau and shall transmit this report to the fire chief. 
(b)  Building permits and certificates of occupancy subject to review of fire marshal. 
(1)  Plans and specifications for all proposed buildings which come under the fire code enforcement jurisdiction of the city fire department, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-12(a)(2), shall be permitted to and receive approval from the fire marshal before any building permit may be issued by the building department. All such plans and specifications submitted by this subsection shall be accompanied by a fee set forth in the fee schedule promulgated by the city fire department. All such plans and specifications submitted as required by this subsection shall bear the seal and Georgia registration number of the drafting architect or engineer. 
(2)  A complete set of approved plans and specifications shall be maintained on the construction site, and construction shall proceed in compliance with the minimum fire safety standards under which the plans and specifications were approved. 
(3)  Every building or structure which comes under the fire code enforcement jurisdiction of the city fire department, as specified in subsection 6-127(b) hereof, shall have a certificate of occupancy issued by the city fire department before such building or structure may be occupied. The fee for a certificate of occupancy for an existing building (new tenant/business license) shall be as set forth in a few schedule promulgated by the city fire department. The fire marshal shall proceed to inspect the subject building or structure to ensure compliance with the provisions of the Social Circle Fire Standards, with in ten days after said application, the fire marshal shall either issue a certificate of occupancy to the applicant or notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for the denial of the certificate of occupancy. Such certificates of occupancy shall be issued for each business establishment within a building, and when issued shall state the occupant load for such business establishment or building. The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a prominent location within such business establishment or building. 
(Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Sec. 6-129. - Inspection of buildings. 
(a)  Inspection of buildings and premises; authority to enter premises; inspection warrants. 
(1)  The fire chief, fire marshal and designated city fire department personnel have the authority at all times day and night to enter in or upon and to examine any building or premises where a fire is in progress or has occurred, as well as other buildings or premises adjacent to or near the same. The fire chief and his delegated authorities shall have the right to enter in or upon all buildings and premises subject to this article, at any reasonable time, for the purpose of examination or inspection. 
(2)  Upon the complaint of any person, the fire chief, fire marshal and designated city fire department personnel may inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings and premises within their jurisdiction whenever deemed necessary. 
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contrary elsewhere in these ordinances, any inspections of buildings and premises not otherwise open to the public shall be made upon consent of the owner or occupant of said premises or upon securing and inspection warrant as provided in subsection (b) herein. 
(b)  Inspection warrants. 
(1)  Inspection warrants may be obtained from any judge of the superior, magistrate, or municipal court upon oath or affirmation showing probable cause for the purpose of conducting inspections authorized herein. For the purpose of issuance of inspection warrants, probable cause exists upon showing a valid public interest in the effective enforcement of the Social Circle Fire Standards sufficient to justify inspection of the area, premises, building, or conveyance in the circumstance specified in the application for the warrant. 
(2)  A warrant shall be issued only upon affidavit of the fire chief, fire marshal or any person authorized to conduct inspections, sworn to before a judicial officer and establishing grounds for issuing a warrant. 
(3)  The issuing judge may issue the warrant when he is satisfied that the following conditions are met: 
a.  The one seeking the warrant must establish under oath or affirmation that the property to be inspected is to be inspected as part of a legally authorized program of inspection which includes property or that there is probable cause for believing that there is a condition, object, activity, or circumstance which legally justifies such an inspection of that property. 
b.  The issuing judge determines that issuance of the warrant is authorized by this article. 
(4)  The warrant shall: 
a.  State the grounds for its issuance and name each person whose affidavit has been taken in support thereof; 
b.  Be directed to persons authorized to conduct inspections and execute it; 
c.  Command the persons to whom it is directed to inspect the area, premises, building, or conveyance identified for the purpose specified and, if appropriate, direct the seizure or the property specified; 
d.  Identify the item or types of property to be seized, if any; and 
e.  Designate the judicial officer to whom the warrant shall be returned. 
(5)  A warrant issued pursuant to this subsection must be executed and returned within ten days of its date of issuance unless, upon showing need of additional time, the court orders otherwise. If property is seized pursuant to a warrant, a copy shall be provided upon request to the person from whom or from whose premises the property has been taken, together with a receipt of the property taken. The return of the warrant shall be made promptly, accompanied by a written inventory of any property taken. A copy of the inventory shall be delivered upon request to the person from whom or from whose premises the property was taken and the application for the warrant. 
The judicial officer who issued the warrant shall attach thereto a copy of return and all papers returnable in connection therewith and file them with the clerk of the superior court for the county in which the inspection was made. 
(c)  Correction of deficient conditions. 
(1)  When the fire chief, fire marshal or other personnel authorized to conduct inspections finds any building or other structure which, for want of repair or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or any other cause is especially liable to fire hazard or which is so situated as to endanger other property or the safety of the public, or when, in or around any building, such officer finds combustible or explosive matter, inflammables, or other conditions dangerous to the safety of the building, notice may be given to the owner or agent and occupant of the building to correct such unsafe conditions as may be found. 
(2)  If any owner, agent, or occupant fails to comply with this notice within the time specified therein, the fire marshal may issue a citation or, with the approval of the fire chief, may petition the court for a rule of nisi to show cause why an order should not be issued by the court that the same be removed and remedied. Such court order shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of the premises or building within such time as may be fixed in the court order. 
(3)  If any person fails to comply with the order of the court within the time fixed, the city shall cause the building or premises to be forthwith repaired, torn down, or demolished, the hazardous materials removed, or the dangerous conditions remedied, as the case may be, at the expense of the city. If the owner thereof, within 30 days after notice in writing of the amount of such expense, fails, neglects, or refuses to pay the city the expenses thereby incurred, the city shall issue a fi.fa. against the property for the expenses actually occurred. 
(4)  The final authority for ordering the carrying out of the enforcement of the provisions of subsection (c) to ensure compliance with this article shall be by order of the court and not the fire chief or fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Sec. 6-130. - Additional regulations. 
(a)  Outdoor burning. 
(1)  No person shall kindle or maintain any outdoor burning of hand piled natural vegetation or authorize such outdoor burning to be kindled or maintained without first obtaining a burn permit from the state forestry commission. 
(2)  No person shall kindle or maintain any outdoor burning of machine piled natural vegetation or authorize such outdoor burning to be kindled or maintained without first obtaining an air curtain destructor (ACD) permit [from] the state forestry commission. The rules and regulations from the state forestry commission and the Georgia EPD shall apply all burns of this nature. 
(3)  Outdoor burning of manmade materials is prohibited. 
(4)  The fire chief or his appointed representative may prohibit any and all fires when prescribed rules, regulations, and laws are not followed or circumstance make such fires or smoke hazardous to life, health, or property. 
(b)  Authorized burning without a permit. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, open burning may be done without a permit as follows: 
(1)  Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any public safety officer, if necessary to prevent a fire hazard or to carry out his or her official duties. 
(2)  Fire may be used for the cooking of food or for recreational purposes, such as camp fires, provided no smoke violation or other nuisance is created. 
(c)  Open flame cooking/heating devices. 
(1)  Definition. 
Open flame cooking/heating device per this article is defined as hibachi, gas fired grill or smoker, charcoal grill or smoker or other similar devices used for cooking, heating, or any other purpose. [3] 
(2)  The use of open flame cooking/heating devices on balconies or breeze ways of an apartment complex or condominium is prohibited. 
(3)  The use of open flame cooking/heating devices within ten feet of any structure of an apartment complex or condominium is prohibited. Enforcement: Owner, managers or residents may be held responsible for violating this Code section. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be fined not more than $300.00. Every day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense as prescribed under this section. 
(d)  Clearing property of debris and refuse where a building is burned. 
(1)  Where a building or structure has burned, the premises must be cleared of all debris and refuse within 90 days thereafter unless such building is under investigation. Any premises under investigation shall be cleared of all debris and refuse 90 days after notice is sent to the property owner of the close of the investigation. If such premises are not cleared within said period, the same shall constitute a violation and be treated accordingly. 
(2)  If the remains of the building mentioned under subsection (d)(1) above constitute a safety hazard, the building inspector or fire marshal may at any time file a complaint with the code enforcement official to have such condition declared a nuisance and the abatement of the same. 
(3)  The provisions of this subsection are and shall be construed to be cumulative of all other provisions regarding the condition of the property within the city and shall not be construed to alter, amend, or repeal any other such provisions. 
(e)  Fire watch. 
(1)  Fire watch is the assignment of a person or persons to an area for the express purpose of notifying the fire department and/or building occupants of an emergency, preventing a fire from occurring, extinguishing small fires, or protecting the public from fire or life safety dangers. 
(2)  The fire marshal shall have the authority to require standby fire personnel or an approved fire watch in the following situations when deemed essential for the protection of public safety: 
a.  Potentially hazardous conditions or a reduction in a life safety feature exists due to the type of performance, display, exhibit, occupancy, contest or activity being conducted; 
b.  An impairment to a fire protection feature or system has occurred; or 
c.  The number of persons present justifies additional fire protection. 
(3)  The owner, agent or lessee of an event for which fire watch is required (the "event sponsor") shall employ one or more qualified persons, as required and approved, to be on duty. The cost of standby fire personnel shall be paid by the event sponsor. 
(4)  All standby fire personnel or fire watch personnel shall be subject to the orders of the fire chief, fire marshal, or his designee, at all times, shall be identifiable as fire watch personnel and, unless expressly relieved of duty by order of the fire marshal, shall remain on duty during the times such places are open to the public, when such activity is being conducted, or while such impairment or condition remains. 
(f)  Rapid entry system. 
(1)  The city recognized the importance of providing the fire department rapid entry into locked buildings. The delay in gaining entry can result in substantial property damage, the potential for rapid fire erosion and increased danger for the fire fighters. To assist the fire department in gaining rapid entry, the city adopts a rapid entry system ordinance. 
(2)  In accordance with International Fire Code Section 506.1, the fire chief can require a business to have a key box on-premises as well as provide a fire department master key to authorized personnel of the fire department. 
(3)  The rapid entry system is required within the city for the following buildings: 
a.  Government facilities; 
b.  Buildings that have restricted business, industrial, commercial or limited commercial uses; 
c.  Buildings containing a sprinkler system; 
d.  Buildings containing a fire alarm system; 
e.  Buildings containing an automatic fire suppression system; or 
f.  Buildings that are a facility that is required to prepare and have available material safety data sheets and/or hazardous chemical inventory forms under the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (SARA Title Ill). 
(4)  Except as ordered by the fire chief under subsection (2) or as required under subsection (3) of this section, no building is required to have a rapid entry system. 
(g)  Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated: 
    Automatic fire suppression system means a system or assembly of piping, valves, controls and sprinklers which are designed and installed to comply with the NFPA standards, which utilize water, foam, C02, or other gas to automatically react to suppress fires. 
    Central station means an office of a private company to which a remote alarm and supervisory signaling devices are transmitted and where personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and investigate signals. 
    Fire alarm system means equipment which automatically actuates a fire alarm when the detecting element is exposed to fire, smoke, abnormal rise or decrease in temperature or activation of a sprinkler system or manually activated device. 
    Fire department master key means a limited issue key of special or controlled design to be carried by fire department officials in command which will open key boxes on specified properties. 
    Lock box/key box means a high security key vault which is listed under the UL 161 O and the UL 1037 standards, master keyed with a Medeco Biaxial Level 1 or equivalent lock. Locks shall be keyed to the key configuration provided by the fire department. 
    Lock box document vault means a high security steel plate vault with a minimum of 14 inches high by 12 inches wide by two inches deep, constructed to the same standards as the lock box, for the storage of documents. 
(h)  Installation requirements. 
(1)  The city fire department has chosen the Knox Company to serve as our supplier. All key boxes purchased for use in the city must come from this company. 
(2)  As directed by the fire chief, a building owner, shall install or cause to be installed a lock box system and/or lock box document vault prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any portion of the building for new or remodeling construction or within six months of the adoption date of the ordinance from which this article derives if no new construction or remodeling takes place. 
(3)  The lock box shall be installed on the front of the building near the main entry door and between six and eight feet above the ground unless approved at a higher or lower level by the fire chief. 
(4)  The lock box shall contain the key(s) for the exterior doors, the keys for all interior doors within the building and a scaled floor plan of the building. In lieu of having the interior keys at this location, a second lock box may be located within the main lobby of the building to hold these keys. Keys within the lock box shall be labeled for easy identification either by the tenant name or indexed floor plan of the building and shall be kept current. Where a building contains a business that is required to maintain material safety data sheets, a lock box document vault shall be installed. The lock box document vault shall be installed on the front of the building, near the main entry door and between six and eight feet from the ground unless approved at a higher or lower level by the fire chief. The vault shall contain copies of the material safety data sheets that are required to be on file within the building as well as a floor plan or written description that indicates the location of the general areas of these materials will be found within the building. 
(i)  Penalties for offenses. Any violation of this article is hereby declared to be an offense, punishable pursuant to enforcement procedures of the City Code. 
(j)  Amendment of provisions. The city council may from time to time amend, supplement, change, modify or repeal this article pursuant to the provisions of the city ordinance and the general municipal law applicable thereto. 
(k)  Sale of fireworks. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 25-10-S(C), licenses for temporary consumer fireworks retail sales stands shall be obtained from the city fire department. 
(l)  Repeal of ordinances inconsistent with model code. Any matters in said model codes which are contrary to existing ordinances of the city, shall prevail. 
(m)  Designated enforcement officers. Within said model codes when reference is made to the duties of certain officials named therein that designated official of the City of Social Circle, Walton County, Georgia the responsibility shall be assigned by order of the fire chief. 
(n)  Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the various standard codes as set out above or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who should violate any order made thereunder, or who should build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who should fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the fire chief or governing body, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall, for each such failure or violation or non-compliance be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and costs, or by imprisonment not to exceed 12 months, or both, any and all of such penalties to be imposed in the discretion of the judge of the municipal court of the city. In the event a party desires to pay a penalty without appearing before the municipal court, the established fine shall be $500.00. If the matter is heard in the municipal court, the fine imposed shall be at the discretion of the municipal court judge. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(o)  Obstructing fire hydrants or connections. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire hydrant so as to obstruct approaches to the same by the fire department. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct any fire department connection, closer than five feet in any direction, parallel with street access. 
(p)  Obstructing a fire station. It is unlawful for any person to put any obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any fire station or location where fire service equipment is located. 
(q)  Persons permitted within vicinity of fire. No persons other than firefighters, city officials, police officers, and the property owner or his agent shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of a fire, unless such persons are given permission to do so by the fire chief or designee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- Many apartment complexes or condominiums have regulations on the use of grills and other heating devices that exceed fire code requirements. Please check with your management staff to see what requirements or expectations apply to grills at your complex. 

Sec. 6-131. - Administration. 
(a)  Fees. Fees for services provided by the city fire department shall be established by the fee schedule adopted by the city mayor and council. All federal, state, county or city publicly owned buildings covered by this article are exempt from any fee or license. Such fees or licenses may be waived by only by a resolution of the mayor and council. 
(b)  Variances. The fire marshal shall have the power to grant reasonable variances to modify any of the provisions of the Social Circle Fire Standards upon application in writing by the owner, lessee or his duly authorized agent when a strict application of the rule is not reasonable under the special circumstances demonstrated by the property owner, provided that the intent of this article and the applicable Code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the fire marshal is not authorized to grant any variances to the state rules and regulations. The particulars of such modifications and the decision of the fire marshal shall be entered upon the records of the fire prevention bureau and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(c)  Appeals. Whenever the fire marshal has disapproved an application or refused to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that a provision of this article does not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the within mentioned model codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant shall be entitled to appeal from the decision of the said fire marshal to the fire chief by filing a written notice of appeal with the fire marshal within ten days of the decision being appealed. If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved by the fire chief, the applicant may file a written notice of appeal to the city manager within ten days from fire chiefs decision. If the matter is not satisfactorily resolved by the city manager, then the applicant may file a written appeal of the decision to the Superior Court of Walton County within 30 days of the final decision of the city manager. 
(d)  Nonliability of persons enforcing section. Any public employee, officers or other person responsible for the enforcement of this article, including the fire marshal, acting for the governing body in the discharge of its duties, shall not be liable personally and each person is hereby relieved from all personal liability from any damage that may occur to persons and/or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of duties. 
(e)  Sovereign immunity. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the city or official immunity any officer or employee thereof in carrying out the provisions of this article. No action shall be maintained against the city or any officer, elected officer, or employee thereof for damages sustained as a result of any fire or related hazard covered by this section by reason of any inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this section. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee thereof from any legal duty, obligation or liability incidental to the ownership, maintenance and use of such property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Sec. 6-132. - Schedule of fees and fines. 
    The mayor and city council hereby adopt the schedule of fees and fines by reference and incorporate the list into this article as Attachment 1 to Ord. No. 2017-8. 
(Ord. No. 2017-8, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Note- The schedule of fees and fines is not set out at length in this Code, but is on file in the offices of the city. 
Chapter 7 - LAND AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Zoning. 
(a)  Intent. The council desires to fully enforce the terms and provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, as previously adopted July 29, 2008, amended on or about May 19, 2009, amended on or about March 16, 2010, and any other amendments. The enforcement by the city of said ordinance is done to facilitate proper use of land in the city. 
(b)  Incorporation by reference. The city shall administer and enforce the latest edition of the Zoning Ordinance of Social Circle, Georgia, as adopted and amended by the council, originally adopted July 29, 2008, amended on or about May 19, 2009, amended on or about March 16, 2010. Said ordinance and its amendments are hereby incorporated for application and enforcement by reference as though they were fully copied herein. 
(Former § 7-001) 
Sec. 7-2. - Land subdivision regulations. 
(a)  Intent. The council desires to fully enforce the terms and provisions of the subdivision regulations of Social Circle, previously adopted January 10, 2000, and any existing or future amendments thereto. The enforcement of these regulations by the city is done to facilitate proper subdivision of land and development of streets, sanitary sewers and other public facilities improvements within the city. 
(b)  Incorporation by reference. The city shall administer and enforce the latest edition of the subdivision regulations of Social Circle, as adopted and amended by the council, originally adopted January 10, 2000. Said ordinance and its amendments are hereby incorporated by reference for application and enforcement by reference as though they were fully copied herein. 
(Former § 7-002) 
Sec. 7-3. - Protected resources. 
(a)  River and stream corridor protection. 
    Protected streams. 
(1)  All streams in the W-P1 and W-P2 Watershed Protection Overlay Districts must comply with the natural greenway and setback requirements established below. 
(2)  There shall be no land disturbing activities within 50 feet of the stream banks, other than drainage structures and roads allowed under a development permit. 
(b)  Groundwater recharge area protection. 
(1)  Applicability. This section applies to the areas defined as "significant recharge areas" by the state and are hereby protected relative to their susceptibility to pollution. 
a.  Significant recharge areas. Significant recharge areas are defined by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 18 (1989 edition, or as may be amended by DNR from time to time). 
b.  Pollution susceptibility category. Categories of relative vulnerability of an aquifer to pollution (classified as higher, average or lower) are defined by the DNR using criteria developed by them, and have been mapped on DNR's Hydrologic Atlas 20 (as may be amended by DNR from time to time) along with the most significant recharge areas. All significant recharge areas in Walton County are classified as having a "lower" susceptibility to pollution. 
(2)  Protected groundwater recharge area restrictions. Within any significant recharge area, as defined and delineated by the DNR, the following shall apply: 
a.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
b.  New sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
c.  New facilities that involve the treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste are prohibited. 
d.  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding under ground storage tanks) are prohibited. 
e.  A new above ground chemical or petroleum storage tank must have secondary containment of 110 percent of the volume of the tank or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. This requirement does not apply to: 
1.  Any tank having a maximum capacity of less than 660 gallons; and 
2.  Any tank used for agricultural purposes, provided it complies with all Federal requirements. 
f.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites larger than 50 acre feet must be lined. The liner must be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
g.  A new home served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the Health Department and must have a lot that is at least 110 percent of the minimum lot size required by Table MT-1 of the department of human resource's Manual for On Site Sewage Management Systems. 
h.  A new manufactured home park served by a septic tank/drain field system must be approved by the health department and must have a lot or space that is at least 110 percent of the minimum lot or space size required by Table MT-2 of the department of human resource's Manual for On Site Sewage Management Systems. 
(c)  Wetlands protection. 
(1)  Purpose. To protect, maintain, and enhance public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control adverse impacts from destruction or alteration of federally protected wetland environments. 
(2)  Applicability. All persons proposing development and/or construction within any suspected federally protected wetland located in the city, as determined by the director, shall submit a detailed delineation of such wetlands, a copy of the pre-construction notification required under the Nationwide Permit (NWP) program, and written approval from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE) granting concurrence with the proposed activities and mitigation measures outlined. 
(3)  Use restrictions. Within any protected wetlands area, the following shall apply: 
a.  Hazardous or toxic waste receiving, treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
b.  Sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
c.  Land uses that may be allowed if permitted by the zoning district and by the Section 404 permit include: 
1.  Timber production and harvesting. 
2.  Wildlife and fisheries management. 
3.  Camping, hiking, hunting and fishing recreation activities. 
4.  Public wastewater treatment and natural water quality treatment or purification facilities. 
5.  Other uses permitted under Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
(4)  Restriction on construction activities. No development, land disturbance or construction activities will be permitted in any suspected wetland, as determined by the director, until all such permit applications are submitted by the applicant or developer to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACOE), and subsequent approvals are issued by the USACOE for the proposed activities. The director may grant partial project approval, and allow work to proceed on those portions of the project outside of the delineated wetlands, provided an alternate development plan is submitted in accordance with these regulations with ample provisions for project completion in the case that the subject wetlands disturbance is not permitted by the USACOE. 
(5)  Violation and enforcement. If any development, land disturbance or construction activities are performed in any suspected federally protected wetland, as determined by the director, without first complying with the requirements of this subsection (c), the director shall issue a stop work order for all site activities and promptly report any and all violations to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. Work shall not resume at the site until all required documentation has been submitted to and approved by the USACOE, and all subsequent fines issued have been paid in full. 
(d)  Cornish Creek, Beaverdam Creek Watershed and Hard Labor Creek Overlay Protection District (W-P2). 
(1)  Purpose and intent. The intent of this land development overlay district is to protect the designated watershed areas from the possible adverse effects of residential and non-residential development such as the leaching of septic systems, increased storm water runoff, sedimentation and other sources of water pollution, in order to insure water quality. All property within this land development district shall simultaneously carry the land development district designation of the underlying land development district as well as the W-P2 designation. 
(2)  Location of the district. The W-P2 watershed protection overlay district is comprised of all land areas within the Cornish Creek, Hard Labor Creek and Beaverdam Creek watershed basins, which have been officially designated for use as public water supplies. The W-P2 watershed protection district is shown on the official land development maps of Walton County, Georgia, which are adopted by reference by the city. In all cases, the watershed is defined by the ridgelines that separate the flow of storm water between the Cornish Creek, Hard Labor Creek and Beaverdam Creek watershed basins and all other watersheds. The actual boundary of W-P2 watershed protection overlay district must therefore be determined on a property-by-property basis using the actual topography of each site. 
(3)  Permitted and conditional uses. 
a.  In the W-P2 watershed protection overlay district, the permitted uses, as well as the conditional uses, shall be those of the underlying land development district provided for in this chapter, except where the provisions of this overlay district differ or are more restrictive than the underlying land development district. 
b.  The following uses are restricted in all land development districts within the W-P2 district: 
1.  Sanitary landfills are prohibited. 
2.  Hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited (except septic tanks). 
3.  Facilities which handle hazardous materials, of the types and amounts regulated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, are prohibited. 
4.  Mining and quarrying activities are prohibited. 
(4)  Required greenways and setbacks. The following greenways and setbacks are hereby established along each perennial stream (i.e., a stream that flows throughout the year) and water impoundment (i.e., a pond or lake) in the W-P2 district: 
a.  Stream greenway. The area extending a distance of 100 feet from the banks of all perennial streams. This area shall remain natural and undisturbed except as otherwise provided in this district, below. 
b.  Stream setback. The area extending a distance of 150 feet from the banks of all perennial streams. 
c.  Water impoundment greenway. The area extending a distance of 100 feet from the normal pool elevation of any water impoundment, except that greenway requirements shall not apply adjacent to the dam side of the impoundment. The greenway shall remain natural and undisturbed except as otherwise provided in this district, below. 
**In the Hard Labor Creek Reservoir, the area extending a distance of 150 feet from the normal pool elevation of any water impoundment, except greenway requirements shall not apply adjacent to the dam side of the impoundment. The greenway shall remain natural and undisturbed except as otherwise provided in this district, below. 
d.  Water impoundment setback. The area extending a distance of 150 feet from the normal pool elevation of any water impoundment. 
(5)  Development regulations. In the W-P2 watershed protection district, all requirements relating to the development of a site shall be those that apply to the underlying land development district as required by this chapter, except where the provisions of this district differ or are more restrictive than the development regulations applying to the underlying land development district or contained elsewhere in this chapter. 
a.  Minimum lot area. 
1.  The minimum lot area shall be one acre with a density of one lot per two acres for lots served by septic tanks. 
2.  Residential developments serviced by public sewer shall be allowed as follows: 
A.  The density shall be no greater than one lot per one acre. 
B.  Open space or green space. 
i.  Required open space: It is the intent of these regulations that open space be un-subdivided and comprised of contiguous buildable and non-buildable lands. Land so designated as open space shall be in a location and configuration that relates to the ultimate purpose of the open space (i.e., outdoor recreation, landscape protection, habitat protection, etc.). Development should be designed around these natural features. 
ii.  Not less than 25 percent of the total area of the tract of land to be developed shall be dedicated as open space. 
iii.  No more than 50 percent of the required open space may be in land that is located in a floodplain, wetlands, utility easements, slopes greater than 25 percent or other non-buildable land. 
iv.  Fifty percent of the required open space shall contain or provide minimum tree density of 30 units per acre, as defined in the tree protection regulations, article VII, sections 7-261 et seq. 
v.  Rights-of-way for streets shall be excluded from land considered for open space. 
vi.  If the development is to be built in phases, 100 percent of the open space of the entire development must be shown on phase one. 
vii.  Ownership of the open space: Open space shall be dedicated by recorded deed to a mandatory homeowners association. 
b.  Impervious surface. The maximum permitted impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities or facilities within the watershed shall be 25 percent or existing, if greater than 25 percent. No buildings, pavement, patios or other impervious surface shall be constructed within the greenway or setback areas of any perennial stream or water impoundment established in this district. 
c.  Septic tank construction. Septic tanks and septic tank drain fields are prohibited within the greenway or setback areas of any perennial stream or water impoundment as established under this district. 
d.  Public utilities. Utilities shall be exempt from the above greenway and setback provisions in accordance with the following conditions if the utilities to be located in the greenway or setback areas cannot feasibly be located outside these areas: 
1.  The utilities shall be located as far from the stream bank or water impoundment as reasonably possible. 
2.  The installation and maintenance of utilities shall be such to protect the integrity of the greenway and setback areas as best as reasonably possible using watershed best management practices to the greatest extent practical. 
e.  Roadways. Roadways, bridges and drainage structures may encroach upon required greenways and setbacks where such structures are necessary to provide access. Such roadways and bridges shall cross streams perpendicularly where reasonably possible. The number of such stream crossings and associated structures shall be minimized to the greatest extent possible, as certified by a professional engineer. 
(6)  Stormwater management. 
a.  With the exception of an individual single-family residential lot, all development sites and subdivisions shall provide storm water detention in accordance with the requirements of sections 7-3, 7-51-7-66, and article IV, divisions 1-5. 
b.  If a subdivision (residential or nonresidential) project is provided with an on-site storm water detention facility, a property owner's association shall be established for its ownership and maintenance. The association bylaws shall be recorded concurrently with the recording of a final subdivision plot. The association bylaws shall include the following provisions: 
1.  Automatic (mandatory) membership of all purchasers of lots therein and their successors; 
2.  Conditions and timing of transferring control of the association from the developer to the lot owners shall be specified which shall not exceed four years from the date of recording of the final plat of the subdivision; 
3.  Responsibility for maintenance, insurance and taxes; 
4.  Sharing of the costs of maintenance among the lot owners with shares defined by the association bylaws; 
5.  Authority to place liens on the real property of members who fail to pay their dues or assessments; and 
6.  Prohibition on the dissolution of the association without the approval of the city. 
(7)  Limitation on variances. Variances from the provisions of the W-P2 watershed protection overlay district are prohibited except as follows: 
a.  Lots of record. All lots or parcels of record as of the effective date of this amendment and all lots or parcels that are shown on a preliminary plat approved by the county prior to the effective date of this amendment, that are made unbuildable by the stream or water impoundment greenway or setback provisions of this district, may still be developed on a case by case basis. Requests for development of these lots shall be made to the director and development as administrative variances. If development is allowed, the minimum possible impervious surface and maximum setback and greenway width, given the configuration of the lot, shall be maintained. 
b.  Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses. Nonconforming lots, buildings and uses shall be governed by article XV of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Former § 7-003A) 
Sec. 7-4. - Annexation. 
(a)  Intent. Per O.C.G.A. § 36-36-37, the council has adopted separate ordinances regarding land areas annexed into the city. The adoption of these ordinances is done to facilitate proper activities by the city relating to annexing of lands into its set legal boundaries. 
(b)  Incorporation by reference. The city shall adhere to the terms, descriptions and limitations of all separately adopted annexation ordinances. All previous annexation ordinances, and any subsequent annexation ordinances legally adopted by the council, are hereby adopted for application and enforcement as though they were fully copied herein. 
(Former § 7-004) 
Sec. 7-5. - Non-discrimination in housing. 
    Discrimination prohibited. It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing. The purposes of this section are: 
(1)  To provide for execution of policies in Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act, as amended by Fair Housing Amendments Act; 
(2)  To safeguard all individuals from any discrimination relating to sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or brokerage services or facilities in connection with sale or rental of a dwelling because of race, color, religion, sex, disability, handicap, family status or national origin; 
(3)  To promote elimination of discrimination in any aspect relating to sale, rental, or financing of dwellings or in the provision of brokerage services or facilities in connection with sale or rental of a dwelling because of a person's race, color, religion, sex, disability or handicap, familial status, or national origin; and 
(4)  To promote the protection of each individual's interest in personal dignity and freedom from humiliation and the individual's freedom to take up residence wherever such individual chooses; to secure the city against domestic strife and unrest which would menace its democratic institutions; to preserve public safety, health, and general welfare; and to further the interests, rights, and privileges of individuals in the city. 
    Per O.C.G.A. § 8-3-220, entitled Adoption of local ordinances, the city incorporates by reference and adopts verbatim the laws against discriminatory housing practices in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 4, including those cited in O.C.G.A. §§ 8-3-202, 8-3-203, 8-3-204, 8-3-205, or 8-3-222, and does not expand or reduce the rights granted thereby. 
(Former § 7-005) 
Sec. 7-6. - Building construction. 
(a)  Intent. The Uniform Codes Act is at O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2. O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B) identifies "state minimum standard codes". Each of these separate codes typically consists of a base code (the International Code published by the International Code Council) and Georgia amendments to the base code. http://www.dca.state.ga.us/development/constructioncodes/programs/codes2.asp 
(b)  Codes enforced. The city shall enforce the latest edition of the following codes and the appendices identified for said codes, as adopted and amended by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs: Georgia State Minimum Standard Building Code (International Building Code with Georgia State Amendments); Georgia State Minimum Standard One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code (International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings with Georgia State Amendments); Georgia State Minimum Standard Fire Code (International Fire Code with Georgia State Amendments); Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code (International Plumbing Code with Georgia State Amendments); Georgia State Minimum Standard Mechanical Code (International Mechanical Code with Georgia State Amendments); Georgia State Minimum Standard Gas Code (International Fuel Gas Code with Georgia State Amendments); Georgia State Minimum Standard Electrical Code (National Electrical Code); Georgia State Minimum Standard Energy Code (International Energy Conservation Code with Georgia State Supplements and Amendments). 
(Former § 7-006) 
Sec. 7-7. - Water conservation. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not a hotel or motel. 
(b)  Restrictions. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and sixth-tenths gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of two and one-half gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and one-half gallons per minute. 
(c)  Effective date. 
(1)  On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (b)(1)-(5) hereof. 
(2)  The requirements of subsection (b) hereof shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair of renovation of or addition to any existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(d)  Exemptions. 
(1)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b), (c) and (d) hereof when: 
a.  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
b.  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; 
c.  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
d.  Units to be installed are: 
1.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
2.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
3.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(2)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (1)b., c. or d. of this subsection shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(e)  Enforcement; penalty. This section shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the city court. Upon conviction, a violation of this section may be punished by a civil fine not to exceed $1,000.00. 
(Former § 7-008) 
Sec. 7-8. - Weeds. 
(a)  Maximum height of certain vegetation; cutting; expenses. For the purposes of preventing the spread of diseases, the breeding of mosquitoes, other insects, rodents, snakes and other pests, and for the protection of the health of the citizens and residents of the city, it shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant or both, in possession of any land in the city limits to allow weeds, grass or other vegetation except vegetation commonly classified as growing crops, trees or ornamental or other shrubbery or nursery plants, to grow on the land at any time above the average height of ten inches. Upon the weeds, grass, or other vegetation subject to this section reaching an average height of ten inches, the owner or tenant in possession, or both, shall be required to cause the vegetation to be cut down at the expense of such owner or tenant, or both. 
(b)  Nuisance; abatement by city. In any case where the owner or tenant of land in the city limits, or both, fail to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) above, then such failure to comply is hereby deemed a nuisance and the city judge may issue an order directing the nuisance to be abated. The city manager in such case, may cause the vegetation to be cut and the land to be brought into compliance with subsection (a) above, and shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner or tenant in possession as for city revenues. 
(Former § 7-009) 
Sec. 7-9. - Timber harvesting-Required notice; bonds or letters of credit. 
(a)  Intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate timber harvesting in the city, consistent with O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24(b). 
(b)  Prior notice of harvesting required. All persons or firms harvesting standing timber in any incorporated area of the city for delivery as pulpwood, logs, poles, or wood chips to any woodyard or processing plant located inside or outside this state shall provide notice of such harvesting operations to the city manager in writing, in person, by transmission of an electronic record via facsimile or by mail, prior to cutting any such timber. Said prior written notice shall be required for each separate tract to be harvested, and shall include: 
(1)  A map of the area which identifies the location of the tract to be harvested and, as to those trucks which will be traveling to and from such tract for purposes of picking up and hauling loads of cut forest products, the main point of ingress to such tract from a public road and, if different, the main point of egress from such tract to a public road; 
(2)  A statement as to whether the timber will be removed pursuant to a lump sum sale, per unit sale, or owner harvest for purposes of ad valorem taxation under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.5; 
(3)  The name, address, and daytime telephone number of the timber seller if the harvest is pursuant to a lump sum or per unit sale or of the timber owner if the harvest is an owner harvest; and 
(4)  The name, business address, business telephone number, and nighttime or emergency telephone number of the person or firm harvesting such timber. 
(c)  Bond or letter of credit. The persons or firms shall deliver a bond or letter of credit per this paragraph, and notice shall not be or remain effective for such harvesting operations unless and until the person or firm providing such notice has delivered to the city a valid surety bond, executed by a surety corporation authorized to transact business in this state, protecting the city against any damage caused by such person or firm in an amount of $5,000.00 or at the option of the person or firm harvesting timber, a valid irrevocable letter of credit issued by a bank or savings and loan association, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 7-1-4, in the amount of and in lieu of such bond. For purposes of this paragraph, any such surety bond or letter of credit shall be valid only for the calendar year in which delivered. 
(d)  Duration of permission and change in facts. Notice shall be effective for such harvesting operation on such tract upon receipt of the same by the city manager and compliance with the requirements of subsection (c) of this section and until such time as the person or firm giving such notice has completed the harvesting operation for such tract. Provided, however, that any subsequent change in the facts required to be provided for purposes of such notice shall be reported to the city within three business days after such change. 
(e)  Fine. Violation of the requirements of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00. 
(f)  Form of notice. The form promulgated by the director, shown below, which is set forth in Georgia Administrative Code, § 224-2-.01, shall be used. 
NOTICE OF TIMBER HARVESTING ACTIVITY 
Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 12-6-24 Georgia Forestry Commission 
County: _____ Timber Sale Acreage: _____ Date Submitted: _____ Check Appropriate: [ ] Landowner [ ] Timber Seller [ ] Legal Representative Name: _____ Address: _____ City: _____ State: _____ Zip Code: _____ Daytime Phone No.: _____ Timber Buyer Information Logger/Harvester Information Name: _____ Name: _____ Business Name: _____ Business Name: _____ Business Address: _____ Business Address: _____ City: _____ State & Zip: _____ City: _____ State & Zip: _____ Business Phone No.: _____ Business Phone No.: _____ Night/Emergency Phone No.: _____ Night/Emergency Phone No.: _____ Timber Sale Type: [ ] Lump Sum [ ] Unit/Load [ ] Owner Harvest Please attach/draw a map to identify (1) tract location, and (2) point(s) of ingress & egress from public road(s). Include identified points of reference, such as streams, public roads, right of ways, landmarks, map/parcel number, distances, etc., to ensure acknowledgement and understanding of location.  
(Former § 7-013) 
State Law reference- O.C.G.A. § 12-6-24. 
Sec. 7-10. - Residential occupancy limitations. 
    Dwelling units shall be constructed and occupied in accordance with these residential occupancy limitations. 
(1)  Privacy. Dwelling units, hotel units, and rooming units shall be arranged for privacy and be separate from other adjoining spaces. 
(2)  Minimum room dimensions. A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall not be less than seven feet in width or length. Kitchens shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet between counter fronts and appliances or counter fronts and walls. 
(3)  Minimum ceiling heights. Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors, laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet. 
Exceptions: 
a.  In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not less than four feet on center may project not more than six inches below the required ceiling height; 
b.  Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, may have a ceiling height of not less than six feet eight inches with not less than six feet four inches of clear height under beams, girders, ducts and similar obstructions; 
c.  Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar purposes and may have a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear ceiling height of at least 7'6" over not less than 50 percent of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling height of five feet or more shall be included. 
(4)  Bedroom requirements. 
a.  Area for sleeping purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every bedroom occupied by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant thereof. 
b.  Prohibited occupancy. Kitchens and uninhabitable spaces (i.e. bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces) shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
(5)  Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants than permitted by the minimum area requirements of the following minimum occupancy area table: 
MINIMUM OCCUPANCY AREA TABLE 
Minimum Occupancy Area Requirements Space Minimum Area in Square Feet 1-2
Occupants 3-5
Occupants 6 or more
Occupants Living Room (see notes a, b) No requirements 120 150 Dining Room (see notes a, b) No requirements 80 100 Kitchen (see note b) 50 50 60 Bedrooms Shall comply with section 4 above  
Note a. Sleeping area. The minimum occupancy area required by the minimum occupancy area table shall not be included as sleeping areas in determining minimum occupancy area for sleeping purposes. All sleeping areas shall comply with subsection (4) above. 
Note b. Combined spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces comply with the requirements of the minimum occupancy area table if the total area is equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is located so as to function as a combination living room/dining room. 
(6)  Occupancy limit. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, not more than eight individuals, unrelated by blood or marriage, shall occupy any dwelling unit. The number of occupants of a dwelling unit may be further limited based upon septic system limitations and parking regulations applicable to a specific property. 
(Former § 7-014) 
Sec. 7-11. - Clotheslines. 
(a)  Clotheslines in lieu of clothing on fences. For the purposes of preventing the spread of diseases, and the prevention of intrusion into homes of ants, other crawling insects, mice, salamanders and other pests, and for the protection of the health of the citizens and residents of the city, it shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant or both, in possession of any land in the city, to hang clothing upon fences. Instead, residents shall use clotheslines tied between posts, at sufficient height to prevent clothing touching the ground, in the backyard behind the rear wall of the residence. 
(b)  Nuisance; abatement by city. In any case where the owner or tenant of land in the city limits, or both, fail to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) above, then such failure to comply is hereby deemed a nuisance and the city judge may issue an order directing the nuisance to be abated. The city manager in such case, may cause the resident to be brought into compliance with subsection (a) above, and shall keep record of the expenses and cost of abating same, and the costs shall be billed against the owner or tenant in possession as for city revenues. 
(Former § 7-015) 
Sec. 7-12. - Adoption of state minimum standard codes. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. It is the desire of the city to adopt, in all respects, the various standard codes relating to amusement devised, building, fire prevention, gas, grading, housing, mechanical, plumbing and swimming pools. 
(b)  The adoption of these codes is done to facilitate proper inspection activities by the city, Walton and Newton Counties, Georgia relating to construction and to maintenance of buildings within the corporate limits of said town and relating to public safety, health and general welfare. 
(c)  The following codes are hereby adopted by reference in the form referenced below as amended and approved by the state department of community affairs as though they were copied herein fully: 
(1)  International Building Code, 2012 Edition. 
(2)  International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 Edition. 
(3)  International Mechanical Code, as published by the International Code Council, 2012 Edition. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code, 2012 Edition. 
(5)  National Electric Code, 2014 Edition. 
(6)  International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council, 2012 Edition. 
(7)  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 Edition. 
(8)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2012 Edition. 
(9)  International Existing Building Code, 2012 Edition. 
(10)  International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 Edition. 
(11)  Life Safety Code, as published by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(12)  International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 Edition. 
(13)  National Green Building Standards, 2008 Edition. 
(14)  Georgia 120-3-20, or otherwise known as the Accessibility Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-6, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-6, § 1, adopted April 18, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 7-12 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 7-13-7-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL 

Sec. 7-26. - Title; definitions. 
(a)  Title. This article will be known as "Social Circle Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control." 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, unless otherwise stated: 
    Best management practices means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
    Board means the board of natural resources. 
    Buffer means the land area immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
    Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "Excavation." 
    Department means the department of natural resources. 
    Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    District means the Walton County soil and water conservation district. 
    Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm-water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and sediment control plan ("plan") means plan for control of soil erosion and sediment from land-disturbing activity. 
    Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; depth above the original ground. 
    Finished grade means final grade or elevation and contour of ground after cutting or filling and conforming to proposed design. 
    Grading means altering the shape of the ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land-disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 7-27(5) of this Code. 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-1 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    Operator means the party or parties with: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications, or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities necessary to ensure compliance with a storm-water pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the storm-water pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under this article. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, association, entity, joint venture, public or private corporation, LLC, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch, composed of virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation means process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Walton County soil and water conservation district. 
    Stabilization means establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
    Structural erosion and sediment control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. §§ 12-5-1 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout water are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sediment control measures means measures for stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any areas adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency or duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Former § 7-003(1.)) 
Sec. 7-27. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A., §§ 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, and other related activities which result in nominal soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum standards as set forth in section 7-28 of this Code. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2, entitled the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 7-28 of this Code and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the Issuing Authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include the raising, harvesting, or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for livestock, including but not limited to cattle, swine, hogs, goats, sheep and rabbits or for use in production of poultry, including but not limited to chicken, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl or animals; production of aquaculture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 7-28(c)(15) and (16), no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for three years after completion of such forestry practices. 
(7)  Project under technical supervision of Natural Resources Conservation Service of the U.S. Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving one acre or less which is not part of a land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of more than one acre; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves one acre or less, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in subsections 7-28(b) and (c) of this Code; provided further that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb five or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1 except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the city, the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development of sale under the state general permit in which case the city shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holder; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
    Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in section 7-28, the issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Former § 7-003(3.)) 
Sec. 7-28. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1 et seq. and of subsections (b) and (c). The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMP'S. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and in this article shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed to control soil erosion and sedimentation for all rainfall events up to and including a 25-year, 24-hour rainfall event and in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with construction of single-family homes not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article governing land-disturbing activities shall require, at a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-1, et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be made to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not adversely affect adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed channels so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts, except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any such case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this Code; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (16), there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however, that buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. art. 5, pt. 6, tit. 12, ch. 5, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. A stream buffer of 25 feet in width shall be maintained in addition to the 25-foot state waters buffer. The following requirements apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality or aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines, or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" per O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirements for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented; 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(17)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2, the "Georgia Water Quality Act," unless a variance for such activity is granted by the director, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
(d)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c). 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Former § 7-003(4.)) 
Sec. 7-29. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineer shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, flood prevention ordinance, this Code, and all other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party eligible for a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the city and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c). Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 7-28. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  a.  A fee of $700.00 for non-residential development and $90.00 per lot or unit for residential development shall be charged. 
b.  In addition to the above specified local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)5, provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), one-half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the city shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the city. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 7-28(c)(15) and (16) and bonding, if required as per section 7-29, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the council to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)  a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits of this article or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, (as amended) within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the council may deny the permit application. 
b.  The permit applicant shall post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance, regulation or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the council with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 7-28. Conformance with the minimum requirements shall be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, and shall conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, ordinances and regulations of the city, and state laws and regulations. 
(2)  Data required for site plan: 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address and phone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact that is responsible for erosion and sediment controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated start and completion dates, which must include the statement in bold letters, that "installation of erosion control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities." 
g.  Storm water and sediment management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetation plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
j.  Maintenance statement-"Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sediment control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection or if the existing measures do not provide effective erosion and sediment control." 
(3)  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 
Map Scale Ground Slope Contour Interval 1 inch = 100 ft. or larger scale Flat 0-2% 0.5 or 1 Rolling 2-8% 1 or 2 Steep 8% + 2, 5 or 10  
f.  Adjacent areas and featured areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc. which might be affected shall be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineation of required 50-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineation of the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sediment control measures and practices, using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the city of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the council unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the council has affirmatively determined the plan is in compliance with this section, any variances required by subsections 7-28(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements per subsection 7-29(b)(5) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect in the city are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the council, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or its successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or its successor in title is in violation of this section. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the county tax commissioner and the clerk and/or their designees, certifying that all ad valorem taxes against the property have been paid. 
(Former § 7-003(5.)) 
Sec. 7-30. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building inspector for the city will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land- disturbing activities as defined in this section has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with all provisions of this section, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section. 
(b)  The building inspector may conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this section, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and inspecting land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The district or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to the council for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the erosion and sedimentation control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The division may periodically review the actions of the council pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of the city's ordinances and regulations and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the council. If such review indicates that the council has not administered or enforced its ordinances or regulations or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(d), the division shall notify the council in writing. The council shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as an issuing authority. If the council does not take necessary correction action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the council as an issuing authority. 
(Former § 7-003(6.)) 
Sec. 7-31. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences any land- disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this section without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the city. 
(b)  Stop work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provision of this section, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or water of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and subsequent violation, the director or issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the city, by the director, or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the city or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this section and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 7-29. Social Circle may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (2) of this subsection, any person who violates any provision of this section, the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this section shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this Code, notwithstanding any provision in any City Charter to the contrary, the city court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violation of city ordinances or regulations, any magistrate court or any other court of jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this section under city ordinances or regulations approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(2)  The following penalties shall apply to land-disturbing activities performed in violation of any provision of this section, any rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this section; 
a.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $250.00 per day for each violation involving the construction of a single-family dwelling by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy; and 
b.  There shall be a minimum penalty of $1,000.00 per day for each violation involving land-disturbing activities other than as provided in subsection (a) hereinbefore. 
(Former § 7-003(7.)) 
Sec. 7-32. - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the council upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance or regulation of the city, shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the council within 30 days after receipt by the city clerk of a written notice of appeal. Notice of appeal must be submitted within 30 days of the city giving the holder notice of the decision. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the council, after exhausting its administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the superior court of Walton County, Georgia, or Newton County, Georgia, as the case may be. The appeal must be filed within 30 days of the decision of the council. 
(Former § 7-003(8.)) 
Sec. 7-33. - Liability. 
    Neither the approval of a plan under this section, nor the compliance with this section, shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city or district for damage to any person or property. The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. No provisions of this section shall permit any person to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any water of the state as defined thereby. 
(Former § 7-003(9.)) 
Sec. 7-34. - Education and certification. 
    After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Former § 7-003(10.)) 
Secs. 7-35-7-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 7-51. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse impacts from stormwater discharges within the city. Proper management of surface water runoff will reduce channel erosion, stream sedimentation, local flash flooding, assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards, and maintain as practically as possible the pre-development surface water runoff characteristics of the area. 
(Former § 7-003B(1.)) 
Sec. 7-52. - Policy. 
    It is hereby declared to be public policy to: 
(1)  Recognize the necessity of joint action where feasible by the city and the development industry in resolution of existing drainage problems and prevention of their worsening or recurrence; 
(2)  Work in a cooperative relationship with the development industry to accomplish the above-stated objective by encouraging through this chapter and other public actions the development of fewer but larger major detention facilities and incremental resolution of existing drainage problems on a priority basis in concert with private development activities; 
(3)  Maintain, where feasible, the natural environment of city streams through reduction of flow quantities resulting from new development, and where feasible, restore the flood plain to its natural functional purpose to resolve existing flooding problems, but recognize the necessity of using urban streams for stormwater runoff in those situations where maintenance of the natural stream environment would result in continuation or worsening of flooding conditions; 
(4)  Require the development industry to maintain the function of the storm drainage system during the development process and property owners thereafter; 
(5)  Encourage the construction of joint detention ponds serving several residential properties. The city encourages the location of these detention facilities off the site of the property under development and may participate where it is in the general public's best interest in the construction of major detention facilities which would serve not only the needs of the property under development, but would assist in resolving existing flooding problems; 
(6)  Encourage innovative design solutions to the effective detention of runoff. 
(Former § 7-003B(2.)) 
Sec. 7-53. - Applicability. 
(a)  All persons proposing development and/or construction within the city shall submit a stormwater management plan and hydrology study to the department for review and approval, except as provided in section 7-54 of this article. 
(b)  A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required for all development and construction that will increase the peak rate of runoff from the site by more than one cubic foot per second for a ten-year frequency storm. The requirement of this paragraph may be waived by the director if it can be shown by detailed engineering including descriptions, drawings, calculations and any other pertinent information necessary and acceptable to prove to the director that one of the following conditions exists: 
(1)  Installation of stormwater management facilities would reduce downstream flood peaks by less than one percent; or 
(2)  The applicant demonstrates how the downstream drainage system will have enough capacity to receive any increase in runoff for the design storms and protect downstream development without the addition or improvement of stormwater management facilities; or 
(3)  The applicant demonstrates the proposed site design will meet the standards of this chapter without such facilities. 
    However, the provisions of this subsection (b) shall not be waived if the director determines that such waiver would increase known flooding problems, or exceed the capacity of the downstream drainage system. 
(Former § 7-003B(3.)) 
Sec. 7-54. - Exemption from requirements. 
(a)  The following development activities are exempt from the requirements of providing a combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff: 
(1)  Agricultural and forestry land management activities. 
(2)  Additions or modifications to existing detached single-family dwellings. 
(3)  Construction of a detached single-family dwelling that is not part of a larger development. 
(4)  Non-residential developments with less than 5,000 square feet of land disturbance activity. 
(5)  Developments of property where the runoff resulting from the proposed development is discharged directly into a Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) identified 100-year flood zone, provided that approved sediment basins are constructed at each significant discharge point to prevent the discharge of sediment from the site, and provided that sufficient energy dissipation devices or structures are installed to limit post development stormwater velocities to less than or equal to pre-development flow velocities at any point on the perimeter of the project. 
(6)  Residential developments consisting of single-family dwellings, each on a lot of five acres or more. 
(b)  When the developer requests and the department agrees that development and construction of nonresidential projects are too small, or that engineering and economic factors make combined detention of other drainage facilities more practical, the department may authorize the joint construction of these facilities to serve two or more properties by two or more developers. Where joint detention facilities serving two or more properties are approved for construction, no use of land or occupancy of building within the properties served by these facilities shall be permitted until completion of the detention facility, and the owners of the joint detention facility have submitted a written agreement that is satisfactory to the department and assigns to one of the parties the responsibility of maintaining that facility. 
(Former § 7-003B(4.)) 
Sec. 7-55. - Requirements for stormwater management plan. 
(a)  Stormwater detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the department and shall be in place and inspected prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or acceptance of a final plat. 
(b)  The stormwater management plan shall be prepared under the supervision of, and certified by, a professional engineer, landscape architect or a registered land surveyor in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-15-2, with competency in hydrology and hydraulics, currently registered in the state. The stormwater management plan shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the affected areas, the potential impacts of the proposed development on water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of measures proposed for managing stormwater runoff. The minimum information required for a stormwater management plan, or applications for a variance or waiver, shall include a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet with the following characteristics and information: 
(1)  Graphic scale, north arrow and date. 
(2)  Vicinity map showing the site location relative to surrounding landmarks, highway intersections, rivers, and streams. 
(3)  Topography showing existing and proposed elevations in accordance with the following: 
a.  For sites with slopes less than two percent, show contours at intervals of not more than two feet and spot elevations at all breaks in grade along drainage channels or swales at selected points not more than 50 feet apart. 
b.  For sites with slopes more than approximately two percent, show contours with an interval of not more than five feet. 
c.  Elevation shall be based on the datum plane established by the United States Geodetic Survey (USGS). 
(c)  Delineation of property lines and deed record names of adjacent property owners. 
(d)  Location of existing structures. 
(1)  Location and right-of-way of streets, roads, railroads and utility lines, either on or adjacent to the property to be developed. Specify whether utility lines are in easements or right-of-way and show location of towers and poles. 
(2)  Size and location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains, culverts, or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of streets or roads adjoining the tract. Grades and invert elevations of storm drains, sewers and culverts shall be shown. 
(e)  Proposed conditions. 
(1)  Layout of streets, roads, alleys, drives, paved areas and public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations. 
(2)  Location of structures. 
(3)  Proposed storm sewer system with grade, pipe size, and location of outlet, both in plan and profile. 
(4)  Delineation of drainage areas that are to be routed through the proposed drainage structure and/or stormwater management facility. 
(5)  Plans for detention facilities shall show existing and proposed contours with a contour interval per subsection (3). The plans shall include sufficient information indicating positive drainage (dry-basins), top of wall or dam to insure adequate freeboard for the 100-year peak stage (minimum one foot), width of the dam crest (minimum eight feet), limits of ponding, maximum ponding elevation, location of facility with respect to property lines, public right-of-way, easements, and details of the outlet device, dam or wall and other provisions needed to insure the safe, proper, and continued function of the facility. 
(f)  Provide computations and supporting documentation of hydrologic and hydraulic analyses. 
(1)  Analysis of drainage areas 50 acres and less in size may be performed using the rational method. 
(2)  Analysis of drainage areas of 25 to 2,000 acres may be performed using SCS methods. 
(3)  Analysis of drainage areas of 25 acres to 25 square miles may be performed using USGS methods. 
(4)  Use of other methods will require prior approval from the department. 
(g)  The stormwater management plan shall provide the following for pre-development and post-development conditions: 
(1)  The composite runoff curve number or runoff coefficient for the site. 
(2)  The peak runoff rate at the point, or points, of discharge for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year, design frequency storm events. 
(3)  The capacity of storm sewers, ditches, and other hydraulic structures. 
(h)  A landscaping plan shall be submitted and reviewed for all detention and other storage facilities as part of the stormwater management plan. 
(i)  The planning and development department shall review each stormwater management plan, and shall either approve or reject the plan and return comments for revision. The approval of any stormwater management plan shall not relieve the developer from satisfying any and all requirements of this part. 
(Former § 7-003B(5.)) 
Sec. 7-56. - Hydrology study requirements. 
(a)  The hydrology study used in the stormwater management plan shall consist of analytical computations resulting in pre-developed and post-developed runoff rates for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year frequency storms and contain the following: 
(1)  Statement of methodology used (Rational, SCS, USGS or a derivative thereof with prior approval from the department). 
(2)  Statement of all assumptions. 
(3)  Calculations should be shown for time of concentration or lag time. 
(4)  Calculations should be shown for all weighted C-factors or weighted curve numbers used. 
(5)  Rainfall intensities and amounts are to be consistent with data for the Walton County or Metro Atlanta area. 
(b)  Downstream analysis required. The purpose of the downstream analysis is to determine if flooding or drainage problems will occur as a result of the proposed development or if existing flooding or drainage problems will be exacerbated. To provide a reasonable guide for downstream analysis, hydrologic-hydraulic engineering study shall extend downstream to a point where the proposed development represents less than ten percent of the total watershed draining to that point. 
(1)  Hydrographs shall be generated for the following conditions: 
a.  Design hydrographs from the developed land using undeveloped land use conditions. 
b.  Design hydrographs from the development using developed land use conditions and routed through the proposed storage or other stormwater management facilities. 
c.  Design hydrographs at the ten percent point routed from the development using developed land use conditions within the development site. 
d.  Design hydrographs from the entire drainage area to the ten percent point using land use conditions as for the different design flows specified in this section. 
(2)  Hydrographs at the exit to the development and at the ten percent point are then compared and analyzed to show that the flows from the development will not be increased beyond the limits allowed in this section, at the exit to the development and at the ten percent point. 
(3)  A narrative shall be prepared to describe the hydraulic characteristics of the drainage system downstream from the proposed development, any restrictions that exist, and any physical characteristics that might affect the conveyance of flows through the system to the ten percent point. 
(c)  All detention and/or retention facility plans shall be at a scale of not less than one inch equals 50 feet with a maximum contour interval of two feet. Hereinafter where the term detention facility is used, it will be taken that the same criteria applies to a retention facility as well. The plans should be based on a stage-storage and controlled discharge design and contain the following information: 
(1)  Maximum storage requirements for the proposed detention facility based on the storage volume required for the 100-year frequency storm event. 
(2)  The plans shall present clearly all information needed for proper review and construction of the storage facility, including dimensions and contours as appropriate. 
(d)  Design of outlet device. 
(1)  The outlet device shall be thoroughly and clearly detailed for proper construction. The design shall be such as to require minimal maintenance and provide maximum longevity. 
(2)  Provide emergency overflow spillway in dam or outlet structure top. 
(3)  If the outlet device utilizes orifice flow, a trash rack protecting the orifice from blockage from debris shall be provided for orifices 15" or less. Access shall be provided for maintenance in the form of a manhole or other suitable device and shall discourage and restrict human entry by use of bolt down lids or other positive means. 
(4)  Discharge from the detention facilities shall be released at a minimum distance of six times the diameter of the discharge pipe, if used, from any exterior property line. Rip-rap shall be placed accordingly. 
(5)  Provide details of outlet devices and dam cross section on the construction drawings. 
(6)  The type and size of pipes to be used for the outlet, along with detail drawings and specifications for all facilities should be indicated. 
(7)  Actual results obtained from routing the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year post-developed storm hydrographs through the facility are required. 
(8)  A summary chart showing maximum pond elevation, storage required, and pre-developed and post-developed discharge rates for the two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storms should be included. 
(e)  Acceptable stormwater management facilities are not limited to conventional detention and/or retention facilities. Constructed wetlands, infiltration systems, and other innovative solutions are encouraged, so long as the intent of this chapter is satisfied. However, proposals for alternative systems shall be presented to the director for tentative acceptability prior to formal submittal of a stormwater management plan. 
(f)  Stormwater retention facilities are recommended in all residential and commercial developments where possible, to provide an effective stormwater management facility, improve water quality, enhance groundwater recharge, and to provide an aesthetically pleasing amenity area to complement the development. 
(g)  Design criteria. 
(1)  The peak release rate of stormwater from all developments where detention is required shall not exceed the corresponding peak stormwater runoff rate from the area in its natural undeveloped state for all intensities up to and including the 50-year storm event. Routing conditions must also be presented to prove that the facility can safely accommodate and pass the 100-year storm event, without damage to any dam or related structure. 
(2)  The same methodology must be used for calculating pre-development and post-development rates of runoff from a site. 
(3)  Detention designs may be rejected by the director if they incorporate structures and facilities that will demand excessive maintenance or utilize numerous small structures, if other alternatives are physically possible. 
(4)  Discharge velocities from detention facilities shall be reduced to provide a non-erosive velocity flow from a structure, channel or other control measure. 
(5)  Stormwater management and flood control facilities shall include both structural and non-structural controls in accordance with sections 7-64 and 7-65 of this article. 
(h)  Methods for estimating stormwater runoff, storage design and outlet structure design shall be implemented in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Volume 2, Chapter 2, First Edition dated August, 2001, with subsequent revisions to be incorporated herein. 
(Former § 7-003B(6.)) 
Sec. 7-57. - Location criteria for detention facilities. 
(a)  Detention facilities shall be considered to consist of the area within the maximum design ponding limits, the dam (if one) including all embankment slopes and wall footings (if applicable), primary and emergency outlet works, any drainage and access easements, and any energy dissipation devices. 
(b)  Detention facilities shall be designed and located to promote interception of runoff from the proposed land use. "By-pass" areas (areas of non-regulated runoff) shall be permitted only if the combined peak discharge rate from the site meets the requirements of sections 7-55 and 7-56 of this part. 
(c)  Detention facilities shall be located in conformance with the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975 (see O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6, 16) and the flood damage prevention regulations of the city. 
(d)  Detention facilities shall be located in accordance with the restrictions created by Title 44, Chapter 1, Subchapter B, Parts 59 and 60 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amended. 
(e)  Detention facilities shall be located in conformance with the provisions of the Clean Water Act of 1974 as amended regulating land disturbing activities within designated wetland areas. (See Title 404 of the Federal Regulations.) 
(f)  Detention facilities may be constructed within a transitional buffer or recreation areas, upon approval by the director of planning and development on an individual basis dependent on site-specific conditions. Title to the recreation area is to be held by a property owners association, homeowners association or private entity and the design will not interfere with the intended use of the area. Detention facilities constructed on individual lots will be owned and maintained by the property owner. 
(g)  The 100-year ponding elevation created by the detention facility shall be considered a flood hazard and as such, shall require the same provisions as the base flood as defined by the flood damage prevention regulations of the city. 
(h)  The drainage system from a proposed development must discharge into an outfall with adequate capacity to accommodate the runoff from the development. If downstream easements are needed to extend the drainage system to an adequate outfall, the developer shall seek these easements. In the event such easements cannot be obtained by the developer, the county may, at its option, agree to assist the developer in obtaining needed drainage easements using its powers, including condemnation. 
(i)  Detention facilities may be incorporated into lake or pond designs. All such facilities shall be designed and constructed in conformity with applicable state and federal regulations. Design engineers are expected to be knowledgeable of the criteria contained within the Georgia Safe Dams Act, Georgia Department of Natural Resources "Rules for Dam Safety" publication, and the U.S.D.A. Soil Conservation Service's Technical Release No. 60, "Earth Dams and Reservoirs." In lieu of more restrictive design standards, the principles and practices for dam construction as detailed in Design of Small Dams, United States Department of the Interior Bureau of Reclamation, Third Edition, 1987, shall be used. 
(j)  Parking lot detention areas shall be located so as to restrict ponding to areas other than parking spaces near buildings, and to not encroach upon entrance drives. The maximum depth of detention ponding in a parking lot, except at a flow control structure, shall be six inches for a ten-year storm, and nine inches for a 100-year storm. The maximum depth of ponding at a flow control structure shall be 12 inches for a 100-year storm. In truck parking areas, the maximum depth of ponding shall be 12 inches for the ten-year storm. Detention in ponding areas are to be drained within 30 minutes after the peak flow occurs. 
(k)  The 100-year ponding limits of a detention facility shall not encroach upon a public right-of-way. Roadway embankments will not be allowed as a dam for a detention facility. 
(l)  Detention facilities may not be located within utility easements, or encroach upon utility easements or right-of-way, unless the owner provides the department with written permission from both the property and utility owners. 
(Former § 7-003B(7.)) 
Sec. 7-58. - Access and fencing requirements. 
(a)  Access. 
(1)  A 20-foot access easement shall be provided to all storm water management and detention facilities from a public right-of-way. Within the easement shall be constructed an access road of at least 12 feet in width. The road shall have a 12-inch base compacted to 95 percent of the Standard Proctor soil test and be grassed. 
(2)  All storm water management and detention facilities shall be provided with a minimum ten-foot drainage and access easement encompassing entire facility including the 100-year ponding limits and the entire dam. The area surrounding the facility shall be for the purpose of maintaining the facility. 
(3)  Storm water detention facilities shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city and shall be in place and inspected prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or acceptance of a final plat. 
(b)  Fencing. 
(1)  Except as provided in subsection (b)(2) below a four-foot chain link fence will be required for every stormwater detention facility. When a four-foot chain link fence is required, the fence shall include double eight-foot wide gates (16 feet total opening) to permit entrance of equipment necessary to allow periodic maintenance activities. 
(2)  A four-foot chain link fence will not be required when the stormwater detention facility meets one of the following criteria: 
a.  When, regardless of pond depth, a minimum of 70 percent of the side slopes is not steeper than a slope of four horizontal to one vertical. 
b.  When the maximum depth of the pond is less than three feet in the 100-year frequency event. 
c.  When the planned facility is a retention facility and the maximum depth change from the normal water surface elevation to the 100-year flood frequency event is less than or equal to four feet. 
d.  When a culvert is downsized to provide stormwater detention through a natural area where the existing topography has not been altered. 
e.  When the site in which the pond is to be constructed is zoned industrial and is more than 500 feet from properties zoned residential or publicly owned property (excluding right-of-way). 
(Former § 7-003B(8.)) 
Sec. 7-59. - Maintenance of stormwater management facilities. 
(a)  The maintenance of any stormwater management facility shall be the responsibility of the mandatory homeowners association of residential subdivision developments or property owner of commercial development. Piped systems and other drainage facilities, whether in an easement or not, outside the county right-of-way, are the responsibility of the mandatory homeowners association in residential subdivision developments or the property owner of commercial property. In residential or commercial developments, stormwater management facility maintenance is to be vested in the mandatory homeowners or property owners association with responsibility clearly vested in the organization through established covenants previously approved by the director. The city has the right, but not the responsibility to access any stormwater management facility for maintenance purposes. 
(b)  Regional stormwater retention facilities, which are deemed by the city to be an essential and integral part of the city stormwater management plan, may be maintained by the city. In order to facilitate the maintenance of said stormwater retention facilities, a drainage easement shall be provided which will encompass the 100-year flood elevation contour plus 20 feet. The 20 feet shall be measured horizontally outward from the 100-year flood elevation contour. An improved access easement shall be provided from an existing or proposed right-of-way to the regional stormwater detention facility as required in section 7-58. 
(c)  A stormwater retention facility built to satisfy the requirements of this Section shall be maintained to satisfy the requirements set forth herein. The shorelines must be graded so that there is not a sudden change in elevation. The banks of the impoundment beyond the normal pool contour shall be graded to a slope not steeper than a six horizontal to one vertical. A retention facility shall require periodic maintenance of the outlet structure and the dam. 
(d)  All stormwater detention facilities shall be graded so as to provide positive drainage. The minimum slope along the bottom of the facility shall be two percent. 
(e)  Inspection and maintenance agreement. 
(1)  An inspection and maintenance agreement shall be executed for all private on-site stormwater management facilities prior to final plat approval. Such agreement shall be in form and content acceptable to the director, and shall provide that all maintenance and repairs of such facilities shall be the responsibility of the developer, property owner, or other entity approved by the city. 
(2)  Such agreement shall provide for access to the facility by virtue of a non-exclusive perpetual easement dedicated to the city for periodic inspections of the facility by city personnel. The agreement shall provide that preventive maintenance inspections of infiltration systems, retention, or detention facilities may be made by the city, at its option. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the city's inspection schedule may include an inspection during the first year of operation and once every two years thereafter. Inspection reports shall be maintained by the department. 
(3)  The agreement shall provide that if, after an inspection, the condition of a facility presents an immediate danger to the public health, safety or general welfare because of unsafe conditions or improper maintenance, the city shall have the right, but not the duty, to take such action as may be necessary to protect the public and make the facility safe. If it is determined that such deficient conditions are the result of neglected maintenance or other action caused by the owner, then any cost incurred by the city shall be paid by the owner as set forth in subsection (4) below. 
(4)  The agreement shall provide that the city shall notify the owner(s) of the facility of any violation, deficiency or failure to comply with this division. The agreement shall also provide that upon a failure to correct violations requiring maintenance work, within 14 calendar days after notice thereof, the city may provide for all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. The owner(s) of the facility shall be assessed the costs of the work performed by the city pursuant to this subsection and there shall be a lien on all property of the owner in which said property utilizes or will utilize such facility in achieving stormwater management, which lien, when filed in Walton County real estate records, shall have the same status and priority as liens for ad valorem taxes. Should such a lien be filed, portions of the affected property may be released by the city following the payments by the owner of such portion of the property of such owner's pro-rata share of the lien amount based upon the acreage to be released with such release amount to be determined by the director. 
(5)  The agreement shall be recorded by the owner in the land records of Walton County prior to the final plat approval or the issuance of any building permit for the subject property(s). 
(Former § 7-003B(9.)) 
Sec. 7-60. - Maintenance of pre-existing stormwater facilities. 
    All stormwater management facilities in existence in the city on the effective date of these regulations may be maintained by the city in such a manner as to maintain and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare; in order to be assured that such facilities are safe, to reduce and minimize damage to public and private property, to reduce and minimize the impact of such facilities on land and stream channel erosion, to assist in the attainment and maintenance of water quality standards, to reduce local flooding, and to maintain, as nearly as possible, the pre-existing development runoff characteristics of the area. 
(Former § 7-003B(10.)) 
Sec. 7-61. - Performance bond. 
(a)  Stormwater management facilities shall be constructed before other clearing and grading activities unless the director approves otherwise. The director may allow limited construction only after the applicant has provided suitable performance surety. 
(b)  When required stormwater management facilities have not yet been constructed, and a valid performance bond is in effect, the director may issue a maximum of five building permits for construction within a residential development, provided that adequate temporary measures are in place to satisfy the intent of this section. 
(c)  The performance bond or other securities shall not be released until the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The director, or designee, shall perform a final inspection of the facilities and determine that they have been constructed in compliance with the stormwater management plan, and this part. 
(2)  It has been determined that all provisions of the stormwater management plan have been faithfully executed. 
(3)  A provision may be made for partial release of the amount of the bond pro-rata upon completion and acceptance of various stages of development as specifically delineated, described and scheduled in the stormwater management plan. The applicant shall notify the department upon completion of each stage that is ready for inspection. 
(Former § 7-003B(11.)) 
Sec. 7-62. - Inspection. 
(a)  The director, or designee, shall be responsible for determining whether development is proceeding in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. Periodic inspection of the development site shall be made by the director, or designee, to ensure that the stormwater management plan is properly implemented. 
(b)  The director, or designee, and other duly authorized employees bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, and management in accordance with the provisions of this part. 
(c)  Upon completion of construction on the project, and prior to approval of the final plat or issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the developer shall provide certification by a professional engineer, currently registered in the state, that the stormwater management facility has been constructed in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan and will effectively control post development peak flow and velocities to less than or equal to pre-development conditions for the two-, five-, ten-, 25- and 50-year frequency storm events, and can safely accommodate and pass the 100-year frequency storm event without damage to the facility. 
(Former § 7-003B(12.)) 
Sec. 7-63. - Enforcement. 
(a)  In the event that work performed does not conform to the provisions of the approved stormwater management plan and inspection, the developer shall be subject to any and all applicable enforcement and violation procedures outlined in this part. 
(b)  In the event that the developer continues in non-compliance with the stormwater management plan following the issuance of a stop-work order or other violation, the performance bond or other surety posted shall be forfeited in favor of the city. 
(Former § 7-003B(13.)) 
Sec. 7-64. - Structural stormwater controls. 
    Structural stormwater controls are to be designed and implemented in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volume 2, Chapter 3, First Edition, dated August, 2001 with subsequent revisions to be incorporated herein. 
(Former § 7-003B(14.)) 
Sec. 7-65. - Non-structural stormwater controls. 
    Non-structural stormwater controls are to be designed and implemented in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volume 2, Chapter 3, First Edition, dated August, 2001 with subsequent revisions to be incorporated herein. 
(Former § 7-003B(15.)) 
Sec. 7-66. - Stormwater management planning and design. 
    Stormwater management minimum standards for new development, redevelopment and hotspots as well as site planning and site design shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual Volume 2, Chapter 3, First Edition, dated August, 2001 with subsequent revisions to be incorporated herein. 
(Former § 7-003B(16.)) 
Secs. 7-67-7-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES, DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 7-91. - Authorization. 
    Article IX, Section II of the Georgia Constitution and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) delegated the responsibility to local governments to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the mayor and council ordain as follows. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 1, § A)) 
Sec. 7-92. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Social Circle, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated and/or flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 1, § B)) 
Sec. 7-93. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 1, § C)) 
Sec. 7-94. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for sound use and development of flood prone areas to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 1, § D)) 
Sec. 7-95. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
    Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the city manager's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, "areas of special flood hazard" shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 7-112. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE). The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. "Critical facilities" include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means, for determining rates, structures for which "start of construction" commenced before February 16, 2010. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before February 16, 2010. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Flood proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is; 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior, or 
b.  Directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after February 16, 2010 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after February 16, 2010 and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after February 16, 2010. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for permanent dwelling but as temporary quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Subdivision the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
    For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from requirements of this article, which permits construction otherwise prohibited by this article. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 6)) 
Secs. 7-96-7-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 7-111. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Social Circle, Georgia. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § A)) 
Sec. 7-112. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its current flood insurance study (FIS), with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for (Walton County) are hereby adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: Social Circle City Hall and/or Walton County Commissioners Office. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § B)) 
Sec. 7-113. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § C)) 
Sec. 7-114. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § D)) 
Sec. 7-115. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § E)) 
Sec. 7-116. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § F)) 
Sec. 7-117. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations as determined by GA EPD. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § G)) 
Sec. 7-118. - Penalties for violation. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 per day, per violation or imprisoned for not more than zero days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 2, § H)) 
Secs. 7-119-7-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 7-136. - Designation of article administrator. 
    The city manager or designee is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 3, § A)) 
Sec. 7-137. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the city manager on forms furnished by the city prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
    Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsection 7-157(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(2)  Construction stage. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. The city manager shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 3, § B)) 
Sec. 7-138. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
    Duties of the city manager shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 7-112, then the city manager shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 4. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 7-137(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 7-137(2). 
(7)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the city manager shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsection 7-137(1)c. and subsections 7-157(2) or 7-159(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accurate city flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city manager shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the city and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 3, § C)) 
Secs. 7-139-7-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 7-156. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment or contamination during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 4, § A)) 
Sec. 7-157. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 7-156(4), "Elevated buildings". All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 7-138(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (see subsection 7-156(6) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
3.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a.-c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located in areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-112, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 4, § B)) 
Sec. 7-158. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-112, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 7-112, then the city manager shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of division 4. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (2) and (3) shall apply: 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located in an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 7-156(4), "Elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
b.  Reserved. 
    The city manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Former § 7-003(Art. 4, § C)) 
Sec. 7-159. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-112, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification shall be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 7-157. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 4, § D)) 
Sec. 7-160. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 7-112, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 7-156(4), "Elevated buildings". 
The city manager shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 7-137(1)c. and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 4, § E)) 
Sec. 7-161. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than either 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 4, § F)) 
Sec. 7-162. - Standards for critical facilities. 
    Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
    All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 4, § G)) 
Secs. 7-163-7-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES AND APPEALS 

Sec. 7-181. - Variance procedures and appeals. 
(a)  The Social Circle Planning Commission as established by the city shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city manager in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city planning commission may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Walton County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued in any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that granting a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The city manager shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this article, the city planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Former § 7-003C(Art. 5)) 
Secs. 7-182-7-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BUILDING CODE ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 7-201. - Purpose. 
(a)  General. This is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the State Minimum Standard Codes ("technical codes"). The city adopts administrative procedures in order to enforce them (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a)). The power to adopt these administrative procedures is in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(a)(1). These include procedural requirements for the enforcement of the codes, provisions for hearings, provisions for appeals from decisions of local inspectors, and any other procedures necessary for the proper local administration and enforcement of the state minimum standard codes. These powers include: Inspecting buildings and other structures to ensure compliance with the code; employing inspectors and other personnel necessary for the proper enforcement of codes; and requiring permits and to establishment charges for said permits. 
(b)  Code remedial. These codes and all inspections conducted and permits issued hereunder are remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof-public safety, health and general welfare-through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems ("service systems"). 
(c)  Quality control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not covered hereby except as it relates to purposes herein. 
(d)  Permitting and inspection. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under this Code shall not be construed as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the city nor any employee shall be liable for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
(Former § 7-007(1.)) 
Sec. 7-202. - Scope. 
(a)  Applicability. Where different sections of these codes specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(b)  Federal and state authority. This section shall not deprive any federal or state agency, or any applicable governing authority having jurisdiction, of any power or authority it had on the effective date hereof or of any remedy than existing for the enforcement of its orders, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  Appendices. Appendices referenced in the code text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
(d)  Referenced standards. Standards referenced in the text of technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are denoted by code text, only those portions of the standard shall be enforced. If code provisions conflict with a standard, code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
(e)  Maintenance. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the technical codes when constructed, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems. 
(Former § 7-007(2.)) 
Sec. 7-203. - Building department. 
(a)  General. There is hereby established a department to be called the building department and the person in charge shall be known as the building inspector. The qualifications for the building inspector and other code enforcement personnel are to be established by the manager. 
(b)  Restrictions on employees. An officer or employee of the department shall not be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building, structure, service, system or in the making of plans or of specifications thereof, unless he is the owner of such. This officer or employee shall not engage in any work inconsistent with his duties or conflict with the interests of the department. 
(c)  Records. The building inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the department. 
(d)  Liability. Any officer or employee shall not thereby render himself personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability, for any damage that may occur as a result of any act in the discharge of his duties. Any suit against any officer or employee or member because of such act performed in good faith shall be defended by the city until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(e)  Reports. The building inspector shall submit a report of the work of the building department during the preceding year. 
(Former § 7-007(3.)) 
Sec. 7-204. - Existing buildings. 
(a)  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without requiring the entire building, structure, plumbing, electrical, mechanical and gas systems to fully comply with all the requirements of the technical codes, provided, however, that the alteration, repair or rehabilitation work must conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building inspector shall determine the extent to which the existing system shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. 
(b)  Change of occupancy. If the occupancy classification of any existing structure is changed, the building, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems shall be made to conform to the intent of the technical codes as required by the building inspector. 
(c)  Historic buildings. Technical codes relating to construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for existing buildings or structures identified and classified by the state or city as historic buildings when such are judged by the building inspector to be safe and if any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings is consistent with the public interest, health, safety and welfare. 
(Former § 7-007(4.)) 
Sec. 7-205. - Powers and duties of the building inspector. 
(a)  General. The building inspector is authorized and directed to enforce the technical codes and render interpretations of the technical codes, consistent with the intent and purpose of each such code. 
(b)  Right of entry. When necessary to make an inspection to enforce this Code, or when the building inspector has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, structure, premises, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building inspector may enter at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building inspector by these technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry. If such building, structure or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of such and request entry. If entry is refused, the building inspector shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. When the building inspector shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no one shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the building inspector for inspection and examination per this Code. 
    On receipt of a credible written complaint or request from an owner, occupant, public safety official, department of family and children services, or a public utility provider, the building inspector shall make or cause to be made inspections to determine the condition of residential buildings and premises. Building inspector staff is authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all residential buildings and premises. The owner or occupant of every residential building or the person in charge thereof shall give staff free access to such building and its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection. 
    Inspection on interruption of utility service. If utility service provided to a premises is interrupted for any reason, other than for non-payment that is cured within 21 days of the date of cessation of the service, before the provision of service is restored to the premises, an inspection of the premises by the building inspector shall be made. The owner, tenant or resident shall notify the building inspector of the need for such inspection, and arrange for a day and time for the inspection to occur. The inspection shall certify that the premises meet the applicable legal standards and codes. The fee for each such inspection shall be $35.00 or as may be set by the manager from time to time, which includes an initial inspection and follow-up within 14 days if necessary. Any additional inspection shall require payment of the fee again to cover the cost. 
(c)  Stop work orders. On notice from the building inspector, work on any building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system contrary to the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and be given to the owner or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping work. 
(d)  Revocation of permit. The building inspector may revoke a permit or approval, if there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based. 
(e)  Revocation of permit for violation of code. The building inspector may revoke a permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of the Code. 
(f)  Unsafe buildings or systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems that are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or that constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to life, or which in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems. All such unsafe buildings, structures or service systems are declared illegal and shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by demolition per the Code. 
(g)  Requirements not covered by Code. Any requirements necessary for the strength, stability, or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this or the other technical codes, shall be determined by the building inspector. 
(h)  Alternate materials and methods. The codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed by the building inspector. The building inspector shall approve any such alternate, provided he finds the alternate for the purpose intended is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes, in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building inspector shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
(Former § 7-007(5.)) 
Sec. 7-206. - Permits. 
(a)  Permit required. Any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to erect, install, enlarge, alter, repair, remove, convert or replace any electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, the installation of which is regulated by the codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building inspector and obtain the required permit for the work. 
    Exception: Permits shall not be required for the following mechanical work: 
(1)  Any portable heating appliance; 
(2)  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
(3)  Any portable cooling unit; 
(4)  Any steam, hot or chilled water piping within any heating or cooling equipment regulated by this Code; 
(5)  Replacement of any part which does not alter its approval or make it unsafe; 
(6)  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
(7)  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten pounds or less of refrigerant and actuated by motors of one horsepower or less. 
(b)  Work authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall carry with it the right to construct or install the work shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where the work is not shown on the drawings and covered by the specifications submitted with the application, separate permits shall be required. 
(c)  Minor repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made with the approval of the building inspector without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
(d)  Information required. Each application for a permit, with the required fee, shall be filed with the building inspector on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain a description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot not covered by the building or structure, and shall contain other information required by the building inspector. 
(e)  Time limitations. An application for a permit for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing for the permit, unless before then a permit has been issued. Extensions of not more than 90 days each may be allowed by the building inspector for the application, if the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
(Former § 7-007(6.)) 
Sec. 7-207. - Drawings and specifications. 
(a)  Requirements. When required by the building inspector, 2+ copies of specifications, and of drawings drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany the application for a permit. Such shall contain information, notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
(b)  Additional data. The building inspector may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required by the building inspector to be prepared by an architect or engineer shall be affixed with their official seal. 
(c)  Design professional. The design professional shall be an architect or engineer legally registered in Georgia and shall affix his official seal to said drawings, specifications and accompanying data, for the following: 
(1)  All Group A, E and I occupancies. 
(2)  Buildings and structures three stories or more high. 
(3)  Buildings and structures 1,000 square feet or more in area. 
    For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific state law exception permits its preparation by a person not so registered. Exception: Single-family dwellings, regardless of size, shall require neither a registered architect or engineer, nor a certification that an architect or engineer is not required. 
(d)  Structural and fire resistance integrity. Plans for all buildings shall indicate how required structural and fire resistance integrity will be maintained where a penetration of a required fire resistance wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, signal and communication conduits, pipes and systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be maintained where required fire resistance floors intersect the exterior walls. 
(e)  Site drawings. Drawings shall show the location of the proposed building or structure and of every existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building inspector may require a boundary line survey prepared by a qualified surveyor. 
(f)  General site plan for hazardous occupancies. The building Inspector may require the submission of a general site plan drawn at a legible scale which shall include the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous materials stored. 
(g)  Building floor plan for hazardous occupancies. The building inspector may require a building floor plan which shall include all hazardous materials storage facilities in the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with hourly rating, location of liquid tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
(h)  Plan review. The building inspector shall cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described is per the requirements of the codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(i)  Affidavits. The building inspector may accept an affidavit from a registered architect or engineer stating the plans conform to the codes. For buildings and structures the affidavit shall state the plans conform to laws as to egress, type of construction and general arrangement and be accompanied by drawings showing the structural design, and by a statement that the plans and design conform to the codes. The building inspector may without any examination or inspection accept such affidavit if the architect or engineer who made such affidavit agrees to submit to the building inspector, copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and on completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems a certification that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected per the codes. Where the building inspector relies on such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for compliance with all codes and pertinent laws or ordinances. 
(Former § 7-007(7.)) 
Sec. 7-208. - Issuing permits. 
(a)  Action on permits. The building inspector shall act on an application for a permit without unreasonable delay. If the building inspector is satisfied that the work described in an application and the contract documents filed therewith conform to the requirements of the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit to the applicant. 
(b)  Refusal to issue permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying documents describing the work do not conform to the codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building inspector shall not issue a permit, but shall return the documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reason. 
(c)  Special foundation permit. When application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed, pending issuance, the building inspector may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder is proceeding at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted or that corrections will not be required to meet code. 
(d)  Public right-of-way. A permit shall not be given by the building inspector for any building, or the alteration of such when such change will affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendages or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another lot or premises, unless the applicant has met setback from the lines of the public street on which he proposes to build, erect or locate said building; and it shall be the duty of the building inspector to see that the street lines are not encroached upon. 
(e)  Contractors responsibilities. Every contractor who does installation or repairs of buildings, structures, gas, electrical, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems, for which a permit is required, shall comply with state and local rules and regulations. In any case in which the state requires a state license before performing work, the contractor shall supply the license number before receiving a permit. 
(Former § 7-007(8.)) 
Sec. 7-209. - Conditions of permit. 
(a)  Permit intent. A permit issued shall be a license to proceed with the work and not authority to violate or set aside any of the provisions of the codes, nor shall a permit prevent the building inspector from thereafter requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or violations of code. Every permit shall become invalid unless the work is commenced within six months after issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for six months. One or more extensions of time, not more than 90 days each, may be allowed, in writing. 
(b)  Permit issued on affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance on an affidavit or the work involves installation under conditions that, in the opinion of the building inspector, are hazardous or complex, the building inspector shall require that registered architects or engineers supervise such work. They shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as performed, and upon completion make and file with the building inspector written affidavit that the work has been done per the reviewed plans and the structural provisions of the technical codes. If such architect or engineer is not available, the owner shall employ in his stead a competent person or agency whose qualifications are subject to approval by the building inspector. 
(c)  Plans. When the building inspector issues a permit, he shall notate, in writing or by stamp, both sets of plans reviewed for code compliance. One set of drawings shall be retained by the building Inspector and the other set returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the site of work and open to inspection by the building inspector or his authorized representative. 
(Former § 7-007(9.)) 
Sec. 7-210. - Fees. 
(a)  Prescribed fees. A permit shall not be issued until the fees prescribed by the city have been paid. An amendment to a permit shall not be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the cost, has been paid. 
(b)  Work commencing before permit. Any person who commences work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing before obtaining the necessary permits, shall be subject to a penalty of 100 percent of the usual permit fee. 
(c)  Accounting. The building inspector shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other monies collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, and date and amount. 
(d)  Schedule of permit fees. On all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid per the fee schedules established by the manager. 
(e)  Building permit valuations. If, in the opinion of the building inspector, the valuation of building, alteration, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems appear underestimated, the permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show detailed estimates to meet the approval of the building inspector. Permit valuations shall include materials and labor. 
(Former § 7-007(10.)) 
Sec. 7-211. - Inspections. 
(a)  Existing building inspections. Before issuing a permit the building inspector may cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems for which an application has been received to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install or change the occupancy. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, during and upon completion of the work. He shall make a record of every inspection and of all violations of the codes. 
(b)  Manufacturers and fabricators. The building inspector may cause to be made an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made of every such inspection and of all violations of the codes. 
(c)  Inspection service. The building inspector may cause to be made, the inspections required by subsection (f). He may accept reports of recognized inspection services if after investigation he is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any code shall not be based on such reports unless in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such service. 
(d)  Inspections prior to certificate of occupancy or completion. The building inspector shall cause to be inspected at various intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system on completion, prior to the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(e)  Posting of permit. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit card is posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the weather and in such a position as to permit the building inspector or representative to conveniently make the required entries until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
(f)  Required inspections. The building inspector, on notification from the permit holder or his agent, which notification is an affirmative duty, shall make the following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and either release that portion of the construction or shall notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the code: 
    BUILDING 
(1)  Foundation : After trenches are excavated and forms erected. 
(2)  Frame : After all roofing, framing, fireblocking, bracing, concealing wiring, pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are done. 
(3)  Final : After the building is completed and ready for occupancy. 
    ELECTRICAL 
(1)  Underground : After trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed, and before any backfill is in place. 
(2)  Rough-in : After roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place and prior to wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final : After building complete, all required electrical fixtures in place, connected or protected, structure ready for occupancy. 
    PLUMBING 
(1)  Underground : After trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. 
(2)  Rough-in : After all roofing, framing, fireblocking, bracing and soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final : After building is complete, all plumbing fixtures in place and connected, and structure ready for occupancy. 
    MECHANICAL 
(1)  Underground : After trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before backfill. 
(2)  Rough-in : After the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting, and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. 
(3)  Final : After the building is complete, mechanical system is in place and connected, and structure ready for occupancy. 
    GAS 
(1)  Rough piping : After all piping installed, and before such is covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances connected. 
(2)  Final piping : After all piping installed and concealed, before any fixtures or gas appliances connected, include pressure test. 
(3)  Final : On all new gas work and portions of existing systems affected by new work or any changes. 
    ENERGY 
(1)  Foundation : Before slab concrete is poured, to verify perimeter insulation has been installed on any slab on grade foundations. 
(2)  Frame : Before wall insulation is concealed, inspect that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed. 
(3)  Final : After the building is completed, verify installation and R-value of all insulation, verify correct SEER ratings on appliances. 
(g)  Written release. Work shall not be done beyond the next point in each successive inspection without a written release from the building inspector. Such written releases shall be given only after an inspection. 
(h)  Reinforcing steel, structural frames, insulation, plumbing, mechanical, or electrical systems. Reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation and plumbing shall not be covered or concealed without a release from the building inspector. 
(i)  Plaster fire protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building inspector after all latching and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be applied until release from the building inspector. 
(Former § 7-007(11.)) 
Sec. 7-212. - Certificates. 
(a)  Building occupancy. A new building shall not be occupied or a change made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or a part of a building until after the building inspector has issued a certificate of occupancy, after all required electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing and fire protection systems have been approved by the building inspector. 
(b)  Certificates of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of all systems per the codes, plans and specifications, and after final inspection, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy stating occupancy permitted, number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and allowable load per square foot for each floor. 
(c)  Temporary/partial occupancy. A temporary/partial certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion of a building which may be safely occupied prior to final completion. 
(d)  Existing building certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy for an existing building may be obtained by applying and supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with the codes. Where necessary, in the opinion of the building inspector, two sets of detailed drawings, or a general inspection, or both, may be required. When, upon inspection, it is found that the building conforms to the codes and other applicable laws and ordinances, a certificate of occupancy shall issue. 
(e)  Certificate of completion. On satisfactory completion of a building or system, a certificate of completion may issue, as proof that a structure or system is complete and for certain types of permits is released for use and may be connected to a utility system. This does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior a certificate of occupancy. 
(Former § 7-007(12.)) 
Sec. 7-213. - Service utilities. 
(a)  Connection. No person shall connect from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system regulated by the codes for which a permit is required, until approved by the building inspector and a certificate of occupancy or completion. 
(b)  Temporary connection. The building inspector may authorize temporary connection of the building or system to the energy, fuel or power for testing building service systems or use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Authority to disconnect service utilities. The building inspector may authorize disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system, in case of emergency to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building inspector shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant, of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Former § 7-007(13.)) 
Sec. 7-214. - Posting floor loads. 
(a)  Occupancy. An existing or new building shall not be occupied for any purpose which will cause the floors thereof to be loaded beyond their safe capacity. 
(b)  Storage and factory-industrial occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a competent architect or engineer in computing the safe load capacity. All such computations shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load on each floor in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed. 
(c)  Signs. In every building or part thereof for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building inspector, shall be marked on plates securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and if lost, removed or defaced, shall be replaced by the owner. 
(Former § 7-007(14.)) 
Sec. 7-215. - Tests. 
    The building inspector may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance. Required tests are to be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency. 
(Former § 7-007(15.)) 
Sec. 7-216. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person, firm, corporation or agent who shall violate a provision of the codes, or fail to comply, or who erects, constructs, alters, installs, demolishes or moves any structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, in violation of a statement or drawing submitted and permitted thereunder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person shall be considered guilty of a separate offense for each day during which a violation of any of the provisions of the Code is committed or continued, and on conviction shall be punished as provided by law. The violation of any provision of this section is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or a temporary or permanent injunction. Nothing in this section shall be construed as an election of remedies and the city may seek both criminal penalties and injunctive relief. 
(Former § 7-007(16.)) 
Secs. 7-217-7-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

Sec. 7-231. - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of Social Circle is among the most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; and 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by the National Historic Preservation Act of 1976, as amended, (16 USC 470 et seq.) and by the Georgia Historic Preservation Act of 1980, as amended, (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-21 et seq.); and 
    In order to stimulate revitalization of the business district and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; and 
    In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and the historic district and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; and 
    In order to stabilize and improve the property values of such properties and districts to retain and attract residents and to encourage restoration and rehabilitation efforts; and 
    In order to enhance the opportunities for federal and state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal and state law; and 
    In order to foster civic pride in the beauty and accomplishments of the past; and 
    In order to promote the use of such properties and districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the people of the city; 
    The council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, district, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Former § 7-010(1.)) 
Sec. 7-232. - Definitions. 
    Building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. "Building" may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in appearance of a designated historic property or a property located in the historic district. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
    Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
    Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. The historic district shall further mean an area designated by the council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 7-234(b). 
    Historic preservation jurisdiction means area within the incorporated limits of the city. 
    Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in subsection 7-234(c). 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within the historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any buildings or other structure within the historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
    Object is a material thing of function, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
    Structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern or organization. 
(Former § 7-010(2.)) 
Sec. 7-233. - Creation of a historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Social Circle Historic Preservation Commission" (sometimes "commission"). 
(b)  Commission position within the city government. The commission shall be part of the planning function of the city. 
(c)  Commission members. The commission shall consist of five members appointed by the council. All members shall be residents of Social Circle and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture, or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. Members shall serve staggered two- and three-year terms. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power. The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all properties in the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated as historic properties or districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same per the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easements Act (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1, et seq.) 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located in the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts which the council may deem necessary or appropriate, for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of DNR a list of historic properties and/or districts; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official commission of Social Circle historic preservation; 
(12)  Recommend that the city employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Recommend to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the national register of historic places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws in Georgia Statutes and City Charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolutions, proceedings and actions. 
(Former § 7-010(3.)) 
Sec. 7-234. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties, preliminary research by the commission. 
(a)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(b)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the council for designation. The commission shall make a formal recommendation and provide a designation report to the council regarding specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or works of art to be designated as historic properties or historic districts. 
(c)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the council for designation, the commission shall prepare a formal report of nomination which will generally follow the guidelines for nominations to the national register of historic places, consisting of: 
(1)  A physical description; 
(2)  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
(3)  A map either a) showing district boundaries or b) showing boundaries of individual historic properties; in the case of individual properties, describing each as contributing (historic structure which meets the criteria set forth below under subsection (e)(1)) or non-contributing (also known as "non-historic", a structure which does not meet the criteria below under subsection (e)(1)); and 
(4)  Representative photograph. 
(d)  Criteria for an historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, or landscape features, or a combination of thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character of special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in a separate designation of such district, and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(e)  Criteria for a historic property. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property (or contributing property) is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the Nation, Walton County or the city, or the state, for one or more of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to Social Circle, Walton County, Georgia or the region; or 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of Social Circle, Walton County, Georgia or the region. 
(f)  Requirements for designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Required components of designation. Any designation of any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(2)  Required public hearings. The commission and the council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city or county tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant. 
(3)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any designation of a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, in section 7-234, to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(4)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing. 
(5)  Council actions on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the council may adopt the designation as proposed, may adopt the designation with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the designation. Designation of historic properties or historic districts shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Designation shall require that the designated property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city to provide notice of such designation. 
b.  Designation shall describe each historic property to be designated, and for a historic district, shall include a description of the boundaries of the district with a list of each property located in such district. 
(6)  Notification of adoption of designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the designation by the council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district. 
(7)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within Walton County and the city of the designation. 
(8)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while designation is pending. If a designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property or district. 
(Former § 7-010(4.)) 
Sec. 7-235. - Application to commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation of a historic property or a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Preliminary review. All proposals for new construction, demolition and relocation shall be presented to the commission for conceptual review and initial recommendations at least 30 days prior to submitting an application for certificate of appropriateness. Preliminary proposals for conceptual review shall be accompanied by such elevations, drawings, photographs or plans as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Submission of application for certificate of appropriateness to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by drawings, photographs, plans and documentation. 
(d)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on the exterior architectural features. 
(e)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(f)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be discussed. The commission shall post notice of a public hearing in the form of a sign posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question for no less than ten days immediately prior to the hearing. The sign shall read more or less as follows: 
"An application has been filed with the Social Circle Historic Preservation Commission, regarding this property, requesting a Certificate of Appropriateness to allow the following work to be done on the exterior of this property: ____________________ ___________________________________________________________________A public hearing will be held by the Social Circle Historic Preservation Commission to review and decide the matter at the City Community Room, 138 East Hightower Trail, Social Circle, Georgia, on [DATE], at [TIME]. All persons having an interest in this application should be at this public hearing to voice their interest. Call 770 464 2380 for more details." 
    The commission shall give equal time to both the owner/applicant/supporters and opponents. Each side shall have no less than ten minutes total. All speakers shall address only the merits of the pending application and address remarks only to the commission. 
    The commission shall be guided by the secretary of the interior's standards for rehabilitation along with any other design guidelines, criteria and policy statements adopted by the commission. The commission shall evaluate the application for any potential substantial adverse effect on the historic or architectural significance or value of the designated historic property or designated historic district. The commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance; architectural style; general design, arrangement, texture and materials of the architectural features involved; and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood. New construction shall conform in orientation, setback, scale, form, design, materials, landscaping and environmental features to the visual and historic character of the designated historic property or designated historic district specified in the commission's guidelines, criteria and policy statements. 
    The commission may adopt further rules for the transaction of its business, and shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings, and for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt and amend further rules of procedure without amendment to this chapter. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall serve as a reference in the determination of the order of business at all meetings. 
(g)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
    Commission action: The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, table until a date certain, or reject it, as described more particularly below: 
Approval with conditions. If the commission identifies elements of a proposed material change in appearance not in compliance with the criteria, the commission may make recommendations or set such conditions and/or changes which render the application for a certificate of appropriateness in compliance, avoiding a substantial adverse effect on the historic, aesthetic or architectural significance or value of the designated historic property or designated historic district. If the applicant agrees to such conditions and/or changes, the commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness. 
Table/withdrawal. If the commission is unable to make an informed decision because it finds the application incomplete, the required support materials insufficient, or the applicant unavailable to answer pertinent queries, the commission shall table the application for not more than seven days and give the applicant the opportunity to provide the required additional information. If the applicant fails to submit the requested information within the seven-day period, the application is to be considered withdrawn without prejudice. The applicant, if desired, may resubmit the application for the next regular meeting. 
Denial. When considering an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall deny the application if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance is not in compliance with the criteria and will have a substantial adverse effect on the historic, aesthetic or architectural significance or value of the designated historic property or designated historic district. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
    Approval. The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, and the historical and architectural value and significance of the property, the following factors for each of the following acts: 
Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation: The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features with the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood, and with the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
Relocation: A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
(1)  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
(2)  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area. 
(3)  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its structural integrity. 
(4)  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
Demolition. The commission shall not approve applications for a COA for demolition without first reviewing post-demolition plans. The commission shall approve or deny applications for a COA for demolition consistent with the criteria below. Before an approved COA for demolition becomes effective, notice of said approved COA for demolition shall be given as follows: historic, two months and non-historic, two months. Notice shall be posted on the premises of the building or structure approved for demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. The purpose of this section is to further the purposes of this chapter by preserving historic buildings, structures and objects which are important to the education, culture, traditions and the economic values of the city and to give the city's interested persons, historical societies or organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings, structures and objects. After such two-month delay period, the approved certificate of appropriateness for demolition shall become effective, in which event demolition may commence without further delay. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects, shall be guided by: 
(1)  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
(2)  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the character of a district. 
(3)  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
(4)  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples in the neighborhood or the city. 
(5)  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area. 
(6)  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
(7)  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(h)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in reviewing applications, shall have the power to reasonably vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided, however, that such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural and historical integrity and character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(i)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the proper filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by united states mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(j)  Necessary action by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(k)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. The commission and the council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(l)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 12 months and are renewable. 
(m)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(n)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(o)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the council. Any such appeal must be filed with the council within 30 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to this section or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 30 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission action pursuant to this section. The council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, if the governing body finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the council may be taken to the superior court of Walton County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for City Code violations. 
(Former § 7-010(5.)) 
Sec. 7-236. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance and repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an historic property, to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a change in the design, material, texture or the exterior appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Standards of minimum maintenance and repair. The commission and the city shall further insure that all designated historic properties and places, sites, buildings, structures and works of art within designated historic districts are kept free from the following conditions which threaten the deterioration or loss of such properties. Owners shall maintain their structures as to not endanger the property: 
(1)  Foundations. Shall be free of holes, wide cracks and buckling. 
(2)  Structural members. Vertical supports shall not split, lean, list or buckle. Structural members of ceilings and roofs, or other horizontal structural members shall not sag, split or buckle. 
(3)  Exterior surfaces and materials. Shall not have holes, wide cracks and loose, warped, protruding or rotting boards or any other condition admitting moisture. Exterior surfaces shall be repaired and weatherproofed, where appropriate, to protect them from further deterioration. Masonry joints shall be maintained. Fireplaces or chimneys shall not list, bulge or settle. 
(4)  Weather protection and ventilation. Windows, exterior doors and exterior siding shall be watertight. Exterior flashing, including that at chimneys, doors, and windows, shall be maintained in good repair. Downspouts and gutters shall be maintained so that rain runoff is directed away from the structure. Foundation and attic vents shall be maintained to ventilate the crawl and attic spaces. 
(5)  Stairways, porches and appurtenances. Exterior staircases, porches and appurtenances shall be maintained in good repair. 
(6)  Rodent and termite infestation. Structures shall be free of wood boring insects and rodent infestation. 
(7)  Security and utilities. Buildings which are no longer occupied shall be properly secured to prevent intrusion, and all utilities shall be properly connected or disconnected. 
(8)  Dependencies and additional site features. Ancillary structures and accessory buildings shall be maintained in good repair. Tree limbs shall be trimmed away from the building, and tree roots shall be cleared away from all foundations. Soil erosion and soil deposition shall not be allowed to endanger any structures. 
(c)  Failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair. Owners shall not allow historic properties and places, sites, buildings, structures or works of art within designated historic districts to deteriorate by failing to provide minimum maintenance and repair. The failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair not only adversely impacts the historic and cultural value of the historic community, but due to decay, deterioration and structural defects, jeopardizes structural integrity and poses additional safety hazards. This section is to require an owner to engage in the minimum maintenance and repair necessary to correct decay, deterioration, structural defects and safety problems. 
(d)  Monitoring of condition. The commission and the city shall monitor the condition of all designated historic properties and places, sites, buildings, structures and works of art within designated historic districts. The commission shall report all failures to provide minimum maintenance and repair to the building official of the city. Such conditions as those outlined above shall constitute a failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair. 
(e)  Condition assessment. Upon notification by the commission, the building official or his designee shall be authorized to enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and inspections regarding conformity to the requirements hereunder. Such entry shall be made in such a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to any persons in possession. The city may appoint and affix the duties of such agents, designees and employees as reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The building official shall prepare a condition assessment for the commission. 
(f)  Notice and remedy time allowance. If the commission finds a failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair, in nonconformity with the above requirements, the commission will give notice as described herein and set forth the steps necessary to remedy the situation. Notice shall be served upon the owner and all parties in interest. The owner of the property will have ten days from receipt of such notice to respond in writing and outline his intentions and steps being taken to remedy the situation. The owner of the property will have 30 days from the receipt of such notice to begin the steps necessary to remedy the situation, and shall have 90 days from receipt of the notice to complete the work, unless such time shall be extended due to the expense and/or complexity of the repairs. In no event shall such extension exceed 90 additional days. 
(g)  Public hearing and recommendation of action. Within 30 days of receipt of the notice provided for above, the owner or any other party in interest who takes exception to such notice may request a public hearing on the matter. The owner or other party with an interest shall then be given an opportunity to appear before the commission, in person or otherwise, and present testimony pertaining to the notice issued. Notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be given via certified mail. The rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the commission, although all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be entitled to present all relevant evidence. If the commission agrees with the original notice, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a recommendation of action and reasons in support thereof, in writing, to the affected party and to the mayor and council. 
(Former § 7-010(6.)) 
Sec. 7-237. - Penalty provisions. 
    Any individual, entity and/or representative violating this section may be punished by a fine up to $1,000.00. 
(Former § 7-010(7.)) 
Secs. 7-238-7-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COMMUNITY TREE MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 7-261. - Title. 
    There is hereby established a community tree management ordinance chapter for the City Code, also known as the "Tree Ordinance". 
(Former § 7-011(1.)) 
Sec. 7-262. - Purpose and intent. 
    The purpose of the tree ordinance is to promote a healthy and sustainable community forest in the city for the benefit of citizens, visitors, and business owners. Trees, especially large, canopy trees, provide many economic, environmental, and social benefits to our community. Trees produce oxygen and help reduce the amount of airborne pollutants; they provide shade, lower air temperatures, reduce low level ozone production, and improve air quality. Trees reduce energy usage and costs. Trees reduce stormwater runoff and soil erosion, decrease sedimentation in streams and rivers, and improve water quality. Trees reduce glare and soften the harsh lines of pavement, buildings, and other hardscape. Trees increase property values. Trees improve human health and enhance outdoor recreation opportunities. Trees provide food and shelter for wildlife. Because trees provide these and other important and irreplaceable benefits, the city has adopted these regulations which contain minimum requirements for tree conservation, protection, establishment, maintenance, inspection, and removal. 
(Former § 7-011(2.)) 
Sec. 7-263. - Administration. 
    The city manager or designee shall be the administrator of this article. 
(Former § 7-011(3.)) 
Sec. 7-264. - Applicability and exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to any activity on city-owned property and to any activity on any real property that requires the issuance of a land development permit, excluding the following: 
(1)  Activities on existing single-family and duplex residential properties when there is an existing structure on the property, unless the activity expands the footprint of the structure. If the property is vacant, this exclusion shall not apply. 
(2)  Construction or maintenance of public utilities within utility easements. 
(3)  Detention ponds and drainage easements. 
(4)  Agricultural operations including land clearing for legitimate agricultural purposes, and not pursuant to land development in the following five years. 
(5)  Tree nursery and horticultural operations. 
(6)  Forestry operations including land clearing for legitimate timber harvesting purposes, and not pursuant to land development within the following five years. 
(7)  Removal, as recommended by a certified arborist or registered forester, of any tree that has become a public nuisance or danger to human life or property or any tree found to be diseased, hazardous, dying, dead, or infested with insects. 
(8)  Activities subject to a building permit where the footprint of the existing building is not being expanded. 
    Activities on private property that occur within the critical root zone of city-owned trees shall not be exempt from compliance with this article. 
    For new development projects that contain more than one building site or lot, such as a subdivision, tree ordinance requirements apply to the entire site and to each individual lot. 
(Former § 7-011(4.)) 
Sec. 7-265. - Definitions. 
    Terms used in this article are defined in Table 1. Other terms found in this article but not defined in this section shall have their common meaning. 
    Administrator means the person responsible for administering the tree ordinance for the city; the city manager or designee. 
    ANSI means the American National Standards Institute. 
    Arborist means a professional who possesses the technical competence gained through experience and related training to provide for or supervise the management of Trees and other woody plants in residential, commercial, and public landscapes. 
    Caliper means the diameter of a tree measured at six inches above the ground for trees with calipers of four inches or less, and measured at 12 inches above the ground for trees with calipers greater than four inches. 
    Canopy tree means any medium- or large-maturing, upright tree that forms part of the upper canopy in a natural setting and with the potential to provide significant shade; also known as a shade tree. 
    Certified arborist means an arborist with current certification by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
    City trees mean any tree on city property, including but not limited to those on street rights-of-way, in parks, in cemeteries, on school campuses, and around city offices and facilities. 
    Critical root zone means the soil area around a tree where the roots are located that provides stability and uptake of moisture; defined as a circle around the trunk with a radius of 1.25 feet for every one inch in DBH and a depth of 30 inches, or as an area established by a certified arborist. 
    CRZ means critical root zone. 
    DBH means an acronym for diameter at breast height; a standard measurement of tree size used by foresters and arborists; defined as the diameter of a tree trunk measured at four and one-half feet (1.3 meters) above the ground. 
    Dormant season means the period when trees are dormant, generally mid-November through late-March. 
    Drip line means the imaginary boundary on the soil surface defined by the branch spread of a single plant or group of plants. 
    Establishment period means the initial three years after planting during which a tree becomes established. 
    Growing season means the period of time when trees are leafed out and actively growing; generally considered to be late March through mid September. 
    Hazard potential means the degree of risk posed by a tree due to a structural or biological defect. 
    Healthy tree means a tree free of major root damage within the CRZ, major trunk wounds or decay, major insect and disease infestations, major structural defects, and that has at least 65 percent live crown and 15 years of useful life remaining. 
    Impervious surface means a surface through which water cannot penetrate, such as concrete, asphalt, rooftops, or severely compacted soil. 
    ISA means the International Society of Arboriculture. 
    Land development permit means a land development permit, as used herein, is a broad term that encompasses any permit from the city required prior to any and all development activity, including without limitation clearing and grubbing, grading and the construction of such improvements as streets, surface parking areas and drives, storm water drainage facilities, sidewalks, water or sewerage utilities, or other structures. "Land development permit" also includes any permit (building permit, utility permit or approval or otherwise) from the city required prior to development activity for buildings, signs, other structures or improvements requiring a building permit. Provided, however, agricultural activities as defined by state law are generally excluded from land development permit requirements. 
    Mature tree means a tree that has reached its potential, although not its maximum, size and age and for which the rate of growth in height and mass has stabilized or slowed. 
    Minimum permeable soil area means the amount of soil surface areas measured in square feet that must remain open and permeable around a tree trunk. 
    Mulch means any organic material on the soil surface to reduce weed growth, retain soil moisture, moderate temperature extremes, prevent damage from lawn-maintenance equipment, and improve aesthetic appearance of the landscape, such as compost, leaves, pine straw, or wood chips. 
    Planting season means the period of time during which trees are dormant and transplanting is recommended; generally considered to be mid November to mid March. 
    Pruning means cutting away unwanted or damaged parts of a plant. 
    Registered forester means a forester registered and good standing with the state board of registration for foresters. 
    Regulated tree means any tree under the jurisdiction of this article, including all trees on city property and trees that are planted or conserved on private property to satisfy tree ordinance requirements. 
    Shade tree. See Canopy tree. 
    Street tree means trees growing along street frontages within the public street right-of-way. 
    TCA means tree conservation area. 
    Topping means an improper pruning technique to reduce tree size; cutting back a tree to buds, stubs, internodes, or laterals not large enough to assume apical dominance; results in an abnormal and disfigured crown, an increase in tree decay and decline, and a shorter lifespan; also known as heading back or tipping. 
    TPZ means tree protection zone. 
    Tree means a woody perennial usually having one dominant trunk, but sometimes multiple trunks, a mature DBH of three inches or greater and a mature height of 15 feet or greater. 
    Tree canopy cover means the ground surface area within a tree's dripline measured in square feet or the percent of a site covered by tree canopy. 
    Tree conservation means the retention and ongoing protection of existing individual tree, groups of trees, or forested areas. 
    Tree conservation area means the area on a site that contains trees to be conserved and protected; includes the combined area of all tree protection zones of all conserved trees; for an individually growing tree not part of a tree group or forested area the tree conservation area equals the CRZ; see also Tree protection zone. 
    Tree conservation plan means a drawing to scale of the proposed location of trees conserved and planted to meet the requirements of this article. 
    Tree establishment means the various activities associated with planting a tree, including site selection, species selection, selection, transport, site preparation, planting, irrigation, and mulching; also includes regular inspection, pruning, and other new tree maintenance. See also Establishment period. 
    Tree protection zone means the area within which certain activities are prohibited or restricted to prevent or minimize potential injury to trees, especially during development or construction; defined by the city as the entire crown and trunk of a tree along with the roots and soil within the CRZ. 
    Tree value means the appraised, monetary value placed on a tree per methodology described in the latest edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal developed by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers and published by the International Society of Arboriculture. 
(Former § 7-011(5.)) 
Sec. 7-266. - Establishment of tree board. 
    There is hereby established a city tree board, which shall also be known as the "tree board." 
(1)  Members. The tree board shall consist of five members. The members shall be appointed by the council. Members shall be residents of the city, provided, however, that to obtain greater expertise on the tree board, the council may appoint a person not residing in the city in consideration of such person's special expertise. The tree board may designate up to five ex-officio members to serve on the tree board. Ex-officio members shall not be eligible to vote on official matters of the tree board. 
(2)  Term of office. The term of office of the members shall be three years, except that for the initial board three of the members shall serve for three years, two of the members shall serve for two years. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, the council shall appoint a successor for the unexpired portion of the term. The board shall choose its own officers and keep minutes of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(3)  Compensation. The members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
(4)  Meeting frequency. The tree board shall meet no less than monthly. If any member misses more than three consecutive regular meetings of the tree board, that member shall be automatically removed from the tree board and another member shall be appointed by the council to fill the unexpired portion of the term. 
(5)  Responsibilities. It shall be the responsibility of the board to develop and recommend for formal council approval a written plan for the management of the community's trees. The board shall provide leadership in the implementation of the plan and shall provide annual updates to the plan. 
a.  The plan shall include: community tree management vision and goals; community tree management ordinance; community tree management ordinance administrative and technical standards; annual work plans for city tree conservation, protection, establishment, maintenance, inspection and removal; an official tree species list; and an annual education and outreach program. 
b.  The board shall be responsible for reviewing all tree conservation plans for new development in the city prior to the submittal of the plan for final review and approval. The tree board shall submit the reviewed plans to the reviewer along with the board's comments and required revisions in a timely manner. 
c.  The board shall receive monies from the city tree fund for tree establishment, tree maintenance, and education and outreach programs per city tree fund guidelines in this tree ordinance and shall make an accounting of the use of tree fund monies to the city council annually. 
d.  The board, when requested by the council, shall investigate and make recommendations on any special matter of question coming within the scope of its duties. 
(6)  Operating budget. The tree board shall be allocated an annual operating budget by the city. In addition, the board may receive grants and donations to be used for special community tree management projects. Income and expenditures from the city budget, grants, donations, and the city tree fund shall be accounted for separately. An income and expenditure report for all income sources shall be made annually by the board to the council. 
(7)  Review by city council. The council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the tree board. Any person may appeal any ruling or order of the board to the council who may hear the matter and make a final decision, subject to appeal rights to superior court via writ of certiorari. 
(Former § 7-011(6.)) 
Sec. 7-267. - Administrative and technical standards. 
    Administrative and technical standards are hereby established as part of this article. They are in a separate document, the "City of Social Circle Community Tree Management Ordinance Administrative and Technical Standards", and are hereinafter referred to as the administrative and technical standards. Compliance with these standards is required for all Tree management and maintenance activities required by this article. Violation of any standard is considered a violation of this article. 
(1)  Professional standards for tree care operations and best management practices published by the International Society of Arboriculture are referenced throughout this article and in the administrative and technical standards. A complete list of the standards and best management practices available is included as Appendix A in the administrative and technical standards. Current copies of these standards and best management practices shall remain on file in the city clerk's office and shall be made available for review by the public upon request. 
(2)  A copy of the administrative and technical standards shall remain on file in the city clerk's office and shall be made available for review by the public upon request. The document shall also be available on the city's website for review and download. 
(Former § 7-011(7.)) 
Sec. 7-268. - Official tree species list. 
    There is hereby established an "Official Tree Species List for the City of Social Circle, Georgia", hereinafter referred to as the tree species list, which is included in the administrative and technical standards as Appendix B. Any and all trees planted on city property and those planted on private property to satisfy the requirements of this article shall be limited to the species on the list, unless written approval to plant other species is granted by the tree board. 
(Former § 7-011(8.)) 
Sec. 7-269. - City tree management. 
(a)  Authority. The city shall have the right to conserve, protect, establish, maintain, and remove trees, plants and shrubs within street and alley rights-of-way, in city parks, on the grounds around city offices and facilities, and on any city-owned property, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such city property. 
(b)  Tree establishment. The city may establish trees on city property per this article and the administrative and technical standards. Only those species on the tree species list shall be planted. Trees shall be planted only where adequate growing space exists, above and below ground, so that future conflicts with utilities and infrastructure are avoided. 
(c)  Planting of street trees by adjacent property owners. The planting of street trees by adjacent property owners is not expressly prohibited, providing that written permission is granted by the city and selection of said trees is per the provisions of this article and administrative and technical standards. Only those species on the tree species list shall be planted. 
(d)  Tree removal and pruning. The city may remove or order or cause to be removed or pruned, any city tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to or in conflict with electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, sewer lines or other public improvements, interferes with sight, traffic light, or street light visibility, reduces vehicular, pedestrian, or building clearance, or is affected with any injurious disease, insect or other pest. 
(e)  Removal of stumps. All stumps of trees removed on city property shall be removed except in cases where stump removal may cause damage to headstones, graves, walls, fences, sidewalks, or other structures. Stumps shall be removed below the surface of the ground so the top of the stump shall not project above the surface. 
(f)  Utilities. No trees, except those in the tree species list categorized as small in height, may be planted under or within 20 lateral feet of any overhead utility wire. No trees of any size may be planted over or within ten lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility within utility easements, unless written permission is granted by the tree board and city manager or designee. 
(g)  [Pruning by utility companies.] Utility companies shall have the right to prune Trees growing beneath or adjacent to overhead utility lines within the easement granted them by the city. Any and all pruning by utility companies or their agents shall be done according to ANSI Standards for Tree Care Operations, ISA Best Management Practices, and the administrative and technical standards. 
(h)  Protection of city trees. It shall be unlawful for anyone to damage, destroy, or remove any city tree or to change the grade or disturb the soil within the CRZ of a city tree by trenching, tilling, excavating, compacting or backfilling, contaminating the soil with any chemical, or causing any other damage to tree roots, trunk, or crown, except when written permission has been granted by the Tree Board. 
(1)  Requests to remove trees or disturb the soil within the CRZ must be submitted to the tree board in writing at least five business days prior to a regularly scheduled board meeting. The board shall act upon the request at such meeting and provide the applicant with a decision in writing within three business days after the meeting. 
(2)  When trees are damaged, destroyed, or removed without permission compensation shall be required, and when permission has been granted, compensation may be required by the tree board as a condition for granting permission. Compensation shall be paid to the city tree fund. The amount of the compensation shall be the tree value as defined in this article and as calculated by an ISA Certified Arborist using the latest edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal [1]. 
(i)  Tree topping. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or entity to top any street, park, or other tree on city property. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions may have their crown reduced only if done according to current ANSI Standards for tree care operations and the administrative and technical standards. 
(j)  Removal and pruning of trees on private property. 
(1)  Insects and diseases. The city shall have the right to order or cause to be removed or pruned any dead, dying, infested, or structurally weak trees or part thereof on private property in the city, when such trees constitute a hazard to persons or property, or harbor diseases or insects which constitute a potential threat to other trees in the city. The city will notify the owners in writing of such trees. removal or pruning shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of receipt of notice. In the event of failure of the owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove or prune such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice, which if unpaid shall be a lien against the real property. 
(2)  Obstructions and clearance. 
a.  The owner of any tree overhanging any street or public right-of-way shall prune the branches so such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street light or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of 13.5 feet above the surface of the street or eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk, or shall remove the tree if pruning is not effective in eliminating the obstruction. 
b.  The city shall have the right to prune or remove or order or cause to be removed or pruned any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light or interferes with visibility of any traffic control device or sign or the passage of vehicles along the street or pedestrians along the sidewalk. 
c.  The city will notify the owners of such trees in writing. Removal or pruning shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after receipt of notice. In the event of failure of the owners to comply, the city shall have the authority to remove or prune such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice, which if unpaid shall be a lien against the real property. 
(k)  Interference with city tree management. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the city or its agent while engaging in conservation, protection, establishment, maintenance, inspection, or removal of any city tree or the inspection, pruning, or removal of trees on private property by the city or its agent as authorized in this article. 
(Former § 7-011(9.)) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Developed by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, and published by the International Society of Arboriculture, http://www.isa-arbor.com. 

Sec. 7-270. - City tree fund. 
    There is hereby established a city tree fund to be used for the establishment and maintenance of trees on city property, community tree management education and outreach, and the hiring of contract services for tree management. 
(1)  The city shall be responsible for approving, receiving and depositing contributions to the city tree fund. The city shall be responsible for the allocation and expenditure of tree fund monies for contract services for community tree management, including development site inspections. Up to 30 percent of the annual expenditures of the tree fund may be for contract services for tree management. 
(2)  The city shall be responsible for allocating tree fund monies to the tree board. The board shall be responsible for the allocation and expenditure of the allotted tree fund monies for tree establishment, tree maintenance, education and outreach. 
(3)  At least 35 percent of the tree board's annual expenditures of tree fund monies shall be for tree establishment, at least ten percent shall be for community tree management education and outreach, and at least 25 percent shall be for city tree maintenance. 
(Former § 7-011(10.)) 
Sec. 7-271. - Seasonal waiver. 
    The city may waive completely, temporarily suspend, or modify any provision of this article to respond to naturally occurring weather or environmental conditions, such as but not limited to droughts, floods, tornadoes, wind storms, or other natural occurrences to meet the needs of the community. 
(Former § 7-011(11.)) 
Sec. 7-272. - Tree canopy cover. 
    The city desires a healthy and sustainable tree canopy well-distributed in the city. To achieve this, tree canopy cover goals are hereby established for the city including city property and previously developed private property and tree canopy cover requirements are hereby established for new developments and any activity on real property that requires the issuance of a land development permit. 
(1)  Tree canopy cover goals. The city's tree canopy cover goals are listed in Table 1. The purpose of these goals is to guide citizen, business, and non-governmental group activities toward contributing to a healthy and sustainable community forest and high quality of life within the city. 
TABLE 1. TREE CANOPY COVER GOALS 
Property Description Tree Canopy
Cover Goal Entire City 60% City offices and facilities 50% City parks 80% All other city-owned properties 60% Existing parking areas 50% Existing single-family residential properties 60% Existing multi-family residential properties 50% Existing office or institutional developments 45% Existing industrial developments (exclusive of truck traffic areas) 50% Agricultural properties 30%  
(2)  Tree canopy cover requirements. 
a.  For any development that requires a land development permit a minimum amount of tree canopy cover is required on site as set forth in Table 2. The tree canopy cover requirements vary by zoning district, take into account the maximum allowable lot coverage, and are represented as a percent of the entire site area exclusive of large truck traffic and storage areas in Zones I-1 and I-2. 
b.  In addition to the overall minimum requirement, a minimum amount of tree canopy cover shall originate from the conservation of existing trees if adequate trees are present on the site. When no trees are present on a site or an inadequate number of trees are present on a site, then the tree conservation portion of the tree canopy cover requirements shall be satisfied through the establishment of additional trees. 
c.  Satisfactory compliance with tree canopy cover requirements shall be required before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
TABLE 2. MINIMUM TREE CANOPY COVER AND 
CONSERVATION REQUIREMENTS 
Zoning District Total Minimum Tree Canopy Cover Required (conserved and established Trees as percent of total site) Total Minimum Conserved Tree Canopy (as percent of total site) OI 
Office Institutional 50% 20% NC 
Neighborhood Commercial 45% 15% CBD 
Central Business District 0% 0% GC 
General Commercial 45% 15% I-1 
Light Industrial* 45% 15% I-2 
Heavy Industrial* 55% 20% MUBP 
Mixed Use Business Park 50% 20% Residential Low Density 
R-25, R-15, R-12 
Single-Family 1 canopy Tree per 40 feet of road frontage or portion thereof planted on private property within 15 feet of property boundary 20% RMD 
Residential Medium Density Single and Two-Family 40% 15% RHD 
Residential High Density Multi-Family 30% 10% PUD 
Planned Unit Development 60% 30% AG 
Agricultural 0% 0%  
* Applies to entire site area exclusive of truck traffic and storage areas. 
(3)  Existing tree canopy cover credit. The amount of tree canopy cover that shall be credited to an existing tree is the actual tree canopy cover as measured in the field or the standard tree canopy cover credit for the species found in the tree species list, whichever is greater. 
a.  Only healthy trees that will be protected per the administrative and technical standards are eligible for tree canopy cover credit. The determination of whether a tree is healthy shall be made by the administrator, who may seek, or require the applicant to provide, an opinion of a certified arborist or registered forester. Tree canopy cover credit will not be given to unhealthy trees or trees with greater than 35 percent crown dieback or trees that are not structurally sound and at risk for whole or partial tree failure. 
b.  Individually growing healthy canopy trees 18 inches DBH and larger that will be protected according to the administrative and technical standards are eligible to receive three times the maximum tree canopy cover as described above at the reasonable objective discretion of the tree board based on written criteria and findings of fact. 
c.  The tree canopy cover credit assigned to a tree to be established on a site is based on the tree canopy size category for the species defined in the tree species list in the administrative and technical standards. Species with the potential for large tree canopies are eligible for a credit of 1,600 square feet of tree canopy cover; trees with medium-sized canopies are eligible for a credit of 900 square feet of tree canopy cover; trees with small canopies are eligible for a credit of 400 square feet of tree canopy cover; and trees with very small canopies are eligible for a credit of 150 square feet of tree canopy cover. 
(4)  Tree conservation requirements. To satisfy tree conservation requirements individual trees may be conserved, groups of trees may be conserved, or natural, forested areas may be conserved. Individual trees proposed for conservation must be at least six inches DBH. Tree conservation must comply with the administrative and technical standards. Trees that are conserved must be protected per the administrative and technical standards. 
(5)  Protection and maintenance of tree canopy cover. The required amount of tree canopy cover on a site must be present on the site in perpetuity, with the exception of single- and two-family residential properties in new subdivisions once construction is complete and the property is owner-occupied. 
a.  Tree conservation areas for which credit has been received shall always remain as tree conservation areas. No activities that disturb the soil or vegetation can take place within tree conservation areas except the planting of trees. 
b.  Tree protection zones must be established around all individual conserved trees prior to site disturbance and must remain until construction has been completed and the certificate of occupancy has been issued. Tree protection structures shall be inspected and approved before site disturbance can begin. Standards for establishing tree protection zones and installing tree protection structures are described in the administrative and technical standards. 
c.  Trees established to satisfy tree canopy cover requirements shall be regularly maintained and remain healthy to continue to receive credit. If the city determines at any time prior to or after the certificate of occupancy has been issued that a tree has been topped or is not healthy, the city shall require the owner to remove and replace the tree to maintain the required minimum amount of tree canopy cover. 
(6)  Payment and penalties to the city tree fund in lieu of conservation or canopy coverage. In cases where adequate trees exist on a site but an inadequate number of trees are proposed for conservation, and after all options for conservation have been exhausted by the applicant, then the city may waive or reduce the minimum tree conservation requirement but shall require in lieu of conservation a contribution to the city tree fund as specified in the administrative and technical standards. Waiver shall be per reasonable objective discretion of the tree board based on written criteria and findings of fact. 
When a violation of this article exists and a fine is levied the fine shall be paid to the city tree fund. 
a.  When the city has wholly or partially waived the tree conservation requirement, a contribution to the city tree fund in lieu of the conservation shall be required in the amount of $300.00 for every 1,600 square feet of tree canopy cover not conserved. 
b.  When the city has wholly or partially waived the tree canopy cover requirement, a contribution to the city tree fund in lieu of the tree canopy cover shall be required in the amount of $300.00 for every 1,600 square feet of canopy not established. 
c.  When a city tree is damaged or destroyed the person responsible for the damage is required to reimburse the city for the value of the tree as described in this article; the reimbursement shall be deposited to the city tree fund. 
(7)  Tree establishment. The remainder of the tree canopy cover requirement in Table 2 shall be satisfied through new trees in frontage landscape strips and parking areas first, and then in other areas on the site where adequate space and growing conditions exist. 
a.  Trees in required buffers may count toward the overall tree canopy cover requirement, if the requirements for frontage landscape strips and parking areas have been met. 
b.  When planting more than three trees on a development site, no more than 30 percent of the trees may be of one single genus (oaks, maples, elms, etc.). 
c.  At time of planting, trees shall be a minimum of two inches caliper for canopy, upright and single-stemmed trees, and five feet tall for small, spreading or multi-stemmed trees. 
(8)  Trees in frontage landscape strips. Trees shall be established in all street frontage landscape strips at a density of one tree for every 40 linear feet of frontage. The largest tree that the growing space can accommodate shall be planted. Required trees may be established in city street rights-of-way with the permission of the tree board. Tree establishment shall conform to the administrative and technical standards. 
(9)  Trees in parking areas. To provide shade for pavement and vehicles and reduce summer temperatures and ozone, canopy trees shall be planted in parking areas at a rate of one tree for every 3,500 square feet of parking area. Trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area in landscape islands so that 50 percent tree canopy cover will be achieved when the trees reach maturity. Trees planted around the perimeter of parking areas shall count for one-half of a tree for satisfying this requirement since only one-half of their canopy will cover pavement. These perimeter trees, however, retain full canopy cover credit for the purpose of satisfying overall tree canopy cover requirements. 
(10)  Minimum permeable soil area. 
a.  The minimum permeable soil areas that must be maintained around trees in paved areas or compacted soils are based on mature tree height category and are as follows: 
1.  Small trees: 100 square feet (minimum dimension five feet). 
2.  Medium trees: 225 square feet (minimum dimension nine feet). 
3.  Large trees: 400 square feet (minimum dimension nine feet). 
b.  These minimum permeable areas may be reduced by 50 percent if permeable pavement is installed around the CRZ of the trees or structural soils are installed beneath the pavement, in an area equal to the required minimum before reduction, as further described in the administrative and technical standards. 
c.  When two or more trees are planted in the same contiguous area, the amount of the combined minimum permeable areas may be reduced by ten percent for each additional tree, but in no case shall be reduced by greater than 50 percent overall. 
d.  The minimum permeable open soil area in parking lots for a large maturing tree may be reduced to the size of two parking bays, or a minimum of 324 feet. 
e.  Minimum permeable CRZ areas around established trees must always remain permeable and shall remain covered in mulch as described in the administrative and technical standards. 
(11)  Soil quality. Soil in the minimum permeable soil area of all trees to a depth of 30 inches must be good quality topsoil, well aerated, and composed of approximately 45 percent mineral soil, five percent organic matter and 50 percent pore space. 
(12)  Removal of trees from development sites. No trees may be disturbed, damaged, destroyed, or removed from a site prior to approval of a tree conservation plan, except for timber harvesting that is part of ongoing forest management operations (see timber harvesting ordinance). When timber harvesting occurs on a site without an approved tree conservation plan, no development permits of any type shall be issued for the site for five years after completion of harvesting. 
(Former § 7-011(13.)) 
Cross reference- Timber harvesting-Required notice; bonds or letters of credit, § 7-9. 
Sec. 7-273. - Tree conservation plan. 
(a)  A separate tree conservation plan that demonstrates compliance with this article shall be submitted to the city for review by the tree board in conjunction with the submittal of other required site plans and the application for a land development permit. After review the board shall forward the tree conservation plan to the administrator or designee along with a recommendation for approval or revision. The tree conservation plan will be reviewed by the administrator or designee for conformance with this article and either approved or returned to the applicant to be revised and resubmitted. 
(b)  For subdivisions, a tree conservation plan that demonstrates compliance with this article for the development as a whole must be submitted and approved before preliminary plat approval may be granted and before a land disturbance permit may be issued. A tree conservation plan that demonstrates compliance with this article for individual lots in a subdivision must be submitted and approved before a building permit or land disturbance permit may be granted. 
(c)  The following information shall be included on the tree conservation plan: 
(1)  Date of plan. 
(2)  Site location and address. 
(3)  Total number of site acres. 
(4)  Property owner's name, mailing address, telephone, and e-mail address, or the same for their agent. 
(5)  Location of all existing and proposed utilities both overhead and underground. 
(6)  Location of all existing and proposed buildings, pavement, parking areas, and other infrastructure and hardscape. 
(7)  Location of construction ingress and egress drives, construction parking areas, temporary offices and portable toilets. 
(8)  The percent and area of tree canopy cover required and the percent and area proposed. 
(9)  The percent and area of tree conservation required and the percent and area proposed. 
(10)  The square foot area of parking areas and the number of trees required and proposed for planting within parking areas. 
(11)  Location of the trunk and critical root zone, species common and Latin names, DBH, and tree canopy cover of individual trees proposed for conservation. 
(12)  Boundaries and square foot area of tree conservation areas proposed for conservation. 
(13)  Location, species, and caliper of trees to be established on the site; location shall include trunk location and limits of the minimum permeable open soil area. 
(14)  Chart showing how minimum tree canopy cover requirements will be met with conserved and established trees as described in the administrative and technical standards. 
(15)  Signature or seal of a registered landscape architect, registered forester, or certified arborist. 
(d)  A tree protection detail and specifications shall be provided as part of the tree conservation plan per the administrative and technical standards. 
(e)  A tree planting, mulching, and anchoring detail shall be provided as part of the tree conservation plan per the administrative and technical standards. 
(f)  The issuance of a land development permit shall constitute approval of the required tree conservation plan. A land development permit shall only be issued after the tree conservation plan has been reviewed by the tree board and approved by the administrator or designee for compliance with this article and approved. 
(Former § 7-011(13.)) 
Sec. 7-274. - Inspections and enforcement. 
    It shall be the responsibility of city manager or designee to enforce this article and make required compliance inspections. The manager may designate a city employee as the inspector, may contract for the services of a certified arborist to make the required compliance inspections, or may require the property owner or the property owner's agent to contract for the services of a certified arborist to make the required compliance inspections and submit a compliance report to the city. 
(1)  At a minimum, the compliance inspections listed below shall be required. 
a.  Initial inspection prior to the issuance of a land disturbance permit to validate the accuracy and feasibility of the tree conservation plan. 
b.  Inspection prior to any site disturbance for compliance with tree protection standards and inspection and approval of tree protection structures. 
c.  Inspection prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy to ensure compliance with the approved tree protection plan and all provisions of this article. 
(2)  in addition to the mandatory compliance inspections listed above, at any time the city may make compliance inspections, or require the owner to contract for compliance inspections by certified arborists and submit compliance reports if any violation has occurred during the development process or after the certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
(Former § 7-011(14.)) 
Sec. 7-275. - Variances. 
    Applications for variances shall be submitted to the tree board for their review and recommendation at least ten days prior to a regularly scheduled tree board meeting. The tree board shall forward a recommendation to the city manager within five business days after said meeting. Variances may be granted by the city manager or designee. variances shall issue in the reasonable objective discretion of the city manager or designee based on written criteria and findings of fact. Appeals for decisions on variances may be made to the city council. Appeals thereafter shall be to superior court by certiorari. 
(Former § 7-011(15.)) 
Sec. 7-276. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any individual, entity, or owner's agent or representative violating any provision of this article shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00, except in the case of damage to city trees. The fine for damage to a city tree shall equal the tree value as determined by a certified arborist. Each day for which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. Each tree for which a violation exists shall constitute a separate violation. All activities governed by this article shall cease pending correction of violation and/or payment of fines and penalties. 
(Former § 7-011(16.)) 
Secs. 7-277-7-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY 

Sec. 7-301. - Purpose and authority. 
    This article is adopted per the authority granted by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-1 et seq. for the purpose of maintaining the health and cleanliness of the city, and to ensure safe and sanitary conditions in private property by establishing a method for enforcing minimum standards. This section is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Former § 7-012(1.)) 
Sec. 7-302. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Closing means causing a dwelling, building, structure or property to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, commercial, industrial or business uses or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. The term does not include any farm, any building or structure on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Parties in interest means persons in possession of such property and all persons and entities who have any interest in such dwelling, building or structure, or the property on which it is situated, based on the records of the public officer and of the county courthouse, and based on a 50-year title examination conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia, and any party who has filed a notice per O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9. 
    Public authority means any housing authority officer or officer in charge of any department or branch of the city, county or state relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
    Public officer means the building inspector, health department officer, the city manager, or any other city representative approved by the mayor and council, who are authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this section, or any agent of such officer or officers, or any other officer or officers appointed by the mayor and council for purposes of this section. 
    Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, structure or property to bring it into compliance with the applicable regulations and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, structure or property. 
    Vacancy means the use of a structure or property is discontinued in excess of 30 consecutive days. 
(Former § 7-012(2.)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8. 
Sec. 7-303. - Findings and applicability. 
(a)  It is found and declared that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings, structures, and properties which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses and not in compliance with the applicable standard codes or optional building, fire, life safety, or other codes adopted by the city; or in violation of general nuisance law and which constitute a hazard to the health, safety, and welfare of the people; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. It is further found and declared that where there is a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the people and a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use. This city should exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish said dwellings, buildings or structures and/or cause the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such use in the manner provided in this section. 
(b)  All the provisions hereof may also be applied to private property where there is an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any governmental health department, health officer or building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this section. 
(Former § 7-012(3.)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7. 
Sec. 7-304. - Unlawful to own structures or property not compliant with this section. 
(a)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure or property in the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with this section and all applicable codes in force in the city including such regulations which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or regulations. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any owner to own any dwelling, building, structure or property which: is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, or is otherwise in violation of this section. 
(Former § 7-012(4.)) 
Sec. 7-305. - Enforcement procedure. 
(a)  When a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use or when it appears to the public officer (on his own motion) that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
    If the officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes, or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists. The following described action shall then be taken. 
    The officer shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest in such dwelling, building, structure or property summons and a complaint containing a notice that a hearing will be held in municipal court not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner and any parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or by attorney, and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. 
    The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the owner and parties in interest; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. 
(b)  If, after the hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, structure, or property under consideration is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; or is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result or unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner and any parties in interest that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building, structure, or property so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of such dwelling, building, structure, or property in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, structure, or property, requiring the owner within the time specified in the order, to remove or demolish such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
(3)  If the court finds there is a condition or use of real estate other than addressed above, which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation and the court further finds that such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such condition or the cessation of such use, the court may order the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure, and the order may require the abatement of the public health hazard or general nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety. 
    For the purposes of this Code section, the court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. 
    The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the city. 
(c)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter, improve or demolish the dwelling, building, structure, or property, or to abate the nuisance to eliminate the endangerment to the public health or safety, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, structure, or property to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Time during any court stay on abatement shall not count toward said 270 days. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, structure, or property a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(d)  The amount of the cost of any repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which cost was incurred. Credit for salvaged materials sold, per subsection (e) below, shall be given. Such lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order in the office of the clerk of Walton County Superior Court and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under this section. 
    The clerk shall record and index such order in the deed records and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing the order with the clerk, and within 90 days of the repair, demolition or closure, the public officer shall forward a copy of the order and notice given to the owner and parties in interest and a final settlement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
    It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property per O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1, and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. 
    The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the city. Thirty days after imposition of the lien, the unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties in the same amount as interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(e)  If the dwelling, building or structure is removed or demolished by the public officer, reasonable efforts shall be made to salvage and sell reusable materials at private or public sale, and the proceeds of such sale shall be credited against the cost of the removal or demolition, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Such sale may be made without public advertisement and bid. The public officer and city shall have no liability related to such sale, including due to defects. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(f)  The city may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the city agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(g)  The redemption amount shall be the full amount of costs as determined above, plus interest, penalties and costs incurred by the city and the tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property shall be per O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80, 48-4-81. 
(Former § 7-012(5.)) 
State Law reference- Abatement procedures, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9. 
Sec. 7-306. - Standards for determination by public officer. 
    The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions if he finds that conditions exist in or on such building, dwelling, structure, or property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or of other residents. Such conditions may include without limitation: 
(1)  Dilapidation and non-compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(3)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(4)  Other conditions exist rendering such dwellings, buildings, structures, or property unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of such municipality such as: 
a.  Disrepair, structural defects or uncleanliness; 
b.  The interior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle so that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity of the structural members falls outside of its base so as to create a hazardous condition to the occupants of the structure or the population of the surrounding area; 
c.  Due to unsafe condition the supporting structure or nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls must be replaced; 
d.  The floors or roofs have improperly distributed loads or oversized loads or are so weakened as to be unsafe for their present or intended use; 
e.  The structure has been damaged by wind, fire or other causes so as to imperil the safety or the health of the structure's occupants or of the people of the city; 
f.  There are abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations, abandoned refrigerators or motor vehicles, or any structurally unsound fences or any lumber, trash, fences, debris or vegetation, or any condition which may cause lack of safe ingress or egress to the structure(s); 
(5)  Vacant dwellings, buildings, or structures in which drug crimes are being committed; 
(6)  There exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. 
(Former § 7-012(6.)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7, 41-2-10. 
Sec. 7-307. - Powers of public officers. 
    The public officer shall exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this section, including, among others granted herein, the power to: 
(1)  Investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, structures, or property therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use, and not in compliance with applicable codes, or are vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes, or endanger the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(2)  Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(3)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out this section; 
(4)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this section to such officers and agents as he may designate. 
(Former § 7-012(7.)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11. 
Sec. 7-308. - Service of complaints or orders upon parties in interest and owners of unfit buildings or structures. 
(a)  Complaints issued by a public officer pursuant to this section shall be served in the following manner. A copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. A copy of the complaint and summons shall also be served in the following way: 
    At least 14 days prior to the hearing, the public officer shall send the complaint and summons certified mail, return receipt requested, or statutory overnight delivery to all interested parties whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any. 
    For any owner or party in interest whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which sheriff's advertisements appear once a week for 2 consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(b)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the Walton County Superior Court at the time of filing the complaint. Such notice shall have the same force and affect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on the owner and any party in interest who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Former § 7-012(8.)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
Sec. 7-309. - Use of revenues, grants and donations to repair, close or demolish unfit buildings or structures. 
    The city may make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out this section. 
(Former § 7-012(9.)) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-15. 
Sec. 7-310. - Deteriorated structures and premises as nuisances. 
(a)  All structures and/or the surrounding property of the structures which are determined to be in violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances. In those instances where there is an imminent threat to life or safety, the public officer shall be authorized to immediately post the structure as "unsafe for human habitation." 
(b)  If such finding of the public officer is contested by the occupants of the structure, then the public officer shall request an immediate hearing before the judge of the magistrate court in order to secure an order requiring any occupants of the unsafe structures to vacate. The public officer shall then proceed as set forth in this section. 
(Former § 7-012(10.)) 
Sec. 7-311. - Construction of this section with Charter and other laws, ordinances and regulations; appeal. 
    Nothing herein shall abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department of the city to enforce any provisions of the Charter or its ordinances or regulations, nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and powers conferred herein shall be in addition to and supplemental to powers conferred by any other law or ordinance. Appeal from municipal court shall be per O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Former § 7-012(11.)) 
Chapter 8 - TRAFFIC AND PARKING 

Sec. 8-1. - Rules of the road. 
(a)  Georgia Rules of the Road adopted. 
(1)  Intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate traffic upon the public streets of the city and to repeal all other ordinances and regulations in conflict herewith. 
(2)  Incorporation by reference. Per ch. 6 of tit. 40 of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372-40-6-376 and §§ 40-6-1-40-6-395 of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein. 
(b)  Penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Former § 8-001) 
Sec. 8-2. - Parking and speed restrictions. 
(a)  Parking limitations of certain areas of town. 
(1)  General limitation. No person who is an owner, lessee, agent or employee of any business located on Cherokee Road between Memorial Street and 50 yards north of said street's intersection with East Hightower Trail, shall park or cause to be parked any vehicle on Monday through Saturday between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. legally prevailing time on Cherokee Road between Memorial Street and 50 yards north of said street's intersection with East Hightower Trail or on the southern right-of-way of East Hightower Trail. It shall be no defense to a violation for an owner or agent to move or cause to be moved his or her vehicle from one parking space to another parking space within said limited parking area. 
(2)  Loading/unloading zones. The following parking spaces are hereby designated loading/unloading zones in which parking shall be limited to ten minutes: 
a.  The area in front of Magnolia Hall, with a current address of 147 N. Cherokee Road; 
b.  The area on the east side of North Cherokee Road in front of the Social Circle Board of Education at 140 North Cherokee Road; 
c.  The alley running behind the stores on the west side of Cherokee Road; and 
d.  The alley running behind the stores on the east side of Cherokee Road. 
(3)  "Pure Station" parking area. The area between the store building currently known as "Pure Station", with a current street address of 165 S. Cherokee Road, and the store building currently or formerly known as "Corine's", with a current street address of 157 S. Cherokee Road, is a parking area available only for the customers and patrons of stores within a one block area of said area, and may not be used for any other purposes, including, but not limited to, delivery truck loading and unloading. Delivery truck loading and unloading will not be allowed in front of said Pure Station. There will be one parallel parking space directly in front of the Pure gas station. 
(4)  Handicapped permit parking. Only vehicles which have a current State of Georgia validly issued handicap permit may park along the side of the store building currently or formerly known as "GKM Furniture", with a current street address of 154 S. Cherokee Road, and the store building currently or formerly known as "Claude Wiley's Store", with a current street address of 109 S. Cherokee Road, in front of the store building currently or formerly known as Rebecca Dally's law office with a current street address of 137 E. Hightower Trail, and in front of the store building currently or formerly known as the Honey Store with a current street address of 125 S. Cherokee Road. 
(5)  "No parking" area. The following areas are designated as "no parking" areas: 
a.  The east side of South Cherokee at the building currently or formerly known as Wachovia Bank, 170 South Cherokee Road, and the building currently or formerly known as The Welcome Inn at 184 South Cherokee Road; 
b.  The west side of North Cherokee Road and the north side of West Hightower Trail at the corner at the building currently or formerly known as Hardy's Citgo, 109 North Cherokee Road; and 
c.  The east side of North Cherokee Road at the building currently or formerly known as Georgia Central Bank Annex located between the main office and the building currently or formerly known as Social Circle Board of Education. 
(6)  Enforcement. 
a.  All persons violating any provision of paragraphs (1), (2), [or] (3) will [be] guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 per violation, each instance being considered a separate violation. 
b.  All persons violating any provision of subsection (4) or (5) are guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $250.00 per violation, each instance being considered a separate violation. 
(b)  Speed limits. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-06-183 concerning alteration of speed limits by local authorities, the following regulations regarding speed limits within the city has been adopted: 
(1)  The following speed zones are established based on a traffic engineering investigation as required by state law: 
ON-SYSTEM 
STATE
ROUTE WITHIN THE
CITY LIMITS
OF and/or
School Name FROM MILE
POINT TO MILE
POINT LENGTH
IN
MILES SPEED
LIMIT SR 11 Social Circle Newton County Line 
(South City Limits) 00.00 950' south of Birch Street 00.31 00.31 50 SR 11 Social Circle 950' south of Birch Street 00.31 370' south of East Ash Street 00.73 00.42 40 SR 11 Social Circle 370' south of East Ash Street 00.73 300' north of Cannon Drive 01.01 00.28 30 SR 11 Social Circle 300' north of Cannon 
Drive 01.01 50' south of Annie P. Henderson Drive 01.84 00.83 25 SR 11 
*** 
SCHOOL 
ZONE 
*** Social Circle 
Social Circle 
Elementary, 
Middle & 
High Schools 
SCHOOL DAYS 317' south of Holly Street 01.33 317' north of Oak Drive 01.77 00.44 25 SR 11 Social Circle 50' south of Annie P. Henderson Drive 01.84 Malcolm Road 02.59 00.75 35 SR 11 Social Circle Malcolm Road 02.59 528' north of O'Kelly Street (North City Limits) 03.31 00.72 45 SR 12/ 
US 278 Social Circle 4277' west of East Hightower Trail 01.51 2165' west of East Hightower Road 01.91 00.40 55 I-20 (SR 402) Social Circle Newton County Line 101.39 Morgan County Line 102.87 01.48 70  
OFF-SYSTEM 
ROAD NAME WITHIN THE
CITY LIMITS
OF and/or
School Name FROM TO LENGTH
IN
MILES SPEED
LIMIT Alcova Drive Social Circle South city limits West Hightower Trail 02.00 45 Alcova Drive 
*** 
SCHOOL 
ZONE 
*** Social Circle 
Middle & High 
School 
SCHOOL DAYS 
ONLY 310' West of Hightower Trail 1735' North of St. Andrews Subdivision 00.43 35 Annie P. Henderson/Fairplay Drive Social Circle Oak Street 900' North of Inglis Street 00.41 25 Annie P. Henderson/Fairplay Drive Social Circle 900' North of Inglis Street 600' North of Ronthor Drive 00.37 35 Annie P. Henderson/Fairplay Drive Social Circle 600' North of Ronthor Drive West City Limits 00.82 45 Cannon Drive Social Circle Spring Street City Limits 01.60 35 East Hightower 
Trail Social Circle Spring Street 700' West of Thurman 
Baccus Road 00.99 35 East Hightower 
Trail Social Circle 700' West of Thurman 
Baccus Road 1320' East of Thurman 
Baccus Road 00.39 45 East Hightower 
Trail Social Circle 1320' East of Thurman 
Baccus Road East City Limits 00.76 55 West Hightower 
Trail Social Circle State Route 11 150' West of Forest Avenue 00.25 25 West Hightower 
Trail Social Circle 150' West of Forest Avenue 1700' West of Clegg Farm Road 01.03 35 West Hightower 
Trail Social Circle 1700' West of Clegg Farm Road East City Limits 00.88 45 Willow Springs 
Church Road Social Circle South City Limits North City Limits 00.88 40 Social Circle 
Bypass Social Circle State Route 11 East Hightower Trail 02.25 55 Spring Street Social Circle State Route 11 East Hightower Trail 00.70 35  
(2)  It is unlawful to use radar detection devices on any state route, county road or city street not listed in this section. 
(3)  This section includes all construction/work zones on any state route posted with the statutory 40 miles per hour speed limit. 
(4)  Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished as provided by state law. 
(Former § 8-002) 
Sec. 8-3. - Solicitation of charitable contributions. 
(a)  Charitable organizations registered in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5 and such organizations exempt from registration in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9 are authorized to solicit for contributions on the streets and highways within the city, subject to compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Charitable organizations seeking a permit pursuant to this section shall file an application, in the form provided by the city, with the city clerk. Such application shall include the name, address and telephone number of the organization, the officers of the organization, the date(s), time(s) and places(s) of the proposed solicitation and must include an agreement by the organization to hold harmless and indemnify the city from liability for damage or injury arising out of the permitted solicitation. Such application must be executed by a duly authorized officer of said organization. Such organization must provide a copy of the declaration page of a liability insurance policy which provides liability insurance coverage, with limits of at least $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, for the permitted solicitation to the clerk. Such policy shall include an endorsement listing the city as a named insured. 
(c)  The cost of the permit for solicitation shall be $10.00. In the event the solicitation will continue more than one day, an additional fee in the amount of $10.00 per day shall be imposed. 
(d)  Solicitation for contributions on the streets and highways contrary to this section is a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $100.00 per violation, each instance being considered a separate violation. 
(Former § 8-003) 
Sec. 8-4. - Low speed vehicles. 
(a)  Findings; definition. 
(1)  Certain city streets with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less under exclusive city jurisdiction (non-DOT streets) are constructed so as to safely permit their use by operators of low speed motorized vehicles and motorized carts, excluding state or federal or county roads. 
The permitted streets are as follows: All city streets with speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less. 
(2)  Definitions. 
All-terrain vehicle or ATV means motorized vehicle designed for off-road use with three or four tires and with a seat to be straddled by the operator and with handlebars. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways unless it meets the definition of an all-terrain vehicle which is a "Farm use vehicle" and is exclusively used in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-305. 
Bicycle means having only two wheels and either of which is more than 13 inches in diameter. 
Daylight hours means between 30 minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after sunset. 
Dealer means person in the business of buying, selling or exchanging vehicles with an established place of business in Georgia. 
Dirt bike means off-road motorcycle (see Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. § 391-4-2-.62), a motor vehicle having a seat or saddle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, which is not designed, licensed or authorized for use on public roads. 
Electric bicycle means a device with two or three wheels which has a saddle and fully operative pedals for human propulsion and also has an electric motor. It shall meet the requirements of the federal motor vehicle safety standards and operate so that the electric motor ceases to function when the brakes are applied. The electric motor in an electric bicycle shall: Have a power output of not more than 1,000 watts; be incapable of propelling the device more than 20 miles per hour on level ground; and be incapable of further increasing the speed when human power alone is used to propel the device at or more than 20 miles per hour. 
Electric personal assistive mobility device or EPAMD means a self-balancing, two non-tandem wheeled device designed to transport only one person and having an electric propulsion system with average power of 750 watts (one horsepower) and a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour on a paved level surface when ridden by an operator who weighs no more than 170 pounds. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways, except with speed limits no more than 35 miles per hour. 
Gross weight means the weight of a vehicle without load plus the weight of any load thereon. 
Low-speed motor vehicle or LSMV means four-wheeled vehicle whose top speed in one mile is greater than 20 miles per hour but not greater than 25 miles per hour on a paved level surface and manufactured in compliance with federal motor vehicle safety standards for low-speed vehicles in 49 C.F.R. Section 571.500. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways, except those city streets with speed limits no more than 35 miles per hour. 
Moped means motor driven cycle with two or three wheels, with or without foot pedals to permit muscular propulsion, and an independent power source providing a maximum of two brake horsepower. If a combustion engine is used, the maximum displacement shall be 50 cc's. The power source shall be capable of propelling the vehicle, unassisted, at a speed not to exceed 30 miles per hour on level road surface and shall be equipped with a power drive system that functions directly or automatically only, not requiring clutching or shifting. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways, except those with speed limits no more than 35 miles per hour. 
Motor driven cycle means every motorcycle and scooter with a motor not to exceed five brake horsepower, every bicycle with a motor and every moped. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways, except with speed limits no more than 35 miles per hour. 
Motorcycle means every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, and moped. 
Motorized cart (or golf cart ) means every motor vehicle having no less than three wheels and an empty weight of 1,300 pounds or less and which cannot go more than 20 miles per hour. They may only be used on city streets with speed limits no more than 35 miles per hour. 
Motorized play vehicle means a coaster, scooter, pocket bike, or other motorized vehicle that is self-propelled and is not otherwise defined in this Code as an "ATV", "motorized cart", "low speed motor vehicle (LSMV)" "motor vehicle", "motorcycle", "electric bicycle", motorized skateboard", "electric personal assistive mobility device", "personal transportation vehicle", "UTV", or "motorized wheelchair". They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways. 
Motorized skateboard or motorized scooter means a self-propelled device, a deck upon which a person may ride, not equipped with a seat, and at least two tandem wheels in contact with the ground and which is not otherwise defined in this Code as a "motor vehicle," "motorcycle," "motorized play vehicle," "electric personal assistive mobility device" or "motorized wheelchair." They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways. 
Motorized wheelchair means self-propelled wheelchair used by a physically disabled person for mobility. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways except for crossing such at marked crosswalks. 
Personal transportation vehicle means any motor vehicle: With a minimum of four wheels; capable of a maximum level ground speed of less than 20 miles per hour; with a maximum gross vehicle unladen or empty weight of 1,375 pounds; and capable of transporting not more than eight persons. The term does not include mobility aids, including power wheelchairs and scooters, that can be used indoors and outdoors for the express purpose of enabling mobility for a person with a disability. The term also does not include any all-terrain vehicle. 
Note- This subsection is inserted primarily for reference purposes only at this time: Currently of limited applicability since per O.C.G.A. § 40-6-363, the city "enacted prior to January 1, 2012, an ordinance authorizing the operation of motorized carts pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-331." 
Pocket motorcycle or pocket bike means a miniature replica of replicate of a motorcycle which does not meet Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways. 
UTV means any motorized vehicle with a combustion engine designed for off-road use equipped with four or six tires and seats inside a roll cage or contained within the body of the vehicle, with or without seat belts, and a steering wheel and a pickup truck style bed. They may not be used on public streets, roads or highways unless it meets the definition of a personal transportation vehicle which is a "Farm use vehicle" and is exclusively used in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 40-6-305. 
(b)  Registration/transfer requirements. 
(1)  Motorized carts. Every owner of a motorized cart operated over the city streets and parking areas accessible by the public shall register the cart with the city within ten business days of purchase. Two decals shall be issued upon registration; and a record of each motorized cart number, along with the name and address of the owner, shall be maintained by the city. The decals must be affixed to the sides of the cart to be fully visible at all times. The failure to have a current registration decal on such a motorized cart shall be a violation of this section and subject the owner of such cart to the penalties in section 1-5. 
a.  Resident fee. The registration fee for motorized carts owned by city residents shall be $12.00, and registration shall be effective for five years. 
b.  Registration deadline. If such cart is not registered within ten business days of purchase, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the registration fee; and the cart shall be considered unregistered. 
c.  Transfers. Upon sale of the cart to another person who shall operate the cart over the streets of the city, the registration must be transferred to the new owner within ten business days of the change in ownership at a cost of $5.00, and if the new owner is not a city resident, the nonresident registration/user fee for the balance of the year shall be due from the new owner. If registration is not transferred within ten business days, a $20.00 penalty will be applied in addition to the $5.00 transfer charge; and the cart shall be considered an unregistered cart. 
d.  Special tourism events. Council may, at its discretion, by formal action at a council meeting, waive registration requirements for special events of a limited duration to which out-of-city residents may bring motorized carts as participants. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Electric personal assistive mobility device (EPAMD). EPAMDs shall be subject to the same registration requirements outlined above in subsections (a) and (c). 
(4)  Age, number of registrants limited. Only those persons 18 years of age or older may register a motorized cart. Motorized cart registration may be in one person's name only, and the registration form must be signed by that person. 
(5)  LSMV. No LSMV shall be operated unless it is legally registered and insured according to laws of the state. 
(c)  Operation regulations. 
(1)  Before any motorized cart or LSMV may be operated upon the designated city streets or areas of the city, it shall have installed a triangular red orange emblem per O.C.G.A. § 40-8-4, and an amber strobe light per O.C.G.A. § 40-8-35. 
(2)  Only those currently licensed drivers who are 16 years of age and older may drive a motorized cart or LSMV on the designated city streets and those parking areas accessible by the public. 
(3)  All operators shall abide by all traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic. Seat belts shall be worn by all occupants at all times the vehicle is moving. All operators and passengers must remain seated at all times during operation. No person may sit on the operator's lap. 
(4)  Motorized carts or LSMVs shall not be operated on sidewalks at any time. 
(5)  Motorized carts may be operated over those designated streets and those parking areas accessible by the public only during daylight hours, unless such motorized carts are equipped with functional headlights, taillights, brake lights and turn signals. Every gasoline powered motorized cart shall at all times be equipped with an exhaust system in good working order and in constant operation. The cart shall not emit smoke or fumes. 
(6)  No motorized cart or EPAMD shall be permitted to operate over, along, or across State Highway 11 and State Highway 12 a/k/a U.S. Highway 278, except where crossing areas are clearly designated by signage. Said crossing areas shall be marked in accordance with Georgia Law. LSMV's and motorized carts may only operate along portions of city streets that are marked 35 miles per hour or slower speed limit, per state law. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any motorized cart or LSMV to drive in violation of this section. 
(8)  EPAMD. Only persons possessing a valid driver's license, or in lieu of a driver's license, persons who are at least 18 years of age and older, may operate an EPAMD on the designated city streets located within the city. They may only operate along portions of city streets marked 25 miles per hour or slower speed limit. 
(9)  EPAMDs shall be equipped with front, rear, and side reflectors which shall be visible from a distance of 300 feet when directly in front of high beams of headlights on a motor vehicle; a system that when employed will enable the operator to bring the device to a controlled stop; and, if the device is operated between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, a lamp emitting a white light which, while the device is in motion, illuminates the area in front of the operator for a distance of 300 feet. 
(10)  No person shall operate an EPAMD at a speed greater than seven miles per hour when traveling on any path or sidewalk or 15 miles per hour on any other city right-of-way. See O.C.G.A. § 40-6-322. No person shall operate an EPAMD with more than a single user at any time. 
(11)  Per O.C.G.A. § 40-6-331(c), the city will erect signs on every highway which comprises a part of the state highway system at that point on the highway which intersects the corporate limits of the municipality. Such signs shall be at least 24 by 30 inches in area and shall warn approaching motorists that motorized carts are authorized for use on public streets. This section establishing operating standards for motorized carts shall not be effective unless appropriate signs giving notice are posted as required. 
(12)  Any person who drives any vehicle in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property commits the offense of reckless driving. No person shall ride or drive any vehicle, on any of the streets or roads in a disorderly manner or in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property. Reckless driving includes: driving at an excessive rate of speed given the posted speed limit and the driving conditions existing at the time, approaching blind hill, drive or turn at excessive speed, speeding in construction zone, causing the vehicle's tires to squeal and/or the vehicle to fish-tail, screeching tires, spinning circles (also known as "donuts"), exhibitions of speed, racing, coming close to striking persons or objects, wrong side of the road, wrong way in one way street, striking vehicles, persons or objects, taking eyes off the roadway including using electronic device such as texting or internet surfing or watching video, impairment by drugs or alcohol, failure to take seizure medication or other medication required for safe driving, driving with disorders characterized by lapses of consciousness or other mental or physical disabilities affecting the ability of a person to drive safely, being too sleepy to safely drive, driving without lights in rain or darkness, too fast for wet or slick conditions, following too closely, tailgating, repeatedly, abruptly or erratically swerving or changing lanes or passing other vehicles, illegal or unsafe turn or U-turn, passing on double yellow, passing a vehicle in a no-pass zone, crossing the center line, weaving in and out of a lane, failure to maintain lane, striking the curb, guardrail, median divider or other edge of lane markers, driving on median or shoulder of roadway, driving with defective equipment, attempting to elude a police officer or deputy, failing to stop for roadblock or otherwise ignoring command of police officer, accelerating through intersection in attempt to beat a changing light, disregarding pedestrian trying to cross roadway, failure to sound horn or apply brakes for pedestrians trying to cross roadway, failure to obey traffic control device or ignoring road signs, leaving scene of accident, stunts including standing on the seat, tank or fender, sliding turns, "wheelies" and "stoppies", if any of the foregoing is in reckless disregard for the safety of persons or property. 
(d)  Sidewalks-Permitted and prohibited uses. Sidewalks are for use only by pedestrians and non-prohibited users ("users") as follows: bicyclists, skaters and non-motorized scooter riders may use them. This section shall not apply to necessary use of sidewalks by transportation agencies in crossing sidewalks, nor to the loading or unloading of trailers or other vehicles. 
    No person shall interfere with the full, free and easy use of the sidewalk, or shall refuse to "move on" when directed by any proper officer of this city. It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any sidewalk so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to refuse to clear such public way when ordered by a deputy sheriff or a representative of the police department or other lawful authority. 
    Prohibited users of sidewalks are as follows: 
(1)  Automobiles and trucks (except authorized maintenance vehicles); 
(2)  Motorcycles including dirt bikes; 
(3)  Street and trail motorized bikes or vehicles (not to include electric bicycles); 
(4)  Minibikes and mopeds and pocket motorcycles/bikes; 
(5)  Horses; 
(6)  Go-carts; 
(7)  Electric-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(8)  Gasoline-powered golf carts or motorized carts; 
(9)  Motorized skateboards or motorized scooters; 
(10)  Motorized play vehicles; 
(11)  LSMVs, motorized carts, ATV's and UTV's; 
(12)  Any other vehicle designed by the manufacturer to be able to travel at speeds in excess of ten miles per hour under its own power on a flat surface; 
(13)  Un-registered EPAMDs. 
(e)  Hazardous activities and special rules. 
(1)  Sidewalks are for use only by the non-prohibited users. Hazardous activities on the sidewalks and streets and those parking areas accessible by the public are prohibited. Such hazardous activities, and the special rules pertaining to them, include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Racing of any form, except for special events approved by the city, and 
b.  Blocking of public access, except for special events approved by the city. 
(2)  None of the prohibited users in subsection (d) shall use the sidewalk system or any related bridges and/or their underpasses for any purpose. 
(3)  Bicyclists, skaters and non-motorized scooter riders shall not loiter or stop on sidewalks, but shall move off the sidewalk when stopped. 
(4)  Normal rules of the road shall apply to the sidewalks. For instance, when approaching oncoming users, each user shall move to his right side. Passing shall be on the left side. 
(5)  Pedestrians shall be given priority consideration and full right-of-way by other users of the sidewalks to ensure them safe passage. 
(6)  A warning shall be given by bicyclists, non-motorized scooter riders and skaters, when approaching pedestrians from the rear. This warning shall be verbal such as "coming up on your left". Each user of the sidewalks shall be considerate of the safety and welfare of other users, and dangerous conduct will not be tolerated. 
(7)  All laws and ordinances relative to alcohol and its use, including open container laws, which apply to traffic on the streets of the city, also apply to the sidewalks. 
(8)  All litter shall be deposited in the receptacles provided or retained by the user for proper disposal later. Littering shall be subject to twice the fines and penalties as littering on the streets. 
(9)  All users of bicyclists, skaters and non-motorized scooter riders under 16 shall wear a properly fitted and fastened bicycle helmet which meets the ANSI or Snell standards. 
(f)  Motorized play vehicle; authorizations; prohibitions; disclosure requirements. 
(1)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any public street, roadway, sidewalk, park, parking lot, trail, shared multi-use path, bicycle path or any other public property. 
(2)  Motorized play vehicles are permitted on private residential property with the permission of the property owner. 
(3)  No motorized play vehicle may be operated on any private commercial/industrial property unless the location is inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic (such as an enclosed warehouse or fenced parking lot with a locked gate). Motorized play vehicles may be operated on private commercial/industrial property meeting these restrictions with the written permission of the owner, the person entitled to immediate possession, or the authorized agent of either. 
(4)  No person shall operate a motorized play vehicle in a manner causing noise plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet. 
(5)  The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of any minor shall not permit such minor to violate this section. 
(6)  It is unlawful for any vendor or merchant to sell motorized play vehicles without making disclosures required by this section. Any merchant or vendor who sells motorized play vehicles within the city shall: 
a.  Post in a prominent place at each location where motorized play vehicles are on display, a notice, on a sign not less than 96 square inches and visible to the public, stating that operation of motorized play vehicles: 
1.  Are prohibited on any public street, roadway, sidewalk, park, parking lot, trail, shared multi-use path, bike path or other public property. 
2.  Are allowed to be used on private residential property with owner's written permission. 
3.  Are allowed to be used on private commercial/industrial property only in areas inaccessible to normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic and only with the written permission of the owner/agent. 
b.  Provide a copy of such notice to each purchaser of a motorized play vehicle, in connection with the purchase of a motorized play vehicle. If the purchaser is a minor, the minor's parent or legal guardian must sign a receipt of said notice. 
c.  Any motorized vehicle owned by a governmental entity operated in performance of authorized duties or activities, is exempt from this section. 
(g)  Penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates the terms of this section, except subsection (c)(4), shall be punished as provided in section 1-5; except that any fine for a littering offense shall be doubled. 
(2)  Any violation of subsection (c)(4) shall be charged against the registered owner of the motorized cart, and all fines and penalties shall be levied against the registered owner of the motorized cart as follows: 
a.  For the first offense, a fine of not less than $250.00. 
b.  For the second offense, a fine of not less than $500.00. 
c.  For a third offense committed within one year of conviction for a second offense for a motorized cart, a fine of $1,000.00, and the motorized cart registration shall be revoked. The registered owner or family member cannot thereafter register a motorized cart for use in the city for a period of two years following the third conviction. 
(3)  Any violation by an operator of a LSMV shall be charged against the operator according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 40 and this Code. Any violation by an owner of a LSMV shall be charged against the owner according to the provisions of O.C.G.A. tit. 40 and this Code. 
(Former § 8-004; Ord. No. 2017-1, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-2017) 
Sec. 8-5. - Trucks over six wheels prohibited on roads designated "No Through Trucks". 
    Trucks over six wheels are prohibited from using roads designated by the city manager as "No Through Trucks", which designation shall be ratified by vote of the mayor and council at the next council meeting after said designation by the manager. Such designation is permissible when such trucks are expressly found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic in that area. The purpose of this restriction is to protect the public safety in the use of the city's streets, to facilitate and expedite traffic, and to protect the streets from unusual wear and damage. The mayor and council have control and supervision over its roads and streets. This prohibition is based on a traffic engineering investigation and recommendation. 
    This prohibition shall be posted with appropriate signage so as to apprise drivers of trucks that such trucks are prohibited in areas designated "No Through Trucks". The signage shall be in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Any law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer to whom law enforcement authority has been designated who observes a motor vehicle being operated upon a public road of the state and who has reason to believe that any provision hereof is being violated is authorized to stop such vehicle and make investigation of such. 
    Exemption. Trucks making a delivery to an address on the "No Through Trucks" road, with documentation proving such delivery, are permitted on the "No Through Trucks" road solely for that limited purpose, and shall depart by the shortest route to a road that is not designated "No Through Trucks". Provided, however, the maximum total gross weight of a vehicle and load shall not exceed 56,000 pounds. 
    Initial designation. The following roads are hereby designated as "No Through Trucks" to protect the public safety in the use of the city's streets, to facilitate and expedite traffic, and to protect the streets from unusual wear and damage: 
Street Name From To East Hightower North Cherokee Spring Street Thurman Baccus East Hightower Social Circle Parkway Cannon Drive South Cherokee Social Circle Parkway North Tower Road North Cherokee North Cherokee  
    All persons violating the foregoing will guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, each instance being considered a separate violation. 
(Former § 8-005) 
Chapter 9 - GENERAL OFFENSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm except in the defense of person or property. However, shotgun discharge by persons age 16 years or older, with 12 gauge or smaller shotgun (no magnum loads, buckshot, slugs, 3.5" loads or similar), is allowed as follows: during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on weekdays, on one's owned or leased property, and more than 250 feet from property lines and roadways. The shotgun may only be aimed above 30 degrees from horizontal, and never in the direction of any residence. No pistols, revolvers, muzzleloaders, rifles or similar firearms discharging a bullet or ball or slug are allowed in said firearm discharge. Only shotguns may be used, and only #6, #7.5, #8 and similar shot, known as birdshot or target loads, may be used. 
    Furthermore, on larger acreage tracts, wherein neighbor property lines and roadways are at least 200 yards from the location where the gun is to be discharged, all shotguns and shotgun loads are allowed. Muzzleloaders, carbines chambered in pistol rounds and handguns are allowed as well. .22 caliber rimfire rifles (.22 lr, .22 magnum, etc.) are permitted, but larger high pressure rifle calibers, .223 level muzzle energy and up, are prohibited due to the danger of using high powered rifles within the city limits. Provided, however, that .30-30 Winchester, .444 Marlin, .45-70, .35 Remington, and other medium pressure rounds with round nose bullets and similar ballistics are permitted due to their limited range. Such non-shotgun firearm discharge, on larger acreage tracts, wherein neighbor property lines and roadways are at least 200 yards from the location where the gun is to be discharged, may only occur in an elevated area wherein shots shall be in a downward direction. In no case under this exception language may a gun be discharged in the general direction of any residential properties. In other words, the discharge must be towards the interior of the parcel, not towards the closest property line. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined up to $500.00 or be incarcerated for up to ten days, or both. Each day such violation is committed shall be a separate offense. 
    This Code section shall not apply to authorized officers of the law and animal control officers in the performance of their law enforcement duties and/or animal control duties. Nor shall it apply to any lawful state sanctioned hunt. 
(Former § 9-004) 
Sec. 9-2. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Restrictions. 
(1)  [Prohibited; definition.] Per O.C.G.A. § 16-11-39, disorderly conduct is prohibited by the county, and per state law is defined as follows: 
A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
a.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear of the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
b.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
c.  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; or 
d.  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of 14 years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace. 
(2)  Fights, brawls, etc. prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another, or to endanger the lawful pursuits of another. 
(3)  Conduct in a crowd regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to assemble with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; or jostling or roughly crowding or pushing any person in any public place; or collecting in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes as defined by the ordinances or regulations of the city and the state laws; or intending to engage in gaming. 
(4)  Fraudulent schemes illegal. It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent any public place in the city with intent to obtain money from other persons by illegal and fraudulent schemes, tricks, artifices or devices; or to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick, to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person, or to aid or abet therein. 
(5)  Patronizing illegal gaming and alcoholic beverage places prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to frequent any place where illegal gaming activities or illegal sales of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs are allowed or tolerated. 
(6)  Printing/publishing treasonous materials prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, introduce, print or circulate, or cause to be circulated or printed, or aid or assist, or be instrumental in any manner in bringing, introducing, circulating or printing within the city any paper, pamphlet, circular or any writing for the purpose of inciting persons to resist the ordinances of the city or its lawful authorities. 
(7)  Blocking traffic flow illegal. It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and then refuse to clear such public way when ordered by the Walton County Sheriff or a representative of the city department of public safety or other lawful authority. 
(8)  Loitering or prowling prohibited. See O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36. 
a.  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
b.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this Code section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this Code section if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
c.  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose of inducing, enticing, soliciting or procuring another to commit an act of prostitution or sodomy. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such purpose is manifested are: that such person is a known prostitute, pimp, or sodomist, repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages passers-by in conversation, or repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms or any bodily gesture. No arrest shall be made for a violation of this subsection unless the arresting officer first affords such person an opportunity to explain such conduct, and no one shall be convicted of violating this subsection if it appears at trial that the explanation given was true and disclosed a lawful purpose. 
d.  A person committing the offense of loitering or prowling shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Penalties. Any person found in violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and on conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 60 days in jail, or both. 
(Former § 9-005) 
Sec. 9-3. - Marijuana possession. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide the city court with jurisdiction to try and dispose of cases in which a person is charged with possession of marijuana, which possession is of one ounce or less. 
(b)  City court to try certain cases. Any person who is charged with possession of marijuana, which possession is of one once or less, within the city shall have his case heard in the city court. 
(c)  Penalties. Every person convicted of possession of marijuana, which possession is of one once or less, or who pleads guilty or nolo contendere to such offense, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 365 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Former § 9-006) 
Sec. 9-4. - Smoking by minors. 
(a)  [Prohibited; posting of section.] 
(1)  Smoking by minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached 18 years to smoke tobacco or any other substance in public within the city limits. 
(2)  Sales of tobacco products to minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful to knowingly sell, give or make available within the city limits tobacco products of any kind to any person who has not reached the age of 18 years. 
(3)  Misrepresentation of age prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly misrepresent his or her age to another person for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products within the city limits. 
(4)  Purchase, use or consummation of tobacco products by minors prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached the age of 18 years to purchase, use or consume tobacco products of any kind within the city limits. 
(5)  Posting of section. A copy of this section shall be posted in a conspicuous location in every store, restaurant or other business within the city limits where tobacco products are sold. 
(b)  Penalties; municipal court to try cases. Any person found in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or 60 days in jail, or both. 
    Except as otherwise required by law, any person who is charged with violation of this section shall have his case heard before the city court. 
(Former § 9-008) 
Sec. 9-5. - Graffiti. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-2 and following are followed and enforced by the city. O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-3 notes that criminal street gang activity is a serious and continuing public safety concern; criminal trespass and criminal damage to property in the second degree caused by graffiti being placed unlawfully upon private property are crimes frequently associated with criminal street gang activity; and it is in the public interest, not only in the pursuit of justice but also as a means of combating such criminal street gang activity and of contributing to the general public welfare by improving the esthetics of public views, to compensate as provided in this section those private property owners who are the innocent victims of such criminal trespass or criminal damage to property in the second degree by using inmate labor to remove or obliterate graffiti unlawfully placed on private properties when such graffiti is visible from public roads or other public property. Per O.C.G.A. § 17-15A-4, the city authorizes the use of labor by inmates from any penal institution or jail under its authority to remove or obliterate such unlawfully placed graffiti when such graffiti is visible from any public road or other public property. Graffiti is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare and constitutes a public nuisance destructive of the right and values of property owners and the entire community. Graffiti is often associated with gang activity and it harms the esthetics of public views. It promotes blight and must be abated to avoid detrimental impact and to prevent the further spread of graffiti. Without prompt removal, other properties become the target of graffiti, and entire neighborhoods are affected and become less desirable places to live and work. 
(b)  Public nuisance. Graffiti is a public and private nuisance and may be abated per this section and other applicable laws. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of real property or improvements thereon without prior authorization of the owner or occupant of the property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface. City-approved signage is exempt. 
    Occupant means any person or sub-lessee, successor or assignee that has control over property. 
    Owner means any person, agent or entity having a legal or equitable interest in a property. 
    Permit means knowingly allowing graffiti or any failure, refusal or neglect to remove. 
    Property means any real or personal property and that which is affixed incidental or appurtenant to real property but not limited to any premises, house, building, fence, structure or any separate part thereof, whether permanent or not. 
(d)  Prohibited acts. It is unlawful to apply graffiti or for any owner or occupant to permit graffiti on property. 
(e)  Notice of removal. The city may serve a written notice directing the owner/occupant to remove such graffiti and advising of the appeal procedure. The notice may be served in person or by U.S. Mail, return receipt requested. If the owner/occupant cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting in a conspicuous place on the property for three days. 
(f)  Abatement of nuisance. It shall be unlawful for the owner/occupant to fail to remove the graffiti within five days of notice if service is made in person or by certified mail. If service is made by posting, the owner/occupant shall remove the graffiti within five days of the first day that the property is posted. 
(g)  Appeal. An appeal may be taken to the city council by the owner/occupant to prevent the removal of any graffiti, within five days of notice from the city. Appeals shall be in writing and state the reasons for the appeal. The city shall not remove or obscure any graffiti during the pendency of an appeal. If the party filing the appeal requests a hearing, such hearing shall be held within 45 days. If the city council determines the graffiti must be removed, such must be accomplished within ten days of the hearing. 
(h)  Removal. If the graffiti is not completely removed by the owner/occupant within the ten days, the city may have it removed, and the city and/or its private contractor or inmates may enter upon such premises to remove such graffiti. If the owner/occupant applied the graffiti, the owner/occupant shall be liable to the city for all such expenses. The city shall record the expenses incurred in abating graffiti and shall provide a statement of such costs to the owner/occupant. If any expenses remain unpaid after 30 days, the city may sue in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover all such expenses incurred by the city in removing the graffiti, including attorney fees and court costs associated with the action. 
(i)  Penalty. Any person convicted of violating this section may be punished by a fine of $500.00 to $1,000.00 per instance, plus may be required to reimburse the city for the expenses to remove the graffiti. The court may suspend or probate a portion or its entire sentence upon such conditions to include but not be limited to the restoring of the property so defaced, damaged or destroyed, or other remedial action. 
(j)  Alternate means of enforcement. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing any other available civil or criminal proceedings to abate a public nuisance under state law or city ordinance as an alternative, or in addition to, proceedings set forth in this section. 
(Former § 9-009) 
Sec. 9-6. - Public alcohol consumption. 
    The consumption of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits on public property (including without limitation roads, sidewalks and government buildings) is expressly prohibited. Brown bagging at restaurants and elsewhere is expressly prohibited. 
(Former § 9-010) 
Cross reference- Alcohol and entertainment regulations, ch. 10. 
Secs. 9-7-9-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE MOTOR VEHICLES 

Sec. 9-26. - Purpose. 
    This section is to eliminate the undesirable conditions caused by the presence of abandoned, dismantled, partially dismantled, wrecked, junked, inoperative or discarded motor vehicles in the city, in places other than junk yards. Such undesirable conditions include impeding traffic in the streets; interfering with the enjoyment of property; reducing the value of private property; inviting plundering; creating fire hazards; extending and aggravating blight; or resulting in a hazard to the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, or welfare of the residents of the city. 
(Former § 9-001(1.)) 
Sec. 9-27. - Definitions. 
    Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined below, that does not have lawfully affixed thereto an unexpired license plate or plates (if required by law for operation upon public roads), and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle that is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground, including, but not limited to automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailers. 
(Former § 9-001(2.)) 
Sec. 9-28. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Junked motor vehicles prohibited. No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any property within the city for a period of time in excess of 72 hours. 
(b)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) above shall not apply to any vehicle totally enclosed within a building on private property or to any vehicle held in connection with a business enterprise, lawfully licensed by the city, and properly operated in the appropriate business zone, pursuant to the zoning laws of the city, or to any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adopted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways, or any vehicles retained by the owner for antique collectible purposes. 
(Former § 9-001(3.)) 
Sec. 9-29. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  City to notify violator(s). Whenever it comes to the attention of the city manager that any violation as defined in the previous subsection exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the violation exists, or in case there is no such occupant, then upon the owner of the property or his agent, notifying of the existence of the violation and requesting removal in the time specified in the following paragraph. 
(b)  City to issue summons. The owner, agent or occupant shall have 14 days after receipt of the written notice specified in subsection (a) above to come into compliance with this section. If compliance has not been completed within said 14 days, a summons shall be personally served upon the owner of the vehicle and/or occupant of the property on which the violation exists. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more than $200.00. Each day such violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Former § 9-001(4.)) 
Secs. 9-30-9-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CONTROL SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 9-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned animal means any animal placed on public property or within a public building unattended and unsupervised or on or within the private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian or tenant of the private property and is unattended or without care. An animal shall also be considered abandoned which has been on or within the property of the owner or custodian of the animal in excess of 36 hours unattended and without adequate food, water and shelter. 
    Adequate food means sufficient quantity of non-contaminated and nutritionally healthy sustenance, appropriate to the species, breed, size, age and health of the animal, or at the direction of a licensed veterinarian, sufficient to prevent starvation, malnutrition, or risk to the animal's health. Garbage, spoiled, rancid, or contaminated food is not adequate food. 
    Adequate shelter means protective cover appropriate for the species and adequate space to maintain the animal in good health, which also prevents pain, suffering or a significant risk to the animal's health. Adequate shelter shall consist of a completely enclosed structure with four sides with a door opening, a constructed floor, and a roof. It shall also be clean, dry and compatible with current weather conditions and age, size, species and condition of the animal. The structure shall be of sufficient size to allow the animal to stand, turn around, lie down and go in and out of the structure comfortably. Adequate shelter must be compatible with the number of animals on the property. 
(1)  Adequate shelter includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Sufficient coverage and insulation to protect an animal from extreme hot and cold temperatures; 
b.  Sufficient protection from the elements to keep the animal dry; 
c.  Sufficient shade and ventilation to prevent an animal from overheating and/or dehydrating; and 
d.  Adequate bedding or resting area suitable for the breed, species, age, size, and medical condition of the animal. 
(2)  Materials not suitable for shelters include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Inadequately insulated containers; 
b.  Plastic kennels or airline-type animal shipping crates; 
c.  Metal or plastic drums; 
d.  Abandoned or parked vehicles; 
e.  Uncovered porches or decks; 
f.  Lean-tos; 
g.  Any other structure that fails to provide sufficient protection from the elements. 
    Adequate veterinary care means care of an animal from or under the direction of a veterinarian and necessary to maintain the health of an animal based on the age, species, breed, etc., of the animal, or to prevent an animal from suffering from: 
(1)  Ongoing infections; 
(2)  Infestation of parasites; 
(3)  Disease; or 
(4)  Any other condition/injury where withholding or neglecting to provide such care would: 
a.  Endanger the health or welfare of the animal; or 
b.  Promote the spread of communicable diseases. 
    Adequate water means clear, clean, drinkable water in adequate supply. Examples of inadequate water include, but are not limited to: snow, ice, rainwater and rancid or contaminated water. 
    Animal at large means any animal found loose and not under proper restraint off of the property of its owner. 
    Animal control officer means any person so designated by the board of commissioners or mayor and council to perform the duties of animal control and enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Animal under restraint means: 
(1)  Any animal controlled within the property of its owner; 
(2)  Any animal secured by a leash with a collar, or enclosed by way of a fence or other enclosure; 
(3)  Any animal at heel or beside a competent person and obedient to the person's commands; or 
(4)  Any animal inside a vehicle driven or parked on the streets. 
    Domesticated animals means animals accustomed to living in or about the habitation of humans, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, pet chickens in quantities defined by lot size as reflected in section 9-72, domesticated wild animals, and exotic animals. 
    Impoundment means taking physical control of an animal by an animal control officer or other officers empowered to act by law and the transporting of such animal to the animal control facility. 
    Municipal court means the Social Circle Municipal Court. 
    Owner means any person who owns, harbors, keeps and maintains, has lawful possession of, or knowingly causes or permits an animal to be harbored or kept, who has an animal in his care, who shelters or provides for such animal sufficient quantities of wholesome food and water 14 consecutive calendar days or longer, or permits an animal to remain on or around his premises. The term "owner" shall also include any person hired or acting as custodian of the animal for its owner. 
    Permit, in the limited context of the animal control ordinance, is defined to mean that the animal is at large for whatever cause, with or without knowledge or control of the owner. This is a strict liability standard. 
    Proper collar or harness means any fitted collar or harness which provides enough room between the collar and the animal's throat through which two fingers may fit. Choke, pinch, or prong type collars may not be used on a dog. Rope, cable, chain, wire or other similar materials are not suitable as a collar or harness. 
(Former § 9-002-1; Ord. No. 2017-9, § 2, 5-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-7, § 2, 12-18-2018) 
Sec. 9-52. - Animal control unit. 
    There is created for the county and city and approved by the city mayor and council an animal control unit (separate from and independent of any humane society), and it shall be staffed with personnel as may be from time to time authorized by the board of commissioners, which are deemed approved by the city mayor and council. The animal control unit shall enforce this article and the operation of the county shelter, which also house animals from the city. 
(Former § 9-002-2) 
Sec. 9-53. - Duty of owner to keep animals under control. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any domesticated animal, or anyone having a domesticated animal in his possession or control, to permit such domesticated animal to be at large. If the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible to ensure that all provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Former § 9-002-3) 
Sec. 9-54. - Duty to keep animals under restraint while on owner's property. 
    It shall be the duty of every animal owner or custodian to ensure such animals are kept under proper restraint and reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent the animal from leaving, while unattended, the property of its owner. 
(Former § 9-002-4) 
Sec. 9-55. - Duty to keep animals under restraint while off owner's property. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the animal owner or anyone having an animal in their possession to keep the animal under restraint and control at all times while the animal is off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian. For the purpose of this section, an animal shall be deemed under control when off the owner's property when: 
(1)  The animal is in a vehicle, parked or in motion; 
(2)  The animal is properly confined within a secured enclosure with the property owner's permission; 
(3)  The animal is securely restrained by a leash or other method held by a competent person; or 
(4)  The animal is under immediate voice command of a competent person at all times. 
(b)  Hunting dogs shall be deemed under control for the purpose of this section when they are in a hunting role per state game and fish department laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Former § 9-002-5) 
Sec. 9-56. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Primary enforcement responsibility. The primary responsibility for enforcement of this article shall be vested in the animal control unit. 
(1)  The animal control unit shall consist of animal control officers, the number and identity of which shall be designated by the board of commissioners and deemed approved by the city mayor and council. 
(2)  These officers shall be vested with the authority to issue citations for violation of this article. 
(3)  The officers comprising the animal control unit may also call upon any law enforcement officer as may be necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  Issuance of citations. Upon information known to any officer or member of the animal control unit, or the county sheriff's department or city police department, that anyone is in violation of this article, a citation may be issued requiring the owner or possessor of such domesticated animal to appear before the judge of the municipal court on a day and time certain to stand trial for the violation of this article. 
(c)  Right of officer to defend himself in performance of duty. In the performance of his duties per this article, any animal control officer or any law enforcement officer assisting in enforcing this article may use such force as is necessary to defend themselves from attack by an animal; provided, however, that reasonable efforts shall be made to impound an attacking animal without undue harm, injury or danger to the animal, the officer, or to any other persons and property. 
(d)  Right of entry. Any animal control officer or other authorized officer is authorized to enter any property for investigating alleged violations of this article, or to seize and impound any animal found in violation of this article. The animal control unit may use any appropriate means necessary to remove an animal in distress locked in a closed vehicle. 
(e)  Testimony of witnesses. If a violation of this article has not been witnessed by an officer of the animal control unit, the sheriff's department or city police or other employee of the city or county, a subpoena shall issue to the person possessing evidence of a violation requiring such person to appear on the day and time set to testify. 
(f)  Impoundment of animals. Animals in any of the following classes may be impounded by the animal control unit: 
(1)  Animals at large in violation of this article; 
(2)  Animals that have been abandoned; 
(3)  Animals subjected to inhumane treatment in violation of section 9-69; 
(4)  Animals which have bitten a person or animal or which have been bitten by an animal suspected of having rabies; 
(5)  Animals not wearing current vaccination tags; 
(6)  Animals suspected of having rabies; and 
(7)  Unconfined dogs in quarantine areas. 
(Former § 9-002-6) 
Sec. 9-57. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
(a)  Notice of impoundment. The animal control unit shall immediately notify the owner of each domesticated animal impounded if the owner of the domesticated animal is known or can be reasonably ascertained. 
(b)  Mandatory minimum holding period. The animal control unit shall house and care for any impounded domestic animals for 72 hours if the owner is unknown and the animal is untagged; or ten days if the animal is properly tagged or chipped with the current owner's information and the owner can be properly notified. 
(c)  Reclaiming animal; fees. The owner of any impounded domesticated animal may, within the holding period, reclaim such animal by payment of the impoundment fee and daily board rate established from time to time by the board of commissioners (which is deemed approved by the mayor and council). It shall be in the discretion of the animal control unit whether to allow an owner to claim an animal or make application for adoption if the mandatory minimum holding period has expired. If no proof of current rabies inoculation can be shown at the time of the animal's release, the owner shall pay the necessary fees to have the animal properly inoculated and tagged, in addition to any other fees due. 
(d)  Animal adoption. The animal control unit may release for adoption any animal unredeemed or unclaimed after the mandatory minimum holding period, following the adoption procedure outlined in section 9-68. Any person adopting an animal shall pay the required adoption fees and any other such fees deemed necessary. 
(e)  Treatment or euthanization of diseased or injured animal not bearing proper identification. If an animal not properly tagged or chipped is impounded by the animal control unit and shows evidence of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, the animal control officer shall confer with the animal control director or his designee to determine a just reason for euthanasia or may have the animal evaluated by a licensed veterinarian. 
(f)  Treatment or euthanization of diseased or injured animals bearing proper identification. If any properly tagged or chipped animal is impounded by the animal control unit and shows evidence of contagious, infectious or fatal diseases, is seriously ill or severely injured, such animal will be evaluated and the advice of a licensed veterinarian sought to determine whether to treat the animal or euthanize. In the absence of available veterinarian the animal control officer will confer with supervisor on duty to determine a just reason for euthanasia. 
(g)  Veterinary expenses. All veterinary expenses incurred shall be charged to the owner of such animal. 
(h)  Destroying animals. Any animal which is suffering excessively or which exhibits feral or wild tendencies or may present a perceived danger to persons, animal control personnel, or other animals may be, without regard to the mandatory minimum holding period, destroyed by the most humane method available. 
(Former § 9-002-7) 
Sec. 9-58. - Public nuisance animal. 
    It shall be unlawful for an owner to allow an animal to be a public nuisance. An animal will be deemed a public nuisance if: 
(1)  It is repeatedly found at large. 
(2)  It damages the property of someone other than the owner. 
(3)  It aggressively chases, attacks or bites a person while off the property of the owner. 
(4)  It produces, because of quantity, manner or method in which animals are kept, unsanitary conditions. 
(5)  The owner of a dog or cat fails to remove feces deposited upon public property or the property of another. This shall not apply to hoofed animals or livestock. 
(6)  A dog continuously makes excessive noises: continuous howling, barking or crying or causing unreasonable annoyance continuously for one-half hour or more. For the purposes of this section, the dog must be within 200 feet of the property line of the complaining party. 
(7)  An in-heat female dog or cat is tethered outdoors or allowed to be at large thereby attracting males of the same species. 
(Former § 9-002-8) 
Sec. 9-59. - Abandoned animals. 
    It shall be unlawful to abandon or permit such abandonment of or aid in abandonment of any domesticated animal. 
(Former § 9-002-9) 
Sec. 9-60. - Biting dogs, cats, and exotic animals, wildlife, rehabilitated wildlife kept as pets. 
(a)  Confinement. All domesticated animals, vaccinated or not, known to have bitten a person causing an injury that bleeds, shall be confined for ten days for observation for rabies. 
(b)  Destruction and analysis of animals suspected of rabies. For all such animals, or by consent of owner of a dog or cat, the animal shall be destroyed immediately, decapitated and its brain tissue analyzed for indications of rabies, if it has bitten a human or another animal. 
(c)  Destruction of unvaccinated dogs or animals. A dog or other animal which has not been vaccinated or which has been vaccinated less than one month prior to being bitten by a known rabid animal, shall be immediately destroyed. 
(d)  Confinement of animal in isolation. If the owner is unwilling to destroy such animal, it shall be confined in strict isolation in a location approved by the animal control officer for six months. 
(e)  Vaccination of confined animal. The confined animal must be vaccinated five months after the bite. 
(f)  Revaccination and confinement. Any dog or other animal for which rabies vaccination effectiveness has been established and having current vaccination at least one month prior to being bitten by a known rabid animal may be revaccinated and then confined in a manner approved by the animal control officer for 30 days; thereafter, it shall be released to the owner if the animal exhibits no signs (clinical) of rabies as adjudged by a veterinarian. 
(Former § 9-002-10) 
Sec. 9-61. - Establishment of infected area quarantine. 
    Whenever the department of human resources may declare the county or city or any area therein an "infected area" per O.C.G.A. § 31-19-2, then every dog in such infected area shall be quarantined and confined to the owner's or custodian's premises during the entire period of time for which such declaration to the department of human resources is in effect. 
(Former § 9-002-11) 
Sec. 9-62. - Confinement area of facility. 
(a)  Place of confinement. Confinement area or facility to which an animal is confined in compliance with this section shall be an animal shelter, kennel, animal hospital or such other place designated by the animal control officer. 
(b)  Requirements for confinement facility. Unless otherwise authorized by the animal control officer, unvaccinated biting animals and animals to be confined per section 9-60 shall be confined in an animal shelter, kennel or animal hospital at the owner's expense. Such facility shall provide for the following: 
(1)  Construction and management which will keep the animal dry and clean, prevent its escape and prevent its contact with people and other animals. 
(2)  A method and procedure for identification of the animal and recording of date of its admission to the area or facility. 
(3)  Assurance the animal will have adequate water and food. 
(4)  Adequate space for the animal's exercise. 
(5)  Protection against excessive heat and cold. 
(6)  Space, cages, pens and other necessary equipment to isolate the animal for its protection against injury and infectious diseases. 
(Former § 9-002-12) 
Sec. 9-63. - Vaccination of dogs and cats. 
(a)  Vaccination required. The owner of a dog or cat four months of age or older shall cause such dog or cat to be vaccinated against rabies as defined by this section. 
(b)  Revaccination. If such dog or cat is less than one year of age upon vaccination it shall be revaccinated within one year of the original vaccination. 
(c)  Vaccination periods. When dogs or cats one year of age or older are vaccinated with a vaccine approved by the department of human resources as providing three-year protection, such animals shall be revaccinated within three years. When other approved vaccines are used, yearly inoculations shall be required. 
(d)  Vaccination by owner. Vaccination by an owner, unless such owner is a licensed veterinarian, shall not be recognized. 
(e)  Revaccination of dogs or cats brought into county. The owner of a dog or cat brought into the county for a permanent stay from outside the county shall cause such dog or cat to be revaccinated in accordance with this section. 
(f)  Certificate of vaccination for evidence of comparable procedures. When the owner of such dog or cat produces evidence satisfactory to the animal control officer that such dog or cat has been vaccinated compliant with this section, then a county certificate of vaccination may be issued in lieu of revaccination. 
(g)  Vaccination by licensed veterinarian. No person shall vaccinate dogs and cats against rabies who is not licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
(h)  Temporary stay requirements for dogs. Any dog brought into the county for a temporary stay not exceeding 14 days shall be confined or on a leash at all times unless it has a current vaccination for rabies in its home jurisdiction. 
(Former § 9-002-13) 
Sec. 9-64. - Certificate of vaccination. 
(a)  Issuance of certificates of vaccination and vaccination tags. Any veterinarian is authorized and required in connection with his practice to issue certificates of vaccination and vaccination tags. 
(b)  Evidence of vaccination. Evidence of vaccination shall consist of a certification of vaccination and vaccination tag. 
(c)  Preparation of certificate. The certificate, with each item answered, shall be prepared in triplicate and signed by the veterinarian administering the vaccine. 
(d)  Disposition of copies. The veterinarian shall furnish one copy to the owner, one to the rabies control officer and retain one. 
(e)  Maintenance of records. The certificates of vaccination furnished to the rabies control officer by the veterinarian shall be maintained by the rabies control officer in an orderly, indexed file until expired. 
(Former § 9-002-14) 
Sec. 9-65. - Vaccination tags and collars. 
(a)  Issuance. Coincident with the issuance of the certificates of vaccination, the veterinarian shall furnish the owner of the dog or cat a serially numbered tag bearing the same number and year as the certificate. 
(b)  Vaccination tag to be worn. Every dog and cat at all times shall wear on its collar/harness a current vaccination tag. 
(c)  Unlawful removal. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach a vaccination tag to the collar of any animal for which it was not issued, or to remove such tag from any animal. 
(Former § 9-002-15) 
Sec. 9-66. - Adoption. 
(a)  When animals to be offered for adoption. The animal control unit or its agent may offer for adoption any animal unredeemed or un-reclaimed after the mandatory minimum holding period defined in section 9-57. 
(b)  Immediate availability. If the animal is surrendered to animal control unit by its owner, it may be offered immediately. 
(c)  Age requirement. All persons adopting animals must be over 18 and shall provide proper and humane care, feeding, sheltering, and protection from weather, and veterinary treatment as required. 
(d)  Spay and neutering. All persons adopting a fertile dog or cat shall cause it to be spayed/neutered within 30 days of adoption in the case of an adult, or within 30 days of sexual maturity in the case of an immature animal. 
(e)  Use of adopted animal for research prohibited. A person adopting an animal shall not permit it to be used for research. 
(f)  Restrictions on frequency of adoption. The frequency with which a person may adopt animals may be restricted. 
(g)  Refusal of adoption. The animal control unit or its designee may refuse adoption to a person that does not meet specified requirements. 
(h)  Adoption fees. Adoption fees are set by the board of commissioners (deemed approved by the mayor and council) and may include all or part of the costs of examination and rabies inoculation and spaying or neutering. 
(Former § 9-002-16) 
Sec. 9-67. - Discretion. 
    Any animal control officer may at his or her discretion not impound a dog or other animal found in violation of this section but may instead return the animal to its rightful owner. 
(Former § 9-002-17) 
Sec. 9-68. - Interference with an animal control officer. 
    It shall be unlawful to interfere with the investigation or duties of any animal control officer or officer empowered to act by law, or to take or attempt to take an animal from a vehicle used to transport such animal or from the animal control shelter or impounding area, or to otherwise seek to release any animal from the custody of the animal control unit. 
(Former § 9-002-18) 
Sec. 9-69. - Humane treatment of animals. 
(a)  Provision of food, water and shelter. No one shall fail to provide an animal adequate food, water, shelter, and adequate protection from the elements. Adequate veterinary care shall also be provided to prevent suffering. Animals shall be treated with humane care at all times. 
(b)  Inhumane treatment prohibited. No one shall beat, ill-treat, torment, overload, overwork, or abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit combat between animals. 
(c)  Exposure to poisonous substances. No person shall expose any poisonous substance, mixed with food or not, so that the poisonous substance shall be likely to be eaten by any domesticated animal. 
(d)  Exposure to unsanitary conditions. No person shall expose an animal to unsanitary conditions by depositing or failing to remove feces, waste or trash from the animal's immediate living area or area of confinement. 
(e)  Improper tethering. Any owner who shall cause an animal to be tethered shall do so by the use of a proper collar, harness or other acceptable restraint; by a chain or cable of adequate strength, weight and length consistent with the size and strength of the tethered animal and free from obstructions allowing the animal to access adequate food, water, and shelter. It shall be unlawful to tether an animal under the following circumstances: 
(1)  On vacant or uninhabited property without daily adequate food, water, shelter and veterinary care; 
(2)  During any declared weather advisories, warnings, or emergencies; 
(3)  In a manner that prevents the animal from lying, sitting, or standing comfortably, without the restraint becoming taut; 
(4)  In a manner that allows the animal to become entangled on the restraint or another object; 
(5)  In a manner that restricts the animal's access to adequate food, water, or shelter; or 
(6)  In a manner that causes injury to the animal. 
(Former § 9-002-19) 
Sec. 9-70. - Liability of county, officers and employees. 
    The county, the city, the animal control unit and its officers shall not be responsible or liable for any accidents, diseases, injuries or deaths to any animal while impounded or boarded at the animal shelter. Furthermore, the county, the city, the animal control unit and its officers shall not be responsible or liable for the health, welfare or actions of an animal after its adoption. 
(Former § 9-002-20) 
Sec. 9-71. - Violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, as this article exists or as it may hereafter be amended, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the jurisdiction of the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-5. 
(Former § 9-002-21) 
Sec. 9-72. - Chickens as domesticated animals. 
(a)  Definition. 
    Chickens are included within the definition of "domesticated animals" within section 9-51. "Chickens" are also included within the definition of "household pets" in the zoning code of the city. The keeping of chickens, as a part of the category of household pets, is allowed within the following zoning districts: AG, AG-2, R-25, R-15, and RMD in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Chickens are only permitted as pets or for egg-laying production; chickens cannot be kept for slaughter. 
(2)  Chickens, chicken products, and/or by-products shall not be sold on the property. 
(3)  No person shall fail to prevent his or her animals from straying from the property of the owner, or going upon the property of any other person, or upon any public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Roosters, any male chickens, and any other crowing chickens are prohibited. 
(5)  Guinea hens, peacocks, and geese are prohibited. 
(6)  No chickens shall be kept on a lot of less than 8,700 square feet. 
(7)  Three pet chickens are allowed on a lot sized 8,700 square feet or more. 
(8)  Six pet chickens are allowed on a lot sized 15,000 square feet or more. 
(9)  Nine pet chickens are allowed on a lot sized 25,000 square feet or more. 
(10)  Twelve pet chickens are allowed on a lot sized one acre or more. 
(b)  Housing requirements. 
(1)  Chickens must be kept securely in an enclosed yard or pen at all times. 
(2)  Any structure housing chickens must be located in the rear yard. 
(3)  All such houses, pens, or enclosures, shall have a minimum floor space of four square feet per bird over four months old. 
(c)  Sanitary requirements. 
(1)  Chickens must be kept under sanitary conditions and the enclosure they are kept in must not be allowed to become filthy or unsanitary. 
(2)  All places where chickens are kept shall have adequate drainage sufficient to prevent standing water in yards or pens. 
(3)  All places where chickens are kept shall remove all manure from such containers before the same shall become malodorous or unsanitary. 
(4)  All places where chickens are kept shall be kept free from vermin. 
(5)  Feed must be stores in a fully, enclosed, vermin-proof container. 
(Ord. No. 2017-9, § 4, 5-16-2017) 
Secs. 9-73-9-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Responsible Dog Ownership Law, O.C.G.A. §§ 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 9-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal shelter shall have the same meaning as in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2. 
    Classified dog means any dog that has been classified as a dangerous dog or a vicious dog per this article. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no injury occurs; provided, however, that barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subparagraph; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet; provided, however, that this subparagraph shall not apply where the death of such pet is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
    Mail means to send by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to the recipient's last known address. 
    Probate court means the Walton County Probate Court, with whom Social Circle has a contract. 
    Owner means any natural person or any legal entity owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog. If a dog owned by a minor, "owner" includes the parents or person in loco parentis with custody of the minor. 
    Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death, or results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of function of any organ. 
    Superior court means the Superior Court of Walton County, Georgia. 
    Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Former § 9-002-51) 
Sec. 9-102. - Exceptions to definitions. 
    The terms "dangerous dog" and "vicious dog" as defined in this article, shall not include: 
(1)  A dog in the act of use by a law enforcement or military officer to carry out the officer's official duties. 
(2)  A dog that inflicts an injury on a person who, at the time, was committing a willful trespass or other tort, or was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting the dog or had in the past been observed or reported to have tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or was committing or attempting to commit a crime, under O.C.G.A. tit. 16, § 5. 
(Former § 9-002-52) 
Sec. 9-103. - Applicability of provisions. 
    Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a potentially dangerous dog in this state is now classified as a dangerous dog under this article. Any dog classified prior to July 1, 2012 as a dangerous dog or vicious dog in this state is now classified as a vicious dog. The owner of any dog referred to in this section shall come into compliance with all current provisions of this article immediately. 
(Former § 9-002-53) 
Sec. 9-104. - Animal control officer. 
    The director and personnel of the animal control unit created by section 9-52 shall serve as animal control officers for the county and city and shall be charged with enforcing this article. An animal control officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Former § 9-002-54) 
Sec. 9-105. - Liability of county and city. 
    Per state law, under no circumstances shall the county or city or any employee or official of either be liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog as a result of a failure to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Former § 9-002-55) 
Sec. 9-106. - Procedures for classifying vicious dogs and dangerous dogs; notice; hearing. 
(a)  Duty to investigate. Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog within the animal control officer's jurisdiction, the animal control officer shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog. 
(b)  Impoundment. If the animal control officer believes that a dog subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog poses a threat to public safety, the dog may be immediately impounded and the owner shall be responsible for all costs from such impoundment. At the discretion of the animal control officer, the dog may be held at an approved veterinary or boarding facility at the owner's expense. Any impounded dog may be held until the requirements for possessing a classified dog as contained in section 9-107 are met or until a hearing in probate court per subsection (d) of this section results in a decision that no classification is warranted. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the animal control officer states his or her intention to pursue a civil action in superior court to request euthanasia of the dog per subsection (g) of this section within ten days of mailing the notice provided for in subsection (c) of this section, the dog may be held at the owner's expense through the final adjudication of said civil action. 
(c)  Notice. When the animal control officer determines a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog, the animal control officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the animal control officer's determination and state that the owner has a right to a hearing before the probate court on the animal control officer's determination within seven days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the animal control officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this article. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of an animal control officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous or vicious dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the animal control officer. 
(d)  Hearing. When a hearing is requested by an owner per subsection (c) of this section, such shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, such hearing may be continued by the probate court for good cause. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the probate court shall mail to the owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner may testify and present evidence and the probate court shall receive other evidence and testimony as reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal control officer's determination. 
(e)  Notice of determination by probate court. Within ten days after the hearing, the probate court shall mail written notice to the owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous or vicious dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to subsection (h), the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(f)  Judicial review. Review of the probate court's final decision shall be per O.C.G.A. § 5-3-2 and costs shall be paid per O.C.G.A. § 5-3-22. 
(g)  The superior court may order the euthanasia of a dog upon finding, after notice and opportunity for a hearing as provided by this article, that 1) the dog has seriously injured a human, or 2) presents a danger to humans not suitable for control under this article and the owner or custodian of the dog has been convicted of a violation of any state criminal law and the crime was related to such dog or any local government authority has filed with the court a civil action requesting euthanasia of the dog. 
(h)  A dog that is found, after notice and opportunity for a hearing as provided by this article, to have caused a serious injury to a human on more than one occasion shall be euthanized; provided, however, that no injury occurring before July 1, 2012, shall count for purposes of this subsection. 
(Former § 9-002-56) 
Sec. 9-107. - Requirements for possessing a classified dog. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess in the city a classified dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this article. Certificates of registration shall be nontransferable and shall only be issued to a person 18 years of age or older. No more than one certificate of registration shall be issued per domicile. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog shall be issued only if the animal control officer determines the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure that securely confines the dog on the owner's property indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure that prevents the dog from leaving such property; 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; and 
(4)  The dog has been sterilized. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, a certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued only if the animal control officer determines the following requirements have been met: 
(1)  The owner has maintained an enclosure that securely confines the dog on the owner's property indoors, or in a securely locked and enclosed double-walled pen, fence, or structure that prevents the dog from leaving such property. 
(2)  Clearly visible warning signs have been posted at all entrances to the premises where the dog resides; 
(3)  A microchip containing an identification number and capable of being scanned has been injected under the skin between the shoulder blades of the dog; 
(4)  The dog has been sterilized; and 
(5)  The owner maintains and can provide proof of liability insurance of at least $50,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any bodily injury or property damage caused by the dog. 
(d)  No certificate of registration shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of two or more violations of this article. 
(e)  No person shall be the owner of more than one vicious dog. 
(f)  No certificate of registration for a vicious dog shall be issued to any person convicted of: 
(1)  A serious violent felony as defined in O.C.G.A. § 17-10-6.1; 
(2)  The felony of dog fighting as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-37 or the felony of aggravated cruelty to animals as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; or 
(3)  A felony involving trafficking in cocaine, illegal drugs, marijuana, methamphetamine, or ecstasy per O.C.G.A. §§ 16-13-31 and 16-13-31.1 from conviction until two years after completion of sentence, nor to any person residing with such person. 
(g)  An annual fee, which may be set from time to time in an amount deemed reasonable by the board of commissioners (deemed approved by the mayor and council), in addition to any regular dog licensing fees, shall be paid to register classified dogs as required by this article. Certificates of registration shall be renewed annually, and payment of the annual fee shall be paid at the time the certificate of registration is issued. At the time of renewal of registration for a classified dog, an animal control officer shall require proof from the owner or make such investigation as necessary to verify continued compliance with all provisions of this section. Failure to renew a certificate of registration within ten days of the renewal date shall constitute a violation. 
(h)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose or has attacked a human and shall notify the animal control officer within 24 hours if the dog has died or been euthanized. 
(i)  A vicious dog shall not be transferred, sold, or donated to any other person except it may be relinquished for euthanasia to a government facility or veterinarian. 
(j)  The owner of a classified dog shall notify the animal control officer if the owner moves out of the city no later than ten days after such move. The owner of a classified dog who moves to the city from another jurisdiction in Georgia shall register the classified dog within ten days of becoming a resident and notify the animal control officer of the jurisdiction from which it moved. The owner of a similarly classified dog who moves into this state shall register the dog as required within 30 days of becoming a resident. 
(Former § 9-002-57) 
Sec. 9-108. - Unlawful acts by owner of a classified dog. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside an enclosure that securely confines the dangerous dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the dangerous dog from leaving such property unless: 
(1)  The dog is restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary; 
(2)  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate; or 
(3)  The dog is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a vicious dog to permit the dog to be: 
(1)  Outside an enclosure designed to securely confine the vicious dog while on the owner's property or outside a securely locked and enclosed double-walled pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the vicious dog from leaving such property unless: 
a.  The dog is muzzled and restrained by a leash not to exceed six feet and is under the immediate physical control of a person capable of preventing the dog from engaging any other human or animal when necessary, or 
b.  The dog is contained in a closed and locked cage or crate. 
(2)  Unattended with minors. 
(Former § 9-002-58) 
Sec. 9-109. - Confiscation of classified dogs for noncompliance. 
(a)  A dangerous or vicious dog shall be immediately confiscated by any animal control officer or by a law enforcement officer in the case of any violation. A refusal to surrender a dog subject to confiscation shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  The owner of any dog that has been confiscated per this article may recover such dog on payment of all reasonable confiscation and housing costs and proof of compliance with the provisions of this article, unless such confiscation is deemed in error by an animal control officer or the probate court. All fines and all charges for services performed by a law enforcement or animal control officer shall be paid prior to owner recovery of the dog. Criminal prosecution shall not be stayed due to owner recovery or euthanasia of the dog. 
(c)  If the owner has not complied with this article within 14 days of the date the dog was confiscated, such dog shall be released to an animal shelter, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 4-14-2, or euthanized in an expeditious and humane manner. The owner shall pay the costs of housing and euthanasia. 
(Former § 9-002-59) 
Sec. 9-110. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of a classified dog who violates this article may be prosecuted under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29(c) and, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of high and aggravated nature. 
(b)  An owner with a previous conviction for violation of this article whose classified dog causes serious injury to a human under circumstances constituting another violation of this article may be prosecuted for a felony under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-29(d) and, upon conviction, shall be punished by imprisonment for one to ten years, a fine not less than $5,000.00 nor more than $10,000.00, or both. In addition, the classified dog shall be euthanized at the cost of the owner. 
(c)  Any irregularity in classification proceedings shall not be a defense to a prosecution under this article if the owner received actual notice of the classification and did not pursue a civil remedy for the correction of the irregularity. 
(Former § 9-002-60) 
Sec. 9-111. - Confinement. 
    Choke collar or pinch collars shall not be used. 
(1)  All owners shall confine dogs within an adequate fence or enclosure or in a house, garage or other building, or shall securely confine with a chain, cable or leash at least ten feet long, with a swivel at both ends to prevent entanglement, attached to a trolley system four feet to seven feet above ground level and no less than 30 feet long. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any owner of a dog to chain, tie, fasten or otherwise tether the dog to dog houses, trees, fences, vehicles or other stationary objects as a means of confinement, except while the dog is being temporarily confined in the immediate visual outdoor presence of its owner. 
(Former § 9-002-61) 
Secs. 9-112-9-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NOISE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 9-126. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to prevent certain loud or excessive noises, which are plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet and detrimental or annoying to the public. This section shall not prohibit supervised shoots under the Georgia DNR supervision on DNR property. 
(Former § 9-007(1.)) 
Sec. 9-127. - Sound amplifying devices regulated. 
    Except as contemplated under chapter 12, article II, it shall be unlawful for any person within the city who has not first obtained a permit from the city manager to speak through any horn, megaphone, sound box or amplifier or play any phonograph, radio or other mechanical or electrical device where the sound is amplified, where the sound is plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and is detrimental or annoying to the public. 
    Exceptions. The paragraph above shall not restrict the playing of radios or musical instruments for the amusement, instruction or education of himself, members of his family or guests, within the limitations set forth in section 9-130 below, and as long as the sound is not plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet and detrimental or annoying to the public. Nor shall said paragraph restrict noises made by participants in a parade for which a permit has been obtained pursuant to chapter 12, article II of this Code. 
(Former § 9-007(2.)) 
Sec. 9-128. - Motor vehicles. 
    No person shall slow a road tractor, dump truck, fuel truck, garbage truck, or other truck over 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating by downshifting. The brakes shall be used. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle within the limits of the city of without a proper muffler, in good working order and in constant operation, to prevent excessive or unusual noise. No person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device for noise making. This shall not, however, apply to farm tractors. 
(Former § 9-007(3.)) 
Sec. 9-129. - Noise from automotive shops regulated. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or permit to be performed maintenance or repairs on automobiles, motorcycles or other motor vehicles or to operate or permit to be operated a machine shop of any kind within the city, if such activity results in excessive noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public and plainly audible from a distance of 100 feet, between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Former § 9-007(4.)) 
Sec. 9-130. - Nuisance may be abated. 
    In any case where the owner or tenant of land in the city limits, or both, fails to comply with this section, then such failure to comply is hereby deemed a nuisance and the city judge may issue an order directing the nuisance to be abated. 
(1)  Notice of violation. Whenever it comes to the attention of the city manager that any violation of this section exists, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the land where the violation exists, and, if different, upon the owner of the land, notifying them of the existence of the violation and requesting its abatement 14 days after receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Time for abatement by owner or occupant. The owner or occupant as aforesaid shall have 14 days after receipt of the notice in subsection (1) above to come into compliance with this section. If compliance has not been completed within said 14 days, the city manager shall initiate an action for abatement in the city court and shall also seek the fines provided for below. 
(Former § 9-007(5.)) 
Sec. 9-131. - Covered area and establishments. 
    This section shall only apply within residential areas. 
(Former § 9-007(6.)) 
Sec. 9-132. - Violations and fines. 
    Any person violating this section shall be subject to a civil fine of not more than $200.00 per offense. Each time such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Former § 9-007(7.)) 
Chapter 10 - ALCOHOL AND ENTERTAINMENT REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Public alcohol consumption, § 9-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS FOR THE SALE, TAX AND CONTROL OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 10-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale, tax and control of malt beverages and wine in the city. 
(Former § 10-001(1.)) 
Sec. 10-27. - Definitions. 
    Alcohol means the product of distillation of any liquid, whether rectified or diluted, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include synthetic ethyl alcohol. 
    Church means a building used primarily for public religious worship on a regular basis. 
    License means the authorization by the council for a person to engage in retail sales of malt beverages and wine by the package, not for consumption on the premises of the licensee. 
    Licensee means any person, firm or corporation engaged in selling malt beverages and/or wine in unbroken packages at retail, not for consumption on the premises of the licensee. 
    Malt beverage means any beer, ale or like beverage. 
    Minor means the age established by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 or by other state laws regulating the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    Permit means the authorization by the council for a wholesaler or wholesale distributor to engage in the wholesale sales of malt beverages and/or wine to retail licensees. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, corporation or association. 
    Retailer or retail distributor means any person or entity selling, at retail, malt beverages and/or wine. 
    School means a building, publicly or privately owned, used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils. 
    Wholesalers or wholesale distributor means any person, firm or corporation engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of malt beverages and/or wine. 
    Wine means the fermented juice of any fruit or plant having an alcoholic strength of no more than 21 percent alcohol by volume. 
(Former § 10-001(2.)) 
Sec. 10-28. - Eligibility requirements for malt beverage and wine license. 
(a)  Minimum age and residency of applicants. No malt beverage and wine license shall be granted to any person unless such person is at least 25 years of age and has been a resident of the State of Georgia, for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. In the event a corporation should be an applicant and said corporation has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state in Georgia for said one-year period, then the incorporator of said corporation and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock of said corporation shall all have been residents of Georgia for at least one year prior to filing an application for such license. 
(b)  City employees not eligible for licenses; exception. No employee of the city, nor its mayor or members of its council, shall be eligible to receive a retail malt beverage and wine license; provided, however, that any non-profit corporation whose earnings are purely civic and for community purposes may be organized or owned by or operated by the mayor, members of council, and by employees of the city as the case may be. 
(c)  Required distances from schools, etc. No retail malt beverage and wine license shall be granted to any person unless the entire business premises of the proposed location is situated beyond 100 yards from the property line of any school grounds or college campus, the same to be measured by way of the nearest traveled road, street or highway, as provided by law. The council may require each application for a retail malt beverage and wine license to include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest school, and a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this section. 
(d)  Licenses required for each location. A separate retail malt beverage and wine license is required for each place of business. 
(e)  Building to be completed prior to issuance of license. No retail malt beverage and wine license shall be issued to any person unless the building in which the business will located is completed and detailed plans of said building and outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with all requirements of this Code governing building construction, permitting and code enforcement, and the regulations of the state revenue commissioner and the laws of the state. The proposed building shall also be subject to final inspection and approval, when completed, by the building inspector, in accordance with this Code. Each applicant for a retail malt beverage and wine license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease, if the applicant is leasing the building. 
(f)  Licenses not to be issued to felons; others. No applicant for a license who has a conviction or has pled nolo contendere to a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude shall be granted a license. 
(g)  Minimum percentage of non-beer and non-wine product sales required. No license shall be issued under this section to any public or private business or person unless such business or person derives at least 75 percent of its total annual gross sales income from the sale of products other than beer or wine. 
(h)  Minimum amount of non-beer and non-wine product sales required. No license shall be issued under this section to any public or private business or person unless such business or person has total annual gross sales income from the sale of products other than beer or wine in an amount exceeding $100,000.00 per calendar year. 
(i)  Council to consider other factors if necessary. The council, in its discretion, may consider any and all relevant circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or proposed location of the business. If in its sole judgment, circumstances are such that the granting, suspension or revocation of the license would or would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for the decision of the council. 
(Former § 10-001(3.)) 
Sec. 10-29. - License application and submission requirements. 
(a)  Expiration of licenses; re-application. A retail malt beverage and wine license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next or subsequent calendar year must make a new application for such year on or before December 15 of the preceding year. 
(b)  State requirements to be met. In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by council, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
(c)  Performance bond to be posted. Before any malt beverage and wine license is granted, the applicant must post with the council, along with his application, a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond is to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this section. Upon violation of any section herein, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violations as determined by the council. Said bond is to be approved by the council and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $2,500.00 for a wholesale license and $500.00 for a retail license. 
(d)  Applications for licenses to be presented in person. All applications for a retail malt beverage and wine license shall be presented in person. 
(Former § 10-001(4.)) 
Sec. 10-30. - License fees and taxes on sales of malt beverage and wine. 
(a)  License fees to be paid before processing application. The annual fee for a retail malt beverage and wine license shall be $500.00 and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license, said fee to accompany the application and be either in the form of cash or a bank certified check. All licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year granted. No license fee shall be prorated. 
(b)  Excise taxes on malt beverage and wine sales levied. In addition to the annual malt beverage and wine liquor license fee required, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed as follows: 
(1)  Wine sales. Wine shall be taxed at $0.22 a liter and a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(2)  Beer sales. 
a.  Malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, shall be at a rate of $6.00 on each container sold, containing not more than 15.5 gallons, and 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
    Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the council a summary of all purchase invoices for malt beverages and wine sold to each retailer in the city on or before the tenth day of each month following such purchase. Said invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Former § 10-001(5.)) 
Sec. 10-31. - Distribution permits for wholesalers. 
(a)  Permit requirements. Any wholesale distributor in malt beverages and wine licensed by the state or the agent of such licensed wholesale distributor, may be granted a permit to distribute such malt beverages and wine in the city, upon application of such permit to the clerk, and upon presentation of evidence satisfactory to the council that the applicant understands and will fully comply with all terms and conditions of this section governing the sale of malt beverages and wine, including but not limited to those under which retail licenses are issued. 
(b)  Permit fees and performance bonds required. Any wholesale distributor as described in subsection (a) above shall pay an annual fee of $500.00 prior to receiving a permit to distribute malt beverages and wine in the city. All wholesale distributors doing business in the city shall also be required to provide with the aforesaid application, a performance bond in the amount of $2,500.00 in cash or with security satisfactory and payable to the city. 
(Former § 10-001(6.)) 
Sec. 10-32. - Operating requirements of retail licensees. 
(a)  Telephone. A retail licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(b)  Beverages to be covered or locked away on Sundays. On all Sundays, except 12:30 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., all licensees shall fully cover with opaque material or put under lock and key all malt beverages and/or wine on the premises of the licensee. 
(c)  Malt beverages to be transported to licensee in certain packages. All malt beverages transported or delivered to a retail licensee in the city shall be packaged in the following manner, to-wit: seven-, eight- or 12-ounce sealed containers packaged four, six or 12 per package; 16-ounce sealed containers packaged six per package; 24-ounce sealed containers packaged only by the full case; 32-ounce sealed containers packaged only by the case; and draft beer in sealed containers which contain one-half barrel, one-fourth barrel or any other size as draft beer is normally sold, transported and delivered in sealed containers within the state. 
(d)  Wine to be transported to licensee in certain packages. All wine transported or delivered to a retail licensee in the city shall be packaged in containers specified in the Standards of Fill for Wine prescribed by the Department of the Treasury of the United States for wines shipped in interstate commerce. The federal regulations relating to Standards of Fill for Wine adopted and incorporated by reference in this subsection. Wine manufactured and produced in Georgia shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection to the extent that they are exempted from the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-6-28. 
(Former § 10-001(7.)) 
Sec. 10-33. - Sales and delivery of malt beverages and wine. 
(a)  General. No retailer shall sell or deliver malt beverages and/or wine except in said retailer's place of business. 
(b)  Times allowed for malt beverage and wine sales. No retailer shall furnish, sell or offer for sale malt beverages or wine: 
(1)  At any times except between 12:01 a.m. Mondays through and including 11:59 p.m. on Saturdays and on Sundays, from 12:30 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.; and 
(2)  At any time in violation of state law, state rules or regulations, local ordinances or regulations of the council, or on Christmas or Thanksgiving. 
(c)  Sales to certain persons prohibited. No person shall knowingly, directly or through another person offer for sale, sell, barter, exchange, give, provide or furnish malt beverages or wine to any person confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional facility, prison camp, penitentiary or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is under the age of 21, or is noticeably intoxicated, or who is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said license holder or employee. In addition, no person shall knowingly, directly or through another person offer for sale, sell, barter, exchange, give, provide or furnish malt beverages or wine to any individual unless said individual produces one or more pieces of picture identification which reasonably shows the individual customer to be the same person as in the subject picture and that the prospective buyer does not suffer from any of the aforesaid disqualifying conditions and/or statuses listed hereinbefore including, but not limited to, being under the age of 21. 
(d)  Licensee required to post sign. The holder of a license to sell malt beverages and wine shall post in a conspicuous place in his establishment a sign in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: SALE OF MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS STRICTLY PROHIBITED. 
(e)  Licensed retailers cannot operate as wholesalers. No licensed retailer shall keep any malt beverages or wine stored in any bonded or other type warehouse in the city, nor shall he enter into any type of arrangement whereby malt beverages or wine ordered by him by any licensed wholesaler. A retailer shall keep no inventory or stock of malt beverages and wine at any place except his licensed place of business, and within his licensed place of business. 
(f)  Licensee to retain regulations on premises; instruct employees about regulations. All holders of a license for the sale of malt beverages and wine shall keep a copy of this section pertaining to malt beverage and wine regulations, in his premises and shall instruct any person working there with respect to terms hereof and each licensee or his agents selling malt beverages and wine shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of his employees in any violations of this section or the laws of the state or the rules and regulations of the Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(g)  Licensee to keep premises open to inspection. The business premises of the holder of a retail malt beverages and wine license shall be open to inspection at any times by officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(h)  License shall be revoked for false information. The making of any statement on an application for license to sell malt beverages and wine later found to be false shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(i)  Age requirements of licensee's employees. No person under 18 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed under this section. However, nothing contained herein shall prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, breweries and drug stores from selling or handling malt beverages and wine which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(j)  Games of chance prohibited on premises of licensee. 
(1)  Except for officially licensed sales and redemptions of Georgia Lottery tickets as contemplated in O.C.G.A. tit. 50, ch. 27; and except for coin operated slot machines, pin-ball machines, video games, arcade games and similar devices defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70(b)(2)(A) which (i) depend on the skill of the player, (ii) do not pay out cash, (iii) which are expressly defined as bona fide coin operated amusement machines by state law (Collectively "COAM's") and (iv) which are expressly regulated as COAM's by O.C.G.A. § 50-27-70 through 50-27-104 and (v) for which each COAM a current Georgia "location" license and permit has been (a) procured and paid for, and (b) is in good standing, there shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch boards, vending machines, slot machines, pinball machines, lotteries or tickets of chances therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensed retailer's place of business or any room adjoining the same, owned, leased, or controlled by licensee. 
(2)  The General Assembly has found that the ability to operate a COAM business in this state constitutes a privilege and not a right. Nothing in this section shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize, or legalize any machine, device, table, or amusement machine the keeping, exhibition, operation, display, or maintenance of which is in violation of the laws or Constitution of this state. If a term is not defined below, the state law definition shall apply. 
    The city manager or designee ("city manager") shall provide for the proper administration of this section and act on behalf of the city for such purpose. The city manager may initiate investigations, hearings, and take other necessary measures to ensure compliance herewith or to determine whether violations exist. If the city manager finds evidence of any criminal violations, he/she shall notify the appropriate prosecuting attorney in the county in which such violation occurred. The city manager is authorized to provide for enforcement of this section and may delegate to an authorized representative any authority given to the city manager, including conduct of investigations, imposing of fees and fines, and holding of hearings. 
    As expressly authorized by state law, O.C.G.A. § 50-27-86, additional Requirements for COAM's, whether located on the premises of an Alcohol Licensee or not, follow: 
(1)  No more than six Class B machines that reward the player exclusively with noncash merchandise, prizes, toys, gift certificates, or novelties may be at the same business location. The city may, after no less than 60 days' notice to all master licensees and location owners and location operators, and consistent with O.C.G.A. § 50-27-103, vote to remove Class B machines from the city. 
Class B machine means a COAM that allows a successful player to accrue points on the machine and carry over points won on one play to a subsequent play or plays per O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(2) and: (a) Rewards a successful player in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d)(1,2); and (b) Does not reward a successful player with any item prohibited as a reward in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(i) or any reward redeemable as an item prohibited as a reward in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(i). Further class B requirements follow: 
No COAM, its parts, or software or hardware shall be placed or leased in any location owner's/operator's establishment except by a master licensee and only if the owner or agent of the location owner/operator has entered into a written agreement with a master licensee for placement of the COAM. No person with or applying for a location owner's/operator's license shall have an interest in any person or immediate family member of a person with a master license, or doing business as a distributor, or manufacturer in this state. A location owner/operator may sell a COAM to anyone except another location owner or location operator. Violation may result in a state fine up to $50,000.00 and loss of license for one to five years per incident and subject the location owner/operator to loss of any other licenses held. 
Any written agreement entered after April 10, 2013, shall be exclusively between one COAM master licensee and one location owner/operator per location. No person shall receive any proceeds or revenue from operation of a COAM except the location owner/operator. No commission or fee shall be awarded for facilitation of a contract/agreement between a master licensee and a location owner/operator; provided, however, an employee of a master licensee may receive compensation, including a commission, for such agreements/contracts. A master licensee shall not pay commission or provide anything of value to an employee, independent contractor, or immediate family member of a location owner/operator; 
(2)  The owner/operator of a business location which offers to the public any COAM that rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) must inform all employees of the prohibitions and penalties in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e)-(g); 
(3)  The owner/possessor of any COAM that rewards the player exclusively as described in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(d) shall inform each location owner/operator where such COAM is located of the prohibitions and penalties in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e)-(g); 
(4)  A license to manufacture, distribute, or sell alcoholic beverages or any other license granted by the city shall be suspended or revoked as a penalty for conviction of the location owner/operator of a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35(e)-(g). Due process shall be provided for refusal, suspension, or revocation of a license for manufacture, distribution, or sale of alcoholic beverages set out in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b), including 30 days' written notice of the date and location of hearing and names of witnesses, notice of right to legal counsel, right to call and cross examine witnesses, and right to a public evidentiary hearing. The written notice may be served personally or by U.S. certified mail or statutory overnight delivery addressed to licensee at last known address. If notice cannot be effected by these methods after due diligence, the city may use any reasonable method of notice calculated to inform a person of average intelligence and prudence of the action, including publishing in a newspaper of general circulation in the area in which licensee conducts its business activities. The notice shall state with particularity the basis upon which the city is taking proposed actions; 
(5)  Penalties for violation include fines up to $1,000.00 per violation and/or suspension or revocation of a license as provided in paragraph (4) of this subsection, or both. Written notice shall be as follows: Delivery may be by: 
a.  Personal service on an individual licensee; 
b.  Personal service on any officer, director, partner, trustee, or receiver, as the case may be; 
c.  Personal service on the person in charge of the business premises, temporarily or otherwise, of licensee; 
d.  U.S. certified mail or statutory overnight delivery addressed to the business premises of licensee; or 
e.  Posting notice on the outside door of the business premises of licensee. 
Appeal by an affected person shall be to the superior court by petition for certiorari. The review shall be confined to the record. The court shall not substitute its judgment for that of the city as to the weight of the evidence on questions of fact committed to the discretion of the city. The court may affirm the decision in whole or in part; or reverse or remand the case for further proceedings if substantial rights of the appellant have been prejudiced because the city's findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions are: (a) in violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; (b) in excess of the statutory authority of the city; (c) made upon unlawful procedures; (d) affected by other error of law; (e) not reasonably supported by substantial evidence in view of the reliable and probative evidence in the record as a whole; or (f) arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwarranted exercise of discretion. Appeal from any final judgment of the superior court may be taken in the manner provided for in civil actions generally; 
(6)  No location owner/operator shall derive more than 50 percent of monthly gross retail receipts for the business location in which Class B machine(s) is/are situated from Class B machines; however, revenues due to a master licensee or the corporation or noncash redemption earned by the player shall not be deemed revenue from Class B machines. Any location owner/operator subject to O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(b)(1) must provide to the city a copy of each verified monthly report prepared per such Code. 
Said monthly verified report shall set out separately by each location in Georgia: gross receipts from Class B machines; gross retail receipts for the business location; and net receipts of Class B machines. No location owner/operator shall offer more than nine Class B machines to the public for play in the same business location; provided, however, this limitation shall not apply to an amusement or recreational establishment. The city may in its discretion perform an annual audit of reports from the location owner/operator. Any penalties authorized by O.C.G.A. § 50-27-84(d) may be imposed for any violation hereof. 
(7)  The location owner/operator which offers COAM's shall post prominently the following: 
GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; PAYMENT OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON THIS AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF THIS MACHINE. 
(8)  As a condition for doing business in the city, the location owner/operator must disclose in writing the name and address of the owner of the COAM's; 
(9)  All COAM's shall be placed and kept in plain view and accessible to any person at the business; 
(10)  Any business that offers COAM's must post its business license or occupation tax certificate. A copy of an owner's master license and the location owner's/operator's location license shall be prominently displayed at all locations where the owner and location owner/operator have COAM's available to evidence the payment of the fees levied under state law; 
(11)  It is a state law violation for a location owner/operator asking, demanding, or accepting anything of value, including but not limited to a loan or financing arrangement, gift, procurement fee, lease payments, revenue sharing, or payment of license fees or permit fees from a manufacturer, distributor, or master licensee, as an incentive, inducement, or any other consideration to locate a COAM in that establishment. A location owner/operator that violates this subsection may have all of the location owner/operator 's state business licenses revoked for one to five years per incident and be fined up to $50,000.00 per incident and required to repay any incentive fees or other payments received. 
(k)  Licenses to be kept on premises at all times. Licenses under this section of shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which same was issued. 
(l)  Local, state and federal regulations all apply to licensee. No person shall engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine in the city, without first complying with all the rules and regulations set out in this section. Any person violating the rules and regulations set out in this section shall be subject to revocation of his license and punishment as prescribed by the mayor and council. Each licensee doing business in the city under this section shall comply with all state laws, federal laws, and rules and regulations of the state revenue commissioner relating to the sale or distribution of malt beverages and wine in Georgia, and any violation of same shall subject the licensee to immediate suspension or revocation of his retail malt beverage and wine license and also shall subject said licensee to criminal prosecution as provided by law. 
(m)  Process for making decisions on permits. The granting or refusal and the suspension or revocation of retail and wholesale and pouring permits and licenses under this section shall be in accordance with the following guidelines of due process: 
(1)  The provisions of this section as same may be amended shall constitute ascertainable standards upon which all decisions pertaining to these permits or licenses shall be based; 
(2)  All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking such permits or licenses shall be in writing with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant; and 
(3)  Upon timely application, any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council regarding a permit or license shall be afforded a hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(n)  Licenses not transferable. No retail malt beverage and wine license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. In the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the new owner or occupant to apply for a license which may or may not be granted. 
(o)  Exceptions on prohibition of sales. The prohibition in this section to individuals under the age of 21 shall not apply with respect to malt beverages, wine and/or any other alcoholic beverage for consumption in the following instances: 
(1)  For medical purposes per a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in Georgia; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the individual's home with parental consent. 
(Former § 10-001(8.)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any violation of this section shall subject the offender to a fine of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation in addition to such violation being a cause for revocation or suspension of the license of the offending licensee by the mayor and council and criminal prosecution as well as forfeiture of all stock of malt beverages and wine. A license holder who sells or does not prevent the sale at his establishment of beer or wine to an ineligible individual under this section (including but not limited to a person under the age of 21 and/or sells during hours and/or days on which sales of beer or wine are prohibited under this section who is found guilty after the aforesaid hearing under this section hereof shall generally receive a minimum of a 30-day suspension of his license and a fine of $500.00. A second offense of a similar nature which results in a finding of a guilty within five years of the first offense conviction shall generally result in a minimum of the revocation of the license for the balance of the year and a fine of $1,000.00. All of the punishments listed herein are those an individual who is found guilty of said offenses can expect to receive as a minimum although the mayor and council will make the final decision in each case and has the right to impose sentences and fines different from those previously specified. In addition to and without limiting the foregoing, the city shall be authorized to make appropriate application to subject the offender to criminal penalties provided for under any law of Georgia which may have been violated by the offender's conduct in violation of this section. 
(Former § 10-001(9.)) 
Secs. 10-35-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BEER AND WINE POURING LICENSES 

Sec. 10-51. - Purpose; definitions. 
(a)  Purpose. In accordance with the laws of the state, it is necessary and expedient for the city to establish and promulgate certain standards and regulations in regard to the sale for consumption on the premises of malt beverages and wine. This section does not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the drink or otherwise for consumption on the premises. Such sale of distilled spirits by the drink or otherwise for consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited under this section. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this article, defined words shall have the meanings specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. 
    Alcoholic beverage(s) means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
    Church means building primarily used for public religious worship on a regular basis. 
    City clerk means the clerk of the City of Social Circle, Georgia; 
    City manager means the manager of the City of Social Circle, Georgia; 
    Distilled spirits means alcoholic beverage with more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    License ("pouring license") means the authorization by the mayor and council to engage in the retail sale of malt beverages and wine to be consumed only on the licensed premises. 
    Licensee means any person who has been issued a retail consumption dealer license by the mayor and council to engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption only on the licensed premises and not for resale. 
    Lounge means a separate room where malt beverages and wine are served by the drink which is either connected with or part of a restaurant and operated in conjunction with and under the same management as the restaurant operations. 
    Malt beverage(s) means any beer, ale or like beverage made from malt by fermentation. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, non-profit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other entity, group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
    Place of business means the premises described in the licenses issued pursuant to this section. 
    Premises means the location where licensee is authorized to sell malt beverages and wine. 
    Restaurant means any public or private place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations. Such place shall be air-conditioned and contain adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and seating capacity for at least 40 people, and have employed therein a sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its patrons. At least two meals per day shall be served at least five days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating. The serving of such meals and food shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises as only incidental thereto. A restaurant shall derive at least 75 percent of its total annual gross food and beverages sales from the sale of prepared meals or prepared food and shall have food sales in excess of $100,000.00 per year. 
    School means a building, publicly or privately owned, used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils. 
    Wholesaler means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers or retail dealers. 
    Wine means the fermented juice of any fruit or plant. 
(Former § 10-002(1.)) 
Sec. 10-52. - Unlawful sales without license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises without first complying with the rules and regulations set forth herein. It shall be unlawful in any case for any person to sell or offer to sell any distilled spirits for consumption on the premises. The business of selling malt beverages and wine for consumption on the licensed premises is declared to be a privilege, not a right, and such privilege shall not be exercised in the city except as licensed hereunder. 
(Former § 10-002(2.)) 
Sec. 10-53. - Applications. 
    No malt beverages or wine shall be sold by the drink for consumption on the premises except under a pouring license granted by the mayor and council. Application for such license may be made only on behalf of restaurants located within the city and shall be made on forms provided by the mayor and council, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  All applications for a pouring license shall be presented in person. 
(2)  Each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints which shall be forwarded to the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, who shall search the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instance of criminal activity. The Georgia Bureau of Investigation shall also submit the fingerprints to the FBI under rules established by the U.S. Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the mayor and council. 
(3)  In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by the mayor and council, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
(4)  Before any pouring license is granted, the applicant must post with the mayor and council, along with his application, a cash bond or a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond is to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained herein. Upon the violation hereof, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violation as determined by the mayor and council. Said bond is to be approved by the mayor and council and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $1,000.00 for a pouring license. 
(5)  A pouring license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next calendar year must make a new application for such year. 
(Former § 10-002(3.)) 
Sec. 10-54. - Legal age. 
    No pouring license shall be granted to any person unless such person is at least 25 years of age and has been a resident of the state for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. In the event a corporation should be an applicant and said corporation has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state in Georgia for said one-year period, then the incorporator of said corporation and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock of said corporation shall all have been residents of Georgia for one year prior to filing an application for such license. 
(Former § 10-002(4.)) 
Sec. 10-55. - Licensee qualifications. 
    The following standards apply to all decisions pertaining to issuance or denial of licenses hereunder: 
(1)  All applicants for a pouring license must show financial responsibility. The mayor and council may require all applicants to provide financial statements and other evidence of financial responsibility in conjunction with the application. The form of the application shall be set by the mayor and council, and must be fully completed by the applicant and filed by applicant with the clerk. 
(2)  No officials or employees of the city shall be eligible to receive a pouring license. 
(3)  All applicants for a pouring license must be the owner or lessee of the premises to be used for the sale and consumption of malt beverages and wine, and must provide evidence of ownership of the premises in the form of a fully executed deed in recordable form, or, if applicant is leasing the premises, the applicant must provide a copy of the lease. 
(4)  All applicants must be persons operating as the proposed licensed place of business a "restaurant" as defined in this section. No lounges shall be permitted. 
(5)  All applicants for a pouring license must be of good character, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of good character. Furthermore, corporate or firm applicants shall also be of good business reputation. 
(6)  A license may be denied to any applicant where it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or where it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(7)  The mayor and council, in its discretion, may consider extenuating circumstances which may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in the judgment of the mayor and council circumstances indicate the grant of a license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(8)  A corporate license applicant shall appoint and designate to the mayor and council an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of Georgia. If no such designation is made, the mayor and council may serve or notify the applicant or license holder at any address of the applicant or license holder known to the mayor and council. 
(9)  The mayor and council shall give notice in writing to the applicant of any decision to grant or deny an application. The notice shall give the reason(s) for the decision. 
(10)  Whenever the mayor and council shall deny an application for a pouring license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of the denial to request a hearing before the mayor and council. The applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Former § 10-002(5.)) 
Sec. 10-56. - Transferability. 
(a)  Except as otherwise stated in this section, no pouring license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender said license to the mayor and council. Under no circumstances will the license fee be refunded to the holder. 
(b)  No pouring license shall be transferred from one person to another during the year in which the license was obtained except in the case of the death of a person holding a license. In such a case, the licensee's executor or administrator may continue to operate under the license for up to six months from the date of his qualification. 
(c)  Upon the sale of any licensed business hereunder, the new owner may operate the business under the old license under this section, but in no event for longer than 60 days or until his application is granted or denied under this section, whichever shall first occur. 
(d)  All holders of licenses issued under this section shall within six months after the issuance of such license open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such period shall serve as a forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(Former § 10-002(6.)) 
Sec. 10-57. - Separate license. 
    A separate pouring license shall be required for each pouring location of each place of business. Each license will enable the licensee to sell the malt beverages and wine for consumption only in the areas of the premises allowed by state laws and regulations. 
(Former § 10-002(7.)) 
Sec. 10-58. - Building. 
    No pouring license shall be issued to any person unless complete and detailed diagrams of the building in which the business will be located and the outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with city regulations and ordinances, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the state. Upon completion, the proposed building shall be subject to final inspection and approval by the building inspector of the city. Each applicant for a license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. Licensees shall provide on the premises for which the license is issued adequate sanitary toilet facilities as required by the city health and building codes, and the building shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passage ways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(Former § 10-002(8.)) 
Sec. 10-59. - Distance requirements. 
    No pouring license shall be granted to any person unless the front door of the building at the proposed location is situated not less than 100 yards from the property line of any church, school ground, college campus, or building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. This distance is to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application for a license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest church, school ground or college campus and alcohol rehabilitation center, or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this paragraph of this section. 
(Former § 10-002(9.)) 
Sec. 10-60. - Days of operation. 
    No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any malt beverages or wine under this section at any of the following times: 
(1)  At any time on Sundays, except from 12:30 p.m. to 11:00 p.m.; 
(2)  At any time on Christmas Day or Thanksgiving; 
(3)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the Mayor and Council; or 
(4)  At any time in violation of State law or regulation. 
    However, the sale of malt beverages and wine under this section shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election, except that the sale of malt beverages and wine within 250 feet of a polling place is unlawful during such hours that the polls are open. 
(Former § 10-002(10.)) 
Sec. 10-61. - Reports. 
(a)  Each licensee under this section shall as a condition of maintaining such license, file with the clerk within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter: 
(1)  A sworn statement of the licensee's sales during the preceding calendar quarter on forms approved by the city. The forms for such quarterly verified statements shall reflect the licensee's gross dollar sales amount for total sales for the applicable calendar quarter, the gross dollar sales amount for malt beverages and wine for the applicable calendar quarter, and gross dollar sales amount for food items for the applicable calendar quarter. 
(2)  Certified copies of the licensee's State of Georgia Department of Revenue Sales and Use Tax Monthly Reports as filed with the Georgia Department of Revenue for each month during the respective calendar quarter. 
(b)  Any sale of a food or beverage containing malt beverage and wine shall be deemed to be a sale solely of a malt beverage or wine; such shall not be included as "food sale" in the quarterly reports. The fact that the sale of food during any calendar quarter exceeds by three times the sales of malt beverages and wine shall not be conclusive that the licensee is meeting the requirements of operating a restaurant as defined in this section. However, the failure of the food sales to so exceed by three times the sale of malt beverages and wine shall be prima facie evidence that the establishment is not meeting the definition of a restaurant. 
(c)  The quarterly statements shall be confidential in nature and shall not be open for public inspection except as otherwise required by law. Said forms shall be used solely by the city manager for determination of whether or not the licensee remains qualified to hold its pouring license. Failure to timely file such statements shall be a violation of a city ordinance punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 and cause for revocation of the license granted under this section. 
(Former § 10-002(11.)) 
Sec. 10-62. - Posting of warnings. 
    The licensee shall post in a conspicuous place in the business a sign in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE STRICTLY PROHIBITED." The licensee shall also post in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "WARNING: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." 
(Former § 10-002(12.)) 
Sec. 10-63. - Prohibited sales. 
    No licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any malt beverage or wine to any person who is confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional facility, prison camp, penitentiary or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said person. 
(Former § 10-002(13.)) 
Sec. 10-64. - Certain employment prohibited. 
    No licensee shall employ, require or permit a person under 18 years of age to sell or take orders for malt beverage or wine. 
(Former § 10-002(14.)) 
Sec. 10-65. - Unbroken packages. 
    No licensee may sell malt beverages or wine in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises. 
(Former § 10-002(15.)) 
Sec. 10-66. - Annual fees. 
(a)  The annual fee for a malt beverage and wine pouring license shall be $800.00 per license and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license. Said fee shall accompany the application and shall be either a cash payment or a bank certified check. 
(b)  No annual fee shall be prorated. 
(Former § 10-002(16.)) 
Sec. 10-67. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Malt beverages. 
(1)  Where malt beverages are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container as tap or draft beer, there is levied a state excise tax on malt beverages of $10.00 on each container sold containing not more than 31 gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 31 gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers other than barrels or other bulk containers, a state excise tax of $0.045 cents per 12 ounces shall be collected, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts shall be collected. 
(3)  There is levied a state excise tax on all such beverages in excess of 576 ounces or two standard cases of 12 ounce size or the equivalent thereof or one 7.75 gallon keg or barrel of such beverages, at the rate of taxation of $0.045 cents per 12 ounces. 
(4)  The city shall impose an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
a.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 151/2 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 151/2 gallons; 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any malt beverages on which such taxes have not been paid. 
(b)  Wine. 
(1)  There is levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all table wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.11 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(2)  There is imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all table wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.29 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(3)  There is levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all dessert wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.27 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(4)  There is imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all dessert wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.40 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(5)  There is hereby levied by the mayor and council an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate for any fractional parts of a liter. 
(6)  The taxes imposed on wine shall not be levied on any wine sold to established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only, or for any wine exempt from taxation under the Constitution of the United States, or for any wine sold to persons for resale or consumption outside this state. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any wine on which such taxes have not been paid. 
(Former § 10-002(17.)) 
Sec. 10-68. - Copy of article; responsibility of compliance. 
    Any holder of a pouring license shall keep a copy of this article on the premises and shall instruct any person working there in compliance with the terms hereof, and each licensee and the licensee's agents and employees selling malt beverages and wine for consumption on the premises shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of the licensee's agents and/or employees in any violation of this article and/or of the laws of the state and/or the rules and regulations of the Georgia Revenue Commissioner. 
(Former § 10-002(18.)) 
Sec. 10-69. - Inspection. 
    The business premises of the holder of a pouring license shall be available for inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections. 
(Former § 10-002(19.)) 
Sec. 10-70. - Production of records. 
    In conjunction with any license application or any license issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this section, or in conjunction with payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the mayor and council shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for the purposes of auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this section, proving or disproving violation of any part of this section by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(Former § 10-002(20.)) 
Sec. 10-71. - False statement. 
    The making of any false statement on an application for a pouring license shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(Former § 10-002(21.)) 
Sec. 10-72. - Gambling. 
    There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch-boards, slot machines, lotteries or tickets of chance therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensee's place of business or in any room adjoining the same owned, leased or controlled by licensee. 
(Former § 10-002(22.)) 
Sec. 10-73. - Soliciting. 
    No retail licensee shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guests of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or non-alcoholic. 
(Former § 10-002(23.)) 
Sec. 10-74. - Display of license. 
    A license under this section shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which it was issued. 
(Former § 10-002(24.)) 
Sec. 10-75. - Delivery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to deliver any malt beverage and wine except inside of the premises or area licensed for the sale thereof. It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to sell wine beverages and wine for consumption off the premises. 
(Former § 10-002(25.)) 
Sec. 10-76. - Criminal record. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent the premises or loiter on the premises. 
(Former § 10-002(26.)) 
Sec. 10-77. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the licensee's premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. 
(Former § 10-002(27.)) 
Sec. 10-78. - Police reports. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report to the police at the earliest possible time known incidents of a criminal nature that happen on the licensee's premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to willfully withhold from the police any information pertaining to any crime that may have happened on the premises. 
(Former § 10-002(28.)) 
Sec. 10-79. - Police records. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ on the premises any person who in the preceding ten years has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state or who has been convicted of a crime outside the state which would be a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state. It shall also be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any criminal act to be committed on the premises. No applicant or licensee shall have been convicted of or plead nolo contendere to, within ten years of the date of application, a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any crime relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the applicant or licensee is a partnership, all members of such partnership must meet this requirement. If the applicant or licensee is a corporation, all stockholders and officers of the corporation must meet this requirement. 
(Former § 10-002(29.)) 
Sec. 10-80. - Minors. 
(a)  The term "minor" as used in this section shall mean any person under the age of 21 years, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 or by other state laws. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase malt beverages and/or wine or for any other person to purchase malt beverages and/or wine for a minor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain malt beverages and/or wine to which the minor if not legally entitled. 
(d)  No person engaged in the business regulated hereunder shall make or permit to be made any sale of malt beverages and/or wine to minors. 
(e)  No person shall allow anyone under 21 years of age to loiter about the premises of the licensee or possess any alcoholic beverage. This provision shall not apply to employees over the age of 18 eligible for employment under the laws of Georgia. 
(f)  Any violations of the provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor and the offender, upon being found guilty, shall be punishable as for a misdemeanor, and by possible loss of license. 
(g)  The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase or possession of malt beverages and/or wine for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in the state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  In the minor's home with parental consent. 
(Former § 10-002(30.)) 
Sec. 10-81. - Containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents or employees to add to the contents of a container or to refill empty containers or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any malt beverage and wine. 
(Former § 10-002(31.)) 
Sec. 10-82. - Conditions of premises. 
(a)  All premises used for the sale and consumption of malt beverages and wine and/or for the storage of malt beverages and wine shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the county health department. 
(b)  All premises shall be subject to inspection by the Walton County Health Department, the city fire department, the building inspector, and any authorized law enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all city, county and state rules, regulations, laws, and codes. 
(Former § 10-002(32.)) 
Sec. 10-83. - Telephone. 
    A licensee shall maintain on the premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(Former § 10-002(33.)) 
Sec. 10-84. - Incorporation of state law. 
    The state laws and/or regulations relating to the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages within the state are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this section as if fully set out herein. 
(Former § 10-002(34.)) 
Sec. 10-85. - Employees. 
(a)  Every licensee under this section shall maintain at all times on the premises for which the license has been issued a list of all persons currently employed by licensee at such premises, which list shall show the current full legal name, alias, date of birth, current address, current home telephone number and social security number of each employee. 
(b)  The employee list shall be available during reasonable hours for inspection by any law enforcement person or city official or his designee. If so required by such person, an employee must submit to a fingerprint identification and criminal history check. Every retail licensee shall cause each of the licensee's employees during the hours of his employment to be identified by a conspicuous label or badge upon which shall appear the employee's first name. 
(c)  No person under 18 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed hereunder. 
(Former § 10-002(35.)) 
Sec. 10-86. - Promotions. 
    No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of malt beverages and wine: 
(1)  The giving away of any ticket, token or any other item that can be exchanged for any malt beverage or wine upon the purchase of any other malt beverage or wine; 
(2)  The sale of two or more malt beverages or wine for a single price, or the sale of one serving of malt beverage or wine with a ticket, token or any other items redeemable for a subsequent serving of malt beverage or wine. Also prohibited hereunder is the sale of all such beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price. 
(Former § 10-002(36.)) 
Sec. 10-87. - Prohibited acts. 
    No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring onto the premises one or more alcoholic beverages purchased elsewhere, nor shall any such licensee authorize or permit any patron or customer to take out of the premises one or more alcoholic beverages. No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises except a law enforcement officer or other person authorized by federal or state law to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises, nor shall the licensee act as a keeper, bailee or custodian of any kind of deadly weapon or firearm for any customer or patron. 
(Former § 10-002(37.)) 
Sec. 10-88. - Clearing service areas. 
    All licensees shall remove or cause to be removed from the area of the premises utilized by the customers or patrons all malt beverages and wine within one-half hour after the times for last call specified in this section. 
(Former § 10-002(38.)) 
Sec. 10-89. - Lock and key. 
    All malt beverages and wine shall be under lock or fully covered by opaque material during those hours when their sale is not permitted. All malt beverages and wine owned or possessed contrary to this section are hereby declared to be contraband and shall be seized by the proper authorities. 
(Former § 10-002(39.)) 
Sec. 10-90. - Hours. 
    No malt beverage and/or wine may be served before 8:00 a.m. on any day or after last call, which will be at 11:00 p.m. weekdays and Sunday and 12:00 midnight on Saturdays. 
(Former § 10-002(40.)) 
Sec. 10-91. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
    No person shall engage in the sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption on the licensed premises in the city without first complying with the rules and requirements set out in this section. Any license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any false statement on an application for a license issued hereunder; 
(2)  A violation of the rules and regulations in this section or laws and/or regulations of the U.S. or Georgia or the city; 
(3)  The failure to have the financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(4)  Default in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a state retail dealer's license; or 
(6)  For any other legal and sufficient cause. 
    Any action taken by the mayor and council to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the city and/or the state, and/or the United States. Whenever any action is taken by the mayor and council to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the mayor and council shall provide written notice to the licensee of the action taken. The notice shall set forth the reasons for such action. The licensee shall have ten days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the mayor and council. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Former § 10-002(41.)) 
Secs. 10-92-10-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - POURING LICENSES FOR CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES OF ALCOHOL INCLUDING DISTILLED SPIRITS, MALT BEVERAGES AND WINE 

Sec. 10-111. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions supplement those in articles II and III. In the event of a conflict, the definition below shall govern in this article. 
    Alcoholic beverage(s) and alcohol means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, or fortified wine. 
    Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    License means the authorization by the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises, including the sale of malt beverages and wine, and the sale of distilled spirits. 
    Licensee means any person who has been issued an alcohol pouring license, by the city. 
    Person means any natural person, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, LLC, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, or other entity, group or combination acting as a unit, body politic, or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public. 
(Former § 10-004(1.)) 
Sec. 10-112. - Unlawful sales without license. 
    As used in this article, defined words shall have the meanings specified unless the context in which the word or term is used clearly requires that a different meaning be used. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises without first complying with the regulations in this article. The business of selling or otherwise dealing in or possessing alcoholic beverages is declared to be a privilege, not a right, and such privilege shall not be exercised in the city except as licensed under the terms of this article. 
(Former § 10-004(2.)) 
Sec. 10-113. - Applications. 
    No alcoholic beverages shall be sold for consumption on the premises except under a license by the city. Application for an alcohol (distilled spirits, beer, malt beverages, wine, and fortified wine) pouring license may be made only on behalf of restaurants located in Social Circle, and shall be made on forms provided by the city, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  An alcohol pouring license shall be valid only for the calendar year indicated thereon and no such license may be renewed. A licensee who desires to continue in business during the next calendar year must make a new application for such year on or before December 15 of the preceding year. 
(2)  The owner and/or manager of each applicant shall be photographed, and shall furnish picture identification, a separate form of identification, and a complete set of fingerprints, which shall be forwarded to law enforcement, who shall institute a search of the files of the Georgia Crime Information Center for any instance of criminal activity within the ten-year period immediately preceding the date of such application. Law enforcement shall also submit the fingerprints to the Federal Bureau of Investigation under rules established by the U.S. Department of Justice for processing and identification of records. The federal record, if any, shall be obtained and returned to the city. Law enforcement shall make such other investigations as are appropriate in the judgment of law enforcement. All new owners and/or managers shall also immediately undergo this procedure. As to entity applicants, including without limitation LLC's, corporations, and partnerships, the foregoing requirements, regarding no such convictions during the prior ten years, apply to any owners who own a 20 percent or more interest in the entity. All such owners, and all of applicant's managers, shall furnish picture identification and a complete set of fingerprints for state and federal law enforcement background check. The manager(s) shall also submit a complete set of fingerprints and will be photographed by the city. 
(3)  In addition to the completion and submission of the application form as required by the city, each applicant shall attach thereto a completed form with all attachments and requirements for a state license. 
(4)  Before a license is granted, the applicant must post with the city, along with his application, a performance bond with an insurance company as surety. Said bond is to be conditioned requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations contained in this article. Upon the violation of this article, or any part thereof, the amount of the bond to be forfeited will be determined by the seriousness of the violation as determined by the city. Said bond is to be approved by the city and shall be properly executed. Said bond shall be in the amount of $2,500.00 for an alcohol pouring license. 
(5)  All applications for a license shall be presented in person. 
(6)  At the time an application is made for a license, the city clerk shall give notice to the applicant of the date on which the city shall consider the application. The city clerk shall then give notice of the making of such an application by advertisement, once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the date of consideration by the mayor and council on such application, in the newspaper in which legal advertisements for the county are published. The notice shall state the address of the proposed business, give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of all partners, and if a corporation or LLC, the names of the officers and stockholders or members therein, and the day and time the mayor and council will consider such application. 
(Former § 10-004(3.)) 
Sec. 10-114. - Legal age, residency and ownership. 
    No license shall be granted to any person unless such person is at least 25 years old and has been a resident of Georgia for a minimum of one year prior to filing an application for such license. If a corporation or LLC should be an applicant and said corporation has not been incorporated and/or allowed to do business by the secretary of state in Georgia for said one-year period, then the incorporator or managing member and the owners of at least 80 percent of the stock or interests shall all have been residents of Georgia for at least one year prior to filing an application for such license. 
(Former § 10-004(4.)) 
Sec. 10-115. - Standards of issuance. 
    The following standards shall be applied to all decisions pertaining to the issuance or denial of licenses hereunder: 
(1)  All applicants for a license must show financial responsibility. Selling alcoholic beverages is a privilege, not a right, and financial responsibility requirements are reasonable. All applicants shall, at the time of application and periodically thereafter, upon request of the city, submit to the city clerk or designee, evidence of financial responsibility. The evidence or certification shall include without limitation: 
a.  Financial statements and other proof of the finances of the restaurant, which may be provided at the restaurant for confidentiality reasons, the review to be at the licensee's expense, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner that the licensee is a viable going concern, being operated in a fiscally responsible manner, which maintains reasonable reserves and maintains and follows a responsible business plan, and that the licensee is therefore "financially responsible" and meets that requirement of the city alcohol regulations; 
b.  Proof of liability insurance coverage in the amount of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence, $2,000,000.00 aggregate with a company listed on the U.S. Treasury Circular 570; 
c.  A $2,500.00 performance bond with an insurance company as surety, approved by the city and properly executed, requiring the faithful observance and performance by the licensee of the rules and regulations in this article; 
d.  Proof the applicant is the owner or lessee of the restaurant (a fully executed deed in recordable form or a copy of the lease); 
e.  An affidavit from applicant that it has adequate financial participation in the restaurant to direct and manage its affairs, and is not a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
f.  Payment of the applicable license fee; 
g.  Proof of quarterly and annual food sales (with totals) of 60 percent or more of its total gross sales, and annual food sales in excess of $150,000.00 via presenting a confidential non-public sworn statement of the true and correct sales during the preceding calendar quarter and year respectively on forms approved by the city, which reflect the gross dollar sales amount for: total sales for the quarter and year, sales of alcohol for the applicable calendar quarter and year, and sales of food items for the quarter and year (presentation of the statement to the city clerk or designee at the restaurant shall be deemed lawful compliance with any statement filing requirement in this article) and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
h.  Proof, upon request, via purchase receipts and sales records, of ongoing maintenance of two weeks supply (consistent with past sales) of the types of alcohol typically sold, to prevent undercapitalized restaurants and to demonstrate the financial viability of the restaurant, and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
i.  Certified copies of the sales and use tax monthly reports filed with the DOR for each month during the prior year (presentation of such, including with totals for the year, to the city clerk or designee at the business shall be deemed lawful compliance with any report filing requirement), and/or a sworn certification from applicant's CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, that said financial responsibility requirement has been met; 
j.  An affidavit from the CPA, CEO, CFO, or owner, based on their familiarity with and review of all the relevant documentation, certifying that all state and local excise taxes were charged and paid the prior year; 
k.  Written acknowledgement that the city shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of the applicant for auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article, proving or disproving violation of any party of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. If the city has a reasonable suspicion that an affidavit/certification is inaccurate, it may insist upon and be entitled to tender of the actual backup documentation. 
(2)  No officials or employees of the city or members of its city shall be eligible to receive a license. 
(3)  All applicants for a license must be the owner or lessee of the premises to be used for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages, and must provide evidence of ownership of the premises in the form of a fully executed deed in recordable form, or, if applicant is leasing the premises, applicant must provide a copy of the lease. 
(4)  All applicants for a license must be of good character as evidenced by no conviction within the last ten years of misdemeanors involving moral turpitude or felonies, and all operators, managers, clerks, or other employees shall be of such good character. Furthermore, corporate or firm applicants shall also be of such good character, with all officers and members being of such good character. The application shall be sent within five business days of receipt to law enforcement for investigation of the applicants, employees, officers and members, then law enforcement shall timely present a written investigation report to the city. 
(5)  A license may be denied to any applicant if it appears that the applicant would not have adequate financial participation in the proposed business to direct and manage its affairs, or if it appears that the applicant is intended to be a mere surrogate for a person who would not otherwise qualify for a license for any reason whatsoever. 
(6)  The city, in its reasonable discretion, may objectively consider any extenuating circumstances that may reflect favorably or unfavorably on the applicant, application or the proposed location of the business. If in the reasonable judgment of the city circumstances are such that the granting of the license would not be in the best interest of the general public, such circumstances may be grounds for denying the application. 
(7)  A corporate license applicant shall appoint and designate to the city an agent authorized to receive service of process under the laws of Georgia. If no such designation is made, the city may serve or notify the applicant or license holder at any address of the applicant or license holder known to the city. 
(8)  The city shall give notice in writing to the applicant of any decision to grant or deny an application. The notice shall give the reasons for the decision. Whenever the city shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of the denial to request a hearing before the city. The applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Former § 10-004(5.)) 
Sec. 10-116. - Transfer. 
    No license shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location, and in the event that a licensed business is sold or closed, it shall be the duty of the licensee to immediately surrender said license to the city, and under no circumstances will the license fee be refunded to the holder; provided, however, license transfer and temporary licensing can occur subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  In the event that the owner of a license desires to transfer the same, or in the event that a 50 percent or greater interest in the business is sold or otherwise transferred, then the purchaser or transferee of such license or interest shall make a new application to the city per this article V as for an original license, before the date on which such sale or transfer is made. Ownership of such license shall remain unchanged until the application is approved by the city and all proper fees and taxes are paid. 
(2)  Upon the sale or other transfer of 50 percent or more interest in the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser or transferee of such interest shall be entitled to continue to operate such business for a period of no more than 30 days, pending the issuance of a new license, but only if such purchaser or transferee has filed a complete application with the city as required in subsection (1). 
(3)  In case of the death of any natural person holding a license, or any interest therein, the license may be transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heir or devisee of the deceased person by filing a new application with the city for the change in license ownership within 30 days of such death. The business may continue to operate until disposition of the application is determined as for an original license. No additional fees or business taxes shall be charged above what would be due if the business, or portion thereof, remained under the deceased person's ownership. 
(4)  All holders of licenses issued under this article shall within six months after the issuance of such license open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within such period shall serve as a forfeiture and cancellation of the unused license, and no refund of the license fee shall be made to the license holder. 
(Former § 10-004(6.)) 
Sec. 10-117. - Separate license. 
    A separate license shall be required for each pouring location of each place of business. A separate license will be required for each permanent pouring location established. Each license will enable the licensee to sell the licensed alcoholic beverages only in the areas of the premises permitted by state laws and regulations. 
(Former § 10-004(7.)) 
Sec. 10-118. - Building. 
    No license shall be issued to any person unless complete and detailed diagrams of the building in which the business will be located and the outside premises are attached to the application, or unless proposed plans and specifications and a building permit of a proposed building to be built are attached to the application. The completed building or the proposed building shall comply with ordinances of the city, regulations of the state revenue commissioner, and the laws of the state. Upon completion, the proposed building shall be subject to final inspection and approval by the building inspector of the city. Each applicant for a license shall attach to his application evidence of ownership of the building or proposed building or a copy of the lease if the applicant is leasing the building. Licensees shall provide on the premises for which the license is issued adequate sanitary toilet facilities as required by the city health and building codes, and the building shall be adequately illuminated so that all hallways, passageways and open areas may be clearly seen by customers therein. 
(Former § 10-004(8.)) 
Sec. 10-119. - Distance requirements. 
    No license shall be granted to any person unless the front door of the building at the proposed location is situated not less than 100 yards from the property line of any school ground or college campus, and not less than 100 yards from any church building or 100 yards from any housing authority property or any building used as an alcohol rehabilitation center. This distance is to be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. Each application for a license shall include a scale drawing of the location of the proposed premises showing the distance to the nearest school ground, college campus, housing authority property and alcohol rehabilitation center, or a certificate of a registered surveyor that such location complies with this section of this article. 
(Former § 10-004(9.)) 
Sec. 10-120. - Hours of operation. 
    No alcoholic beverage may be served before 11:00 a.m. on any day or after last call, which will be at 11:00 p.m. Monday through Thursday and Sunday, and 12:00 midnight on Fridays and Saturdays. No licensee shall furnish, sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages at any of the following times: 
(1)  At any time on Sundays, except from 12:30 p.m. to 11:00 p.m., Thanksgiving or Christmas; 
(2)  At any time in violation of a local ordinance or regulation or of a special order of the city; 
(3)  At any time in violation of state law or regulation; or 
(4)  At any time more than one hour after the restaurant shuts down the kitchen for the evening. 
    However, the wholesale or retail sale of alcoholic beverages shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election, except that the sale of alcoholic beverages within 250 feet of a polling place is unlawful during such hours that the polls are open. 
(Former § 10-004(10.)) 
Sec. 10-121. - Minimum age of consumption; exceptions. 
    Except as otherwise allowed by state law, no licensee nor any agent or employee of a licensee shall knowingly give, furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverage(s) to a person under 21 years of age. Furthermore, the licensee shall post in a conspicuous place in his establishment a sign printed in letters at least four inches high reading as follows: "SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO PERSONS UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE STRICTLY PROHIBITED" and "WARNING: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS." It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged, or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcoholic beverages. 
(Former § 10-004(11.)) 
Sec. 10-122. - Furnishing alcohol to certain persons prohibited. 
    No licensee nor any agent or employee shall furnish, sell or offer to sell any alcoholic beverages to any person who is confined in any jail, penal institution, correctional facility, prison camp, penitentiary or other lawful place of confinement, or to any person who is a patient or inmate of the Central State Hospital, or to any person who is noticeably intoxicated, or is of unsound mind, or is a habitual drunkard whose intemperate habits are known to said person. 
(Former § 10-004(12.)) 
Sec. 10-123. - Certain employment prohibited; employee permits. 
(a)  Certain employment prohibited. No licensee hereunder shall employ, require or permit a person under 18 years of age to sell or take orders for any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Employee permits. 
(1)  All employees who are involved in the sale and/or dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall each year file an application and obtain an annual permit to dispense and/or sell alcoholic beverages within 30 days after becoming an employee of an establishment licensed under this chapter. 
(2)  The application for the permit required by this section shall be in such form as prescribed by the city. A $20.00 annual application filing fee will be charged. A separate permit shall be required for each separate business location where the employee serves alcohol. 
(3)  After ascertaining that all requested forms have been completed and filed and payment of an annual permit fee has been made, the chief of police, or his designee shall approve the application and issue a permit with a photograph affixed and with pertinent information thereon relating to height, weight, hair color, eye color, date of birth and social security number. 
(4)  In the event that an employee provides false information in the application or attached documents, fails to pass review by the chief of police, or has a record of a violation of the type and within the period of time which would disqualify a person from holding an alcoholic beverage license, the chief of police may deny the application and shall notify the employee and employer in writing that the employee is ineligible for a permit. In the event the chief of police refuses to issue a permit, or in the event that a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant or permit holder shall have an absolute right of appeal to the city manager according to the procedures set forth herein. The appeal shall be perfected by filing with the chief of police a notice of appeal to the city manager, together with copies of all papers upon which action was taken. Thereafter, the city manager shall set a date for hearing on the matter within 30 days after receipt by the chief of police of the notice of appeal. Moreover, the chief of police shall notify the applicant in writing of the date, time and place when the matter shall be heard. 
(5)  Employers must maintain the permit of each employee which is required by this section on the premises of the establishment licensed by this chapter. It shall be the duty of the employer to assure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(6)  Any person violating this section shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation. In addition to the other penalty provided for herein, employers may be subject to suspension or revocation of a license held hereunder. 
(Former § 10-004(13.)) 
Sec. 10-124. - Containers. 
    No licensee may purchase distilled spirits in containers smaller than 700 milliliters. The sale of alcoholic beverages by any licensee in unbroken packages or in any quantity for other than consumption on the premises is expressly prohibited. 
(Former § 10-004(14.)) 
Sec. 10-125. - Annual fees. 
    The fee for a license shall be $1,000.00, and shall be paid prior to the issuance of any license. Said fee shall accompany the application and shall be either a cash payment or a bank check. No annual fee shall be prorated. Wholesalers shall be exempt from said fee unless payment of said fee is required under O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354. 
(Former § 10-004(15.)) 
Sec. 10-126. - Excise tax. 
(a)  Distilled spirits. Per O.C.G.A. § 3-7-60, the city imposes a mandatory excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, in the sum of $0.22 per liter on distilled spirits, imposed upon and to be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer in distilled spirits, collected monthly on distilled spirits sold or disposed of within the city. 
(b)  Malt beverages. 
(1)  Where malt beverages are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container as tap or draft beer, there is hereby levied a state excise tax on malt beverages of $10.00 on each container sold containing not more than 31 gallons, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 31 gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers other than barrels or other bulk containers, a state excise tax of $0.045 per 12 ounces shall be collected, and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(3)  There is hereby levied a state excise tax on all such beverages in excess of 576 ounces or two standard cases of 12 ounce size or the equivalent thereof or one 7.75 gallon keg or barrel of such beverages, said tax being levied at the rate of taxation of $0.045 per 12 ounces. 
(4)  The city shall impose an excise tax, in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, as follows: 
a.  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 15 gallons; 
b.  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans, or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any malt beverages on which such taxes have not been paid. Each wholesaler or retailer collecting said taxes shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of said tax pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-8-50. 
(c)  Wine. 
(1)  There is hereby levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all table wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.11 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(2)  There shall be imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all table wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.29 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(3)  There is hereby levied and imposed on the first sale, use or final delivery within this state of all dessert wines a state excise tax in the amount of $0.27 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(4)  There shall be imposed upon the importation for use, consumption, or final delivery into this state of all dessert wines a state import tax in the amount of $0.40 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(5)  There is hereby levied by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine by the package at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportional tax at the same rate for any fractional parts of a liter. 
(6)  The taxes imposed on wine shall not be levied on any wine sold to established and recognized churches and synagogues for use in sacramental services only, or for any wine exempt from taxation under the Constitution of the United States, or for any wine sold to persons for resale or consumption outside this state. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retail dealer to possess, own, hold, store, display, or sell any wine on which such taxes have not been paid. Each wholesaler or retailer collecting said taxes shall be paid three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for collection of said tax. 
(Former § 10-004(16.)) 
Sec. 10-127. - Responsibility. 
    Any holder of an license shall keep a copy of this article on the premises and shall instruct any person working there in compliance with the terms hereof, and each licensee and the licensee's agents and employees selling alcoholic beverages by the drink shall at all times be familiar with the terms hereof. The licensee shall be held responsible for any acts of the licensee's agents and/or employees in any violation of this article and/or of the laws of the state and/or the rules and regulations of the Georgia revenue commissioner. 
    Each new licensee shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test by the city, and present proof of completion to the city within six months of license approval. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. Every person working on a licensee's premises who may ever provide alcohol to a customer shall complete an alcohol training class, approved by the city after careful investigation of the proposed program and test by the city, and present proof of completion to the city, within six months of license approval, and within six months of a new employee's hiring date, and renew such every three years. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. Licensee shall supply proof of such at the time of permit application. 
(Former § 10-004(17.)) 
Sec. 10-128. - Inspection. 
    The business premises of the holder of a license shall be available for inspection at any and all times by officers or officials authorized to conduct such inspections, including without limitation law enforcement and the city manager. 
(Former § 10-004(18.)) 
Sec. 10-129. - Production of records. 
    In conjunction with any license application or any license issued under the terms hereof, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any license or in conjunction with any of the hearings contemplated by this article, or in conjunction with the payment or nonpayment of any excise tax levied or to be collected hereunder, the city shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any applicant or licensee. Said subpoena right shall be had for the purposes of auditing the records of such applicant or licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this article, proving or disproving violation of any part of this article by any licensee, or to show payment or nonpayment of any taxes, fees, charges or the like due hereunder. 
(Former § 10-004(19.)) 
Sec. 10-130. - False statement. 
    The making of any false statement on an application for a license shall constitute grounds for revocation of said license. 
(Former § 10-004(20.)) 
Sec. 10-131. - Gambling. 
    There shall be no gambling, betting, games of chance, punch-boards, slot machines, lotteries or tickets of chance therein or the operation of any schemes for hazarding money or any other thing of value in any licensee's place of business or in any room adjoining the same owned, leased or controlled by licensee. 
(Former § 10-004(21.)) 
Sec. 10-132. - Soliciting. 
    No licensee shall require, permit, suffer, encourage, or induce any employee or person to solicit in the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guests of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic, or money with which to purchase the same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself or for others, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. 
(Former § 10-004(22.)) 
Sec. 10-133. - Display of license. 
    A license issued under this article shall be displayed prominently at all times on the premises for which it was issued. 
(Former § 10-004(23.)) 
Sec. 10-134. - Delivery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to make delivery of any alcoholic beverage licensed to be sold by the drink, except inside of the premises or area licensed for the sale thereof. It shall be unlawful for any such licensee to sell alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption off the premises. 
(Former § 10-004(24.)) 
Sec. 10-135. - Criminal record. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person with a criminal record for violence or disorder to frequent the premises or loiter on the premises. 
(Former § 10-004(25.)) 
Sec. 10-136. - Prostitution; adult entertainment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any person to frequent the licensee's premises for the purpose of soliciting prostitution. Based on the experiences of other counties and municipalities, which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, the mayor and council note the conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments. It is the finding of the mayor and council that adult entertainment establishments, particularly those where alcoholic beverages are served, result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. An increase in instances of disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, prostitution, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly those in which alcoholic beverages are served. The mayor and council also find that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions. Conditions experienced in other counties and municipalities are depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, community blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement, and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above-mentioned crime problems. 
    In addition to the prohibitions under state law at O.C.G.A. § 3-3-41, no alcoholic beverages may be sold in any restaurant which features performances by topless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers whose performances involve erotic dancing including without limitation the simulation of sexual activities and/or erotic or lewd touching. No such adult entertainment may be located within 1,000 feet of any restaurant selling alcoholic beverages. For the purpose of this subsection, distance shall be by direct measurement between property lines, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. 
(Former § 10-004(26.)) 
Sec. 10-137. - Police reports. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to fail to report to the police at the earliest possible time known incidents of a criminal nature that happen on the licensee's premises. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to willfully withhold from the police any information pertaining to any crime that may have happened on the premises. 
(Former § 10-004(27.)) 
Sec. 10-138. - No employees with criminal records. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to employ on the premises any person who in the preceding ten years has been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state or who has been convicted of a crime outside the state which would be a felony or would be a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the state. It shall also be unlawful for any licensee to knowingly allow any criminal act to be committed on the premises. No applicant or licensee shall have been convicted of or have pled nolo contendere to, within ten years of the date of application, a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or any crime relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages. If the applicant or licensee is a partnership, all members of such partnership must meet this requirement. If the applicant or licensee is a corporation or LLC, all stockholders and officers and members must meet this requirement. 
(Former § 10-004(28.)) 
Sec. 10-139. - Advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful to display on the outside of the premises any form of signs or lettering using brand names or words or advertisements indicating or have the connotation of promoting or advertising the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(Former § 10-004(29.)) 
Sec. 10-140. - Minors. 
(a)  The term "minor" as used in this article shall mean any person under the age of 21 years, or as defined in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 or by other state laws. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to attempt to purchase or for any other person to purchase distilled spirits for a minor. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a minor to exhibit fake, forged or borrowed credentials in an effort to obtain alcohol to which he is not legally entitled. 
(d)  No person engaged in the business regulated under this article shall make or permit to be made any sale of alcohol to minors. Upon violation, the licensee shall generally be treated as follows: upon a first offense by the licensee, a suspension for seven consecutive days of sales of alcoholic beverages; proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days of the first day of the suspension of the license; a $500.00 civil penalty; and on the first day of the suspension, the posting at the premise's entrance of a sign notifying patrons of the nature and length of the suspension. Upon a second offense by the licensee, within three years of a prior offense, a suspension of 60 consecutive days of sales of alcoholic beverages; proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, such proof to be provided to the city council within 75 days of the first day of the suspension of the license; a $1,000.00 civil penalty; removal of all alcoholic beverages from the premises; on the first day of the suspension, the posting at the premise's entrance of a sign notifying patrons of the nature and length of the suspension; and probationary status for one year. Upon a third offense within three years, by the licensee, the license shall be revoked for a period of one full year. 
(e)  Upon receipt of letter of notification of penalty, licensee has ten days to file a written request for a hearing to appeal the fine, suspension, attendance at an approved alcohol awareness class, and/or the starting date of suspension of sales. 
(f)  If no written request for a hearing is filed within ten days of receipt of notification of penalty letter, the fine and suspension will begin on the 11th day after the receipt of the notification of penalty letter unless the 11th day is a Saturday, in which case the suspension will begin on the next day of the establishment's operation during which alcoholic beverages would normally be available. Additionally, proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council, to be provided to the city council within 75 days of receipt of letter of notification of penalty. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. 
(g)  Schedule if appeal hearing conducted. The fine and/or suspension will commence within five days thereafter, on a date set at the appeal hearing by the mayor and city council. Proof of attendance and successful completion by all sales clerks and servers at the approved alcohol awareness class designated by the city council shall be provided to the city council within 75 days after the hearing. Failure to timely present such proof shall be cause for a determination by the mayor and council of non-compliance and a suspension of alcohol sales until the next meeting of the mayor and council after presentation of proof of compliance. 
(Former § 10-004(30.)) 
Sec. 10-141. - Containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for licensees or their agents to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. 
(Former § 10-004(31.)) 
Sec. 10-142. - Conditions of premises. 
(a)  All premises used for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or for the storage of alcoholic beverages shall be kept in a sanitary condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the regulations of the Walton (or if applicable Newton) County Health Department. 
(b)  All premises shall be inspected by the Walton (or if applicable Newton) County Health Department, the city fire department, the city building inspector, and law enforcement officers to determine if the premises are in compliance with all city, county and state rules, regulations, laws, and codes. 
(Former § 10-004(32.)) 
Sec. 10-143. - Telephone. 
    A licensee shall maintain on the premises at all times a telephone in good working order. 
(Former § 10-004(33.)) 
Sec. 10-144. - Incorporation of state law. 
    The state laws and/or regulations relating to the sale and/or distribution of alcoholic beverages within Georgia are hereby incorporated herein and made a part of this article as if fully set out herein. 
(Former § 10-004(34.)) 
Sec. 10-145. - Employees. 
    Every licensee under this article shall maintain at all times on the premises for which the license has been issued a list of all persons currently employed by such licensee at such premises, which list shall show the current full legal name, alias, date of birth, current address, current home telephone number and social security number of each employee. The employee list shall be available during reasonable hours for inspection by any law enforcement person or government official or his designee. If so required by such person, upon reasonable grounds for making such request, an employee must submit to a fingerprint identification and criminal history check. Every retail licensee shall cause each of the licensee's employees during the hours of his employment to be identified by a conspicuous label or badge upon which shall appear the employee's first name. No person under 16 years of age shall be employed in any capacity in any place of business licensed hereunder. 
(Former § 10-004(35.)) 
Sec. 10-146. - Promotions. 
    No licensee or employee or agent of a licensee shall engage in any of the following practices in connection with the sale or other disposition of alcoholic beverages: 
(1)  The giving away of any ticket, token or any other item that can be exchanged for any alcoholic beverage upon the purchase of any other alcoholic beverage; 
(2)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or at the substantially same price as customarily charged for one drink; 
(3)  The sale of one alcoholic beverage with a ticket, token or any other items redeemable for a subsequent alcoholic beverage; 
(4)  The sale of all alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink at a single price; 
(5)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day or the week, at prices lower than those customarily charged during the rest of the day or week; 
(6)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second alcoholic beverage at the same time another is purchased, or before the first such alcoholic beverage is consumed; and 
(7)  Sponsoring, conducting or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(Former § 10-004(36.)) 
Sec. 10-147. - Prohibited acts. 
    No licensee or business shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring onto the premises any alcoholic beverages acquired elsewhere, nor shall any such licensee authorize or permit any patron or customer to take out of the premises any alcoholic beverages. No licensee shall authorize or permit any patron or customer to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises except a law enforcement officer or other person authorized by federal or state law to bring or carry any deadly weapon or firearm on the premises, nor shall the licensee act as a keeper, bailee or custodian of any kind of deadly weapon or firearm for any customer or patron. 
(Former § 10-004(37.)) 
Sec. 10-148. - Clearing service areas. 
    All licensees shall remove or cause to be removed from the area of the premises utilized by the customers all alcoholic beverages within one-half hour after the times for last call specified in this article. To discourage customers from trying to evade this requirement, at no time shall licensees give customers multiple drinks or "doubles" or similar, or provide a new drink or refill before the customer finishes the current drink. 
(Former § 10-004(38.)) 
Sec. 10-149. - Lock and key. 
    All alcoholic beverages shall be under lock or behind closed doors or fully covered by opaque material during those hours when their sale is not permitted. All alcoholic beverages owned or possessed contrary to this article are hereby declared to be contraband and shall be seized by the proper authorities. 
(Former § 10-004(39.)) 
Sec. 10-150. - Grounds for suspension or revocation of license. 
    No person shall engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the incorporated areas of the city without first complying with the rules and requirements set out in this article. Any license issued hereunder shall be subject to suspension or revocation, and/or any licensee subject to civil penalty, upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  The making of any false statement on an application for a license issued hereunder; 
(2)  A violation of the regulations in this article and/or the laws and/or regulations of the United States and/or the state and/or the city; 
(3)  The failure to have the financial responsibility upon which issuance of the license was conditioned; 
(4)  Default in any obligation, of any kind whatsoever, lawfully owing to the city; 
(5)  Suspension or revocation of a state retail dealer's license; or 
(6)  For any other legal and sufficient cause. 
    Any action taken by the city to suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder shall not preclude and may be in addition to any criminal prosecution by a proper authority as provided by the laws and/or ordinances of the city, the state, and/or the United States. Whenever any action is taken by the city to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, the city shall provide written notice to the licensee of the action taken. The notice shall set forth the reasons for such action. The licensee shall have ten days following notification of such action to request a hearing before the city. The licensee shall be entitled at such hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
(Former § 10-004(40.)) 
Sec. 10-151. - New restaurant; temporary licenses. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, a person may apply as a qualified restaurant even though the establishment has not yet been in operation for the previous 12 months. Because it is not possible to determine if such restaurant has annual food sales which are 60 percent or more of its total gross sales and it is not possible to determine if such restaurant has annual food sales in excess of $150,000.00, the city may in its reasonable discretion consider the size and seating capacity of the restaurant, the size and seating capacity of any lounge in the restaurant, the size and type of kitchen facilities and all other relevant factors to determine if it appears substantially likely that the restaurant will qualify for a license under this article. If the city anticipates that the establishment will qualify for a license, it may vote to award the applicant a temporary license not to exceed 90 days. At or before the conclusion of the 90-day period, the city shall use a pro rata analysis to determine if the applicant is operating a qualified restaurant. If the city has determined that the restaurant is qualified under this article, the applicant may make application for a license under section 10-113. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, a nonprofit organization which has at least 75 members regularly paying monthly, quarterly, semiannual or annual dues and has received and has maintained approval from the United States Internal Revenue Service as a bona fide 501(c)(3) organization, and has not applied for a license otherwise, may apply for a temporary three-day special event license for consumption of malt beverages and wine (not distilled spirits, except one single day event, one time per year, upon approval of the mayor and council, using as criteria all applicable standards and requirements; applicant shall then comply with all applicable liquor serving requirements). In addition to the city requirements below, such organizations must file an application with and pay a fee of $25.00 to the commissioner of the state department of revenue, and receive approval and issuance of the state license. No more than six licenses may be issued to an organization in any one calendar year pursuant to this section. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to distribute or sell alcohol during any hours in which the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises is not permitted in the jurisdiction. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to employ any person under 18 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. To make application for such license, the organization must comply with all the following: 
(1)  Make application at least 14 days prior to the proposed license date(s); 
(2)  Pay a fee of $25.00 per licensed event; 
(3)  Not hold more than 18 days and/or nights of such sales per calendar year. A license shall only be granted for a period not to exceed three days and/or nights per event; 
(4)  All sales of alcohol must be for fundraising, or to directly further the purpose of the organization, or made in conjunction with service of a meal; 
(5)  All sections of this article must be complied with except sections 10-113, 10-115, 10-116, 10-118, 10-125 and 10-152; 
(6)  Only one such license shall be issued for any one location within the incorporated limits of the city, and such location shall be stated in the application. Licenses issued pursuant to this section shall be valid only for the place specified in the license; 
(7)  All applicants for a license must be of good character, as evidenced by no conviction within the last ten years of misdemeanors involving moral turpitude or felonies, and all operators, managers, clerks or other employees shall be of such good character, and corporate or LLC or firm applicants shall also be of good business reputation, with all officers and members being of such good character; the application shall be sent within five business days of receipt to law enforcement for investigation of the applicants, employees, officers and members, then law enforcement shall timely present a written investigation report to the city; 
(8)  Whenever the city shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of denial to request a hearing before the city; the applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses; and 
(9)  No license under this section shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. Under no circumstances will the temporary license fee be refunded to the organization. 
(10)  A person who willfully, knowingly, and unlawfully sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is not of lawful drinking age, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, or who knowingly sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, may become liable for injury or damage caused by or resulting from the intoxication of such minor or person when the sale, furnishing, or serving is the proximate cause of such injury or damage. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, a state-approved alcoholic beverage caterer who additionally holds a valid license from the city which authorizes the licensee to sell alcohol by the drink for consumption on the premises may be issued from the city an off-premises license which authorizes such licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to sell malt beverages and wine (not distilled spirits) by the drink off premises and in connection with a specifically designated catered function. Such shall be known as a "special event license". A "licensed alcoholic beverage caterer" means any retail dealer who has been licensed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-4-2, 3-5-2, or 3-6-2. In addition to the city requirements below, such organizations must file an application with and pay a fee of $25.00 to the commissioner of the state department of revenue, and receive approval and issuance of the state license. It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to distribute or sell malt beverages or wine during any hours in which the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption only on the premises is not permitted in the jurisdiction. It shall be unlawful for a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer to employ any person under 18 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle malt beverages and wine. To make application for such license, the organization must comply with and agree to all the following: 
(1)  Make application at least 14 days prior to the first date of the proposed license period. The application shall include without limitation the name of the caterer; the date, address, and time of the event; and the licensed alcoholic beverage caterer's license number; 
(2)  Pay a fee of $250.00 annually; 
(3)  Reserved; 
(4)  All sales of malt beverages and wine must be for fundraising, or to directly further the purpose of the organization, or made in conjunction with service of a meal; 
(5)  All sections of this article must be complied with except sections 10-113, 10-115, 10-116, 10-118, 10-125 and 10-152; 
(6)  Only one such license shall be issued for any one location within the incorporated limits of the city and such location shall be stated in the application. Licenses issued pursuant to this code section shall be valid only for the place specified in the license; 
(7)  All applicants for a license must be of good character as evidenced by no conviction of misdemeanors involving moral turpitude or felonies, and all operators, managers, clerks or other employees shall be of such good character, and corporate or LLC or firm applicants shall also be of good business reputation, with all officers and members being of such good character; the application shall be sent within five business days of receipt to law enforcement for investigation of the applicants, employees, officers and members, then law enforcement shall timely present a written investigation report to the city; 
(8)  Whenever the city shall deny an application for a license, the applicant shall have ten days following the date of notice of denial to request a hearing before the city; the applicant shall be entitled at such a hearing to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses; and 
(9)  No license under this section shall be transferable or assignable to any person or other location. Under no circumstances will the temporary license fee be refunded to the organization. 
(10)  All sales of malt beverages and wine in connection with an authorized catered event shall be cash at the time of delivery or not more than five days in advance of the authorized catered event. All other malt beverages and wine sales will be subject to restrictions and requirements imposed by department of revenue regulations. The acceptance of checks and credit cards shall be deemed the same as cash and are subject to the requirements and restrictions imposed by department of revenue regulations. 
(11)  All sales are final and in no case will broken packages of beverage alcohol be removed or returned by the licensed beverage alcohol caterer from the site of the authorized catered event to his place of business or any other location. All returns of unbroken packages must be documented on the quantity-destination report. Under no circumstances will malt beverages or wine be returned to caterer's inventory on Sunday. Returns of unbroken packages of beverage alcohol will be handled as no sale. 
(12)  Leftover broken packages of malt beverages and wine shall be the property of the event sponsor. 
(13)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer must provide such personnel as needed to handle all malt beverages and wine at the authorized catered event. This shall include bartending services, dispensing, serving, providing, or furnishing beverage alcohol. Employees of a licensed alcohol beverage caterer must be 18 years of age or older in order to handle malt beverages and wine at such authorized catered event. 
(14)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer shall notify the state revenue commissioner in writing of the site of the authorized catered event. The notification will also contain such other information as the commissioner may require. Such notification must be received five working days prior to such authorized catered event. 
(15)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer will keep on file at his place of business, all beverage alcohol quantity/destination reports, local catering event permits and all other documents, records and reports required by state law and other department of revenue regulations for a time period prescribed by those laws and regulations. 
(16)  The licensed beverage alcohol caterer is required to notify sponsors of authorized catered events of the authority of the state revenue commissioner or his agents to enter upon the premises which is the site of an authorized catered event for the purpose of inspection and enforcement of these regulations and all other laws and regulations pertaining to the sale, possession and dispossession and distribution of beverage alcohol. 
(17)  Delivery of malt beverages and wine by a licensed beverage alcohol caterer shall be made only in connection with an authorized catered event. Delivering not meeting the requirements as set forth in these regulations shall be a violation of these regulations and department of revenue regulations governing the transportation of beverage alcohol by retail dealers and alcohol pouring licensees and shall be cause for the suspension or revocation of licensee's beverage alcohol licenses and forfeiture of licensee's bond or both by the state revenue commissioner. All beverage alcohol transported in violation of these regulations shall be declared contraband and subject to seizure by the state revenue commissioner or his agents. 
(18)  Vehicles used by a licensed beverage alcohol catering establishment for the transportation and delivery of beverage alcohol in connection with an authorized catered event will be marked only with the state license number two inches high and one inch wide. No other wordage or advertisement pertaining to the catering service will be permitted. 
(19)  While transporting and delivering beverage alcohol in connection with an authorized catered event, the licensee or the employee of the licensed beverage alcohol catering establishment shall have in his possession a copy of the establishment's valid state beverage alcohol license, a copy of the establishment's valid local beverage alcohol catering license, a copy of the establishment's valid local beverage alcohol catering event permit from the local governing authorities in the jurisdiction the event is being held along with the department of revenue alcohol beverage catering quantity/destination report. 
(20)  Delivery of all beverage alcohol by a licensee to an authorized catered event must be made in unbroken containers. Subsequent serving of all beverage alcohol at the authorized catered event must be by the drink. 
(21)  A person who willfully, knowingly, and unlawfully sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is not of lawful drinking age, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, or who knowingly sells, furnishes, or serves alcoholic beverages to a person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication, knowing that such person will soon be driving a motor vehicle, may become liable for injury or damage caused by or resulting from the intoxication of such minor or person when the sale, furnishing, or serving is the proximate cause of such injury or damage. 
(Former § 10-004(41.)) 
Sec. 10-152. - Reports. 
    Each licensee under this section shall as a condition of maintaining such license, file with the clerk within 30 days after the end of each calendar year evidence of financial responsibility required under subsection 10-115(1). The statements shall be confidential and shall not be open for public inspection except as otherwise required by law. Said documentation shall be used solely by the city for determination of whether the licensee remains qualified to hold its license. Failure to timely file such documentation including evidence of financial responsibility shall be a violation of a city ordinance punishable by a civil penalty of up to $500.00 and cause for suspension or revocation of the license granted hereunder. 
(Former § 10-004(42.)) 
Sec. 10-153. - "Brown Bag" and "Bring Your Own Bottle" practices prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to bring alcoholic beverages into any restaurant or similar eating facility within the city limits or for any person to permit such. It shall also be unlawful for any establishment to charge a "corkage fee" or wine bottle opening fee or similar. 
(Former § 10-004(43.)) 
Secs. 10-154-10-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-176. - Findings, public purposes. 
(a)  Findings. Based on experiences of other counties and municipalities, which experiences are relevant to problems faced by the city the council notes the conditions and occurrences generally associated with adult entertainment establishments. It is the finding of the council that adult entertainment establishments, particularly where alcoholic beverages are served, result in an increase in criminal behavior and create undesirable community conditions. An increase in disorderly conduct, public drunkenness, prostitution, drug trafficking and loitering of individuals with criminal histories has been the experience of other counties and municipalities that permit adult entertainment establishments, particularly those in which alcoholic beverages are served. 
    The council also finds that the increase in criminal behavior which accompanies adult entertainment establishments causes undesirable community conditions. Conditions experienced in other counties and municipalities are depression of property values in neighborhoods surrounding the adult entertainment establishment, community blight, an increased burden on and expenditure for law enforcement, and an increase in the criminal case load in the judicial system due to a greater number of arrests because of the above mentioned crime problems. 
(b)  Purposes. The purpose of this article is to regulate adult entertainment establishments to prevent increases in criminal activity and undesirable community conditions. 
(Former § 10-003(1.)) 
Sec. 10-177. - Definitions. 
    Adult bookstore is herein defined as: 
(1)  An establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or 
(2)  An establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting materials distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture mini-theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coins or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult video store means: 
(1)  An establishment having as its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  An establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material; or 
(3)  An establishment which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos or movies or other reproductions which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by the performance of specified sexual activities or the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort bureau/introduction service means any business, agency or person(s) who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnish or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
    Good moral character means a person is of good moral character if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, in the five years prior to the date of application for a license or permit under this article. The city may take into account the length of time since any conviction of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude, efforts by the applicant or employee to rehabilitate himself, number of such convictions by applicant or employee and status of any sentence or probation imposed upon applicant or employee for any such felony or crime involving moral turpitude. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture. 
    Governmental building means a building owned by any local, state or federal government. 
    Library means a building open to the general public which contains a collection of books. 
    License means authorization by the city to operate an adult entertainment establishment. This license is sometimes referred to as an adult entertainment establishment license. 
    Licensing officer means the employee in charge of granting, denial or suspension of licenses and permits under this article. 
    Licensee means a holder of a current, valid adult entertainment establishment license. 
    Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years of age. 
    Permit means authorization by the city after approval by the licensing officer for a person to be an employee of an adult entertainment establishment. 
    Public playground means an open space or courtyard for recreation that is open to the general public. 
    Public park means a large piece of ground, with grass and trees, for recreation that is open to the general public. 
    School means a building, publicly or privately owned, used for teaching or giving instruction in any subject to pupils. 
    Specified sexual activities shall include the following: 
(1)  Activities of the following nature which are actual or simulated: sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism or zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
    Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(Former § 10-003(2.)) 
Sec. 10-178. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  Advertising without a license. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued per this article. 
(b)  Gross receipts report. No later than March first of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the license officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  Employee list. A licensee shall maintain a list of the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. Said list shall be subject to inspection by authorized city or state officials or employees upon reasonable notice. Ex-employee's names shall not be removed from the list until two years have elapsed from the last date of employment. 
(d)  Dancers under age 18 prohibited. No licensee shall employ or contract with a person to be a dancer who is under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Admission of minors prohibited. No person under 18 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  Operating hours. An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to be open on any Sunday nor on Christmas Day. 
(g)  Consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited. No licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  Display of licenses required. A licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  Height requirements for dancing platforms. All dancing shall occur on a platform used solely for dancing which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  Distance from patrons to be maintained. No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  Fondling and caressing prohibited. No dancer at any erotic dance establishment shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  Gratuities prohibited. No patron at any erotic dance establishment shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  Soliciting of gratuities prohibited. No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from a patron. 
(n)  Lighting requirements. All areas of an establishment licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot candles per square foot. 
(Former § 10-003(3.)) 
Sec. 10-179. - Prohibited activities. 
    No person, firm, partnership, or other entity shall publicly display or expose or permit the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Former § 10-003(4.)) 
Sec. 10-180. - Licensing. 
(a)  License required. In or upon any premises within the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, association, entity, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. The fee for the annual license shall be $1,000.00. A new license must be applied for and purchased annually. Such license is a privilege, not a right. 
(b)  Operation of unlicensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture mini-theater, adult motion picture arcade, escort bureau, introduction service or erotic dance establishment unless such business has a current, valid license, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Former § 10-003(5.)) 
Sec. 10-181. - Admission, sales to minors. 
(a)  Admission of minors. It shall be unlawful for any person, association, entity, partnership or corporation to admit or permit the admission of minors within an adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Sales to minors. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult motion picture mini-theater, exotic dance establishment or any other adult entertainment establishment defined in this article. 
(Former § 10-003(6.)) 
Sec. 10-182. - Location requirements. 
(a)  Location requirements specified. No adult entertainment establishment shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; and 
(5)  On less than three acres of land or on any parcel containing less than 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  How to measure distances. For the purpose of this subsection, distance shall be by airline measurement between property lines, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Former § 10-003(7.)) 
Sec. 10-183. - Adult entertainment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall not be less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work at any adult entertainment establishment for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. The terms "employed at the adult entertainment establishment premises" and "work at any adult entertainment establishment premises" shall include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment by an adult entertainment establishment off the premises of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work at an adult entertainment establishment, he/she shall file a notice with the licensing officer of the intended employment on forms supplied by the licensing officer and must receive approval for such employment from the licensing officer. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the licensing officer requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. The notice of intended employment shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $50.00 or a receipt of the licensing officer evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. Upon the issuance of a permit showing approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. Approval and a permit shall be granted if the qualifications defined in subsection (a) above are met. Approval shall be denied if said qualifications are not met. An appeal from such decision shall be governed by section 10-187. 
(c)  Permit suspension, permit revocation. Violation of this article, any other sections of the Code, any other ordinances of the city, and/or laws and regulations of the state, shall subject an employee to permit suspension or permit revocation. An appeal from such a decision shall be governed by section 10-187. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this section, independent contractors of adult entertainment establishments shall be considered employees, and must comply with employee permit requirements, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Former § 10-003(8.)) 
Sec. 10-184. - Application for license. 
(a)  Application requirements. Any person, association, partnership, limited liability company, or corporation desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the licensing officer. Prior to submitting such application, a non-refundable fee of $50.00 shall be paid to the clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  Application is not a license. The application for a license does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(c)  Application contents. Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant's true full name and any other names ever used by the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's present address and telephone number; 
(3)  The applicant's previous addresses and the dates of residence at each address for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, eye and hair color; and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two color photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months, which clearly show the applicant's face; 
(7)  A statement of the business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the application, and of any and all partners in a partnership, members of a limited liability company, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  A statement of the business license history of the applicant and of any and all partners in a partnership, members of a limited liability company, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding, and whether said persons or the corporate applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory has had a license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reasons therefore, and the business activity(ies) or occupation(s) subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. The same type of information should be set forth for a limited liability company. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation or limited liability company, the provisions of this subsection (9) pertaining to corporations and limited liability companies shall apply. The applicant entity shall designate one of its officers, members or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged; 
(10)  The names and addresses of the owner(s) and/or lessor(s) of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(11)  Such other identification and information as is required in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(12)  If the applicant, any partners of a partnership or any of the officers of a corporation or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, or the members of a limited liability company have ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the past five years, a complete description of any such crime must be provided including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(13)  The city shall require individual applicants to furnish the applicant's fingerprints; 
(14)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the properly recorded trade name must be provided. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant must provide a copy of authority to do business in Georgia, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. The same type of information should be set forth for a limited liability company; 
(15)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers, members or directors of the corporation or limited liability company and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(16)  Addresses of the premises to be licensed; 
(17)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal rights; 
(18)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the acreage of the proposed site, the location of the proposed adult entertainment establishment in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to the closest church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; and 
(19)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the managing or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(d)  Applicant to appear. The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation or limited liability company or other organization, shall personally appear before the licensing officer of the city and produce proof that a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $50.00 has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Former § 10-003(9.)) 
Sec. 10-185. - Investigation. 
(a)  Time limits. The city shall have 60 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. 
(b)  Findings for granting a license. Upon completion of the investigation, the council may grant a license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application complies in all respects with the requirements of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the members if the applicant is a limited liability company or other organization, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has/have not been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above mentioned offenses; 
(6)  As of the date of the application, the applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied, suspended or revoked for cause by this city or any other city, county, state or territory; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business would comply with all applicable laws, ordinances and regulations including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of a corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the members if the applicant is a limited liability company or other organization, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has/have not within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed in violation of this Code or any city ordinances and/or the laws of the state and/or the United States; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a person of good moral character on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises are not located in violation of the requirements of this article; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other laws, ordinances, codes, or regulations of the city, state or the United States; and 
(13)  That any other inquiry deemed necessary by the city to insure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city and the preservation of its neighborhoods has been made and the results of the inquiry demonstrate the granting of the permit will not threaten the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Former § 10-003(10.)) 
Sec. 10-186. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  Specific persons prohibited. No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes or property taxes for the business at that location; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any limited liability company or other organization, partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person not of good moral character; and 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold a business license and/or conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Other conditions. Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. 
(Former § 10-003(11.)) 
Sec. 10-187. - Appeal of applicant from license or permit refusal. 
(a)  Clerk to notify applicant of denial. If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the clerk of denial of the license. The clerk shall within ten days notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license or permit may appeal such denial to the council by filing a written appeal within 30 days of receipt of the notice of denial. 
(b)  Appeal to contain certain information. The appeal shall be delivered to the clerk and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the denial and the date of receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the appellant. 
(c)  Appeal to appear on council agenda. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 35 days after receipt of the appeal. 
(d)  Initial council action. When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the clerk shall give the appellant certified mail notice of placement of the hearing on the agenda. The council may in its discretion appoint a hearing officer to preside over the hearing in a judicial capacity. The clerk shall publish notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(e)  Council to hear appeal; render decision. When the clerk has scheduled an appeal before the council, at the scheduled time and date the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appellant and from competent witnesses. The council may sustain, overrule or modify the decision appealed from. The action of the council shall be final, unless the appellant appeals to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the council. 
(f)  Hearing officer. Any hearing officer appointed per the discretionary procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as the hearing officer may deem advisable. 
(g)  Rules of evidence. The council, and any hearing officer, shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. 
(h)  Hearing officer recommendation. Within a time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is completed, any hearing officer shall submit a written recommendation to the council. Such recommendation shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions, and recommendations. Such recommendation shall be filed with the clerk and shall be considered a public record. A copy shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant within one business day after it is filed with the clerk. Copies shall be given to the city manager and the Walton County Sheriff or a representative of the city department of public safety. 
(i)  Council to consider any recommendation of the hearing officer. The clerk shall place any such recommendation on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the recommendation is filed, and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(j)  Council to act on hearing officer's recommendation. The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's recommendation in its entirety, or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it shall decide the case upon a review of the entire record. 
(Former § 10-003(12.)) 
Sec. 10-188. - Annual license. 
    Licenses for adult entertainment establishments shall be applied for annually. The licensee must meet all requirements of this article. The fee for the adult entertainment establishment license shall be $1,000.00. 
(Former § 10-003(13.)) 
Sec. 10-189. - Non-transferability of license. 
(a)  Sale, transfer of licenses prohibited. No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee or by operation of law. Any purported sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall constitute a voluntary surrender of such license, and such license shall thereafter be null and void. 
(b)  Exceptions in partnership arrangements. If the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city clerk shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. 
(c)  Corporations and limited liability companies. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation or limited liability company shall be deemed terminated and void if any of the outstanding stock or membership interests thereof is/are sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or if any of the stock or membership interests authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued or sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Former § 10-003(14.)) 
Sec. 10-190. - Location and/or name change. 
(a)  Location change. No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee of $100.00 has been deposited with the clerk and approval has been obtained from the city manager and the building inspector. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations contained in all city ordinances, laws and regulations have been met. 
(b)  Name change. No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the licensee's name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Building expansions. Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require an investigation as provided for by section 10-185 and shall comply with all other provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Former § 10-003(15.)) 
Sec. 10-191. - Appeal of licensee or employee from adverse decision other than subsection 10-187. 
(a)  Appeal to be submitted within ten days. The licensee or employee shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the clerk. 
(b)  Appeal to contain certain information. The appeal shall be delivered to the clerk and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of the adverse action and the date of receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the Council and the name and address of the appellant. 
(c)  Appeal to appear on council agenda. The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 35 days after receipt of the appeal. 
(d)  Initial mayor and council action. When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the clerk shall give the appellant certified mail notice of placement of the hearing on the agenda. The council may in its discretion appoint a hearing officer to preside over the hearing in a judicial capacity. The clerk shall publish notice of the hearing as may be required by law. 
(e)  Council to hear appeal; render decision. When the clerk has scheduled an appeal before the council, at the scheduled time and date the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the appellant and from competent witnesses. The council may sustain, overrule or modify the decision appealed from. The action of the council shall be final, unless the appellant appeals to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the council. 
(f)  Hearing officer. Any hearing officer appointed per the discretionary procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as the hearing officer may deem advisable. 
(g)  Rules of evidence. The council and any hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. 
(h)  Hearing officer recommendation. Within a time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is completed, any hearing officer shall submit a written recommendation to the council. Such recommendation shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions, and recommendations. Such recommendation shall be filed with the clerk and shall be considered a public record. A copy shall be forwarded by certified mail to the appellant within one business day after it is filed with the clerk. Copies shall be given to the city manager and the Walton County Sheriff or a representative of the city department of public safety. 
(i)  Council to consider any recommendation of the hearing officer. The clerk shall place any such recommendation on the agenda of the next regular council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the recommendation is filed, and shall notify the appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the appellant stipulates to a shorter notice. 
(j)  Council to act on hearing officer's recommendation. The council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's recommendation in its entirety, or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it shall decide the case upon a review of the entire record. 
(Former § 10-003(16.)) 
Sec. 10-192. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  General. Any person violating this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(b)  Unlawful operation declared nuisance. Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. The city may take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin the operation of an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of any provision of this article shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a license or permit granted hereunder. 
(c)  Self-inspection of licensed premises. The licensee or licensee's designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record the findings of the inspections on a form supplied by the licensing officer. All licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Former § 10-003(17.)) 
Chapter 11 - REGULATIONS OF CITY-OWNED UTILITY SYSTEMS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Non-liability of city. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by installation thereof, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of any inspection authorized hereunder or any permit, certification or approval issued by the superintendent or any other employee of the city. 
(Former § 11-003) 
Sec. 11-2. - Identify theft prevention program. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known as the Identify Theft Prevention Program. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2 to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft red flags and by responding to such red flags in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
    Covered account means: 
(1)  An account that a financial institution or creditor offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a credit card account, mortgage loan, automobile loan, margin account, cell phone account, utility account, checking account, or savings account, and 
(2)  Any other account that the financial institution or creditor offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the financial institution or creditor from identity theft, including financial, operational, compliance, reputation, or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by a creditor to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
    Creditor means any person who regularly extends, renews, or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal, or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew, or continue credit and includes utility companies and telecommunications companies. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with a creditor. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative, or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and drivers' license information and for a natural person includes their social security number, mother's birth name, and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(d)  Findings. The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2 due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include utility accounts. The city has little or no previous experience with identity theft related to covered accounts. The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and is not otherwise recorded. There is a risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways: Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; and use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(e)  Process of establishing a covered account. As a precondition to opening a covered account in the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer, for example, a valid government issued identification card containing a photograph of the customer or, for customers who are not natural persons, a photograph of the customer's agent opening the account. Such applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and shall not otherwise be recorded. Each account shall be assigned an account number and may be assigned a personal identification number (PIN) which shall be unique to that account. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate assigned PINs and to encrypt account numbers and PINs. 
(f)  Access to covered account information. Access to customer accounts shall be password protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. Such password(s) shall be changed on a regular basis, shall be at least eight characters in length and shall contain letters, numbers and symbols. Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the city manager and the password changed immediately. Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(g)  Credit card payments. If credit card payments that are made over the Internet are processed through a third party service provider, such third party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(h)  Sources and types of red flags. All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for red flags as indicators of possible identity theft and such red flags may include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include but are not limited to: A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; a notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; a notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; an unusual number of recently established credit relationships; a material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or an account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include: Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or an application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include: Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or the Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include: Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example: the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. There is, for example: Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; a material change in purchasing or spending patterns; an account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used (taking into consideration the type of account, the expected pattern of usage and other relevant factors). Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or phishing relating to covered accounts. 
(i)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft for existing accounts. In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: 
    Contact the customer; if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account or close the account; Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; Notify a debt collector within three working days of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(j)  Prevention and mitigation of identity theft for new accounts. In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of red flags indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such red flag or combination of red flags suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such red flags to the city manager. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile red flags, the employee shall convey this information to the city manager, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the city manager, in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the city manager: Request additional identifying information from the applicant; deny the application for the new account; notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(k)  Updating the program. The city council shall periodically review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant red flags in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the city council shall consider the following factors and exercise its discretion in amending the program: The city's experiences with identity theft; updates in methods of identity theft; updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft; updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and updates in service provider arrangements. 
(l)  Program administration. The city clerk is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with red flag requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the city manager, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council. The city clerk will report to the city manager at least annually, on compliance with the red flag requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: The effectiveness of the policies and procedures in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; service provider arrangements; significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and recommendations for material changes to the program. The city clerk is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(m)  Outside service providers. In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the city clerk shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any red flags that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Former § 11-004) 
Sec. 11-3. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Short title. This section shall be known as Treatment of Address Discrepancies. 
(b)  Purpose. Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(c)  Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(d)  Policy. If the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the municipal service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
    Compare the information in the consumer report with: Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the Customer Information Program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(e)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. If the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; the city establishes a continuing relation with the consumer; and the city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(f)  Methods of confirming consumer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: Verifying the address with the consumer; reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; verifying the address through third party sources; or Using other reasonable process. 
(Former § 11-005) 
Secs. 11-4-11-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL WATER SYSTEM 

Sec. 11-26. - Illegal tapping or cutting of service. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity to turn on or to cut off water of the waterworks system of the city without having previously obtained the written permission of the city manager. 
(Former § 11-001(1.1)) 
Sec. 11-27. - Superintendent to issue permit and regulate connections. 
    Any person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity seeking to obtain water service from the city water system must first procure a permit from the city manager who shall have the authority to regulate how and where the connection or connections to the system can be made. 
(Former § 11-001(1.2)) 
Sec. 11-28. - Tampering with existing connections illegal. 
    It shall be illegal for any person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity to change or tamper with any existing water tap, meter or other connection or property of the city water system. When any change is desired or when a person has any complaint regarding a tap, meter or other connection or property of the water system, the complainant shall report same to the city manager who shall in turn investigate the complaint. If any changes are needed, they shall be made under the supervision and in accordance with the instructions of the city manager and not otherwise. 
(Former § 11-001(1.3)) 
Sec. 11-29. - Only one customer allowed per meter. 
    No more than one residence or business shall use water from one and the same meter, unless it is easily discernible by the city manager that each individual customer on a meter is paying an individual water bill of an appropriate amount based on said customer's water usage. 
(Former § 11-001(1.4)) 
Sec. 11-30. - Other sellers of water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity to sell or offer to sell water within the corporate limits of the city, unless permission to do so has been granted in writing by the council. 
(Former § 11-001(1.5)) 
Sec. 11-31. - Outdoor water use. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity to use municipally-supplied water or well-water outdoors for washing vehicles, cleaning purposes, lawn or garden watering or irrigation, or any other outdoor use during a time when such watering is prohibited by any water ban imposed by any local, county, regional, state or federal authority. 
(Former § 11-001(1.6)) 
Sec. 11-32. - Mandatory water connections. 
    The owners of all houses, buildings or properties for human occupancy, employment, industry, commerce, recreation, or other purposes, in the city and whose property line is within 300 feet of a city water line, shall, at the owner's expense paying a standard fee as set forth in the city schedule of fees, connect such property directly with the city public water system, within 30 days after the date of official notice by the city to the owner to do so. Provided, however, no single-family residential property owner served by a private well or farm served by a private well, which well predates the passage of the amendment from which this article derives in July, 2013, shall be required to connect with the city public water system line, except where necessary to preclude the use of water obtained from such private well that is demonstrably unfit for human consumption or other intended use. 
(Former § 11-001(1.7)) 
Sec. 11-33. - Wells within the city. 
    No well within the city, wherever located, shall be allowed unless the well meets the requirements hereinabove and all requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-5-134, and unless installed by a licensed water well contractor, and unless approval for said well has been granted by the county health department and a copy of said well permit furnished to the building official of the city. The building official shall present the matter to city council for issuance or denial of a city well permit, which shall be considered by council at a public meeting with notice and opportunity to be heard by the applicant. Under no circumstances shall any well system be connected to the city water system. 
(Former § 11-001(1.8)) 
Sec. 11-34. - Penalties. 
    Any person, persons, firm, corporation or other entity violating this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(Former § 11-001(2)) 
Secs. 11-35-11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MUNICIPAL SEWER SYSTEM 

Sec. 11-51. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of public and private sewers and drains, private sewage disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of waters and wastes into the public sewer system. 
(Former § 11-002(1)) 
Sec. 11-52. - Definitions. 
    BOD (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 201 C, expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch, or 1.27 centimeters, in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer which is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Slug means any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during normal operation. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer means a sewer that carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of sewage works and water pollution control for the city, or his or her authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, sewage or other liquids, and that are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Former § 11-002(2)) 
Sec. 11-53. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  Sanitary disposal of wastes. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  Untreated sewage/other polluted waters. It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent sections of this article. 
(c)  Septic tanks. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(d)  Toilet facilities required. The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city, shall install at his or her own expense suitable toilet facilities therein, and shall connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, provided that said public sewer is within 300 feet of the property line. 
(e)  Sewer backup. The city does not accept responsibility for blockages that may occur in lines not owned and maintained by the city, including, but not limited to, sewer stubs. Stubs are defined as the connection from the structure to the city main. All property owners should install backflow prevention devices to avoid raw sewage backflow. 
    Since most blockages occur in stubs rather than city lines, property owners should normally contact a private plumbing company rather than the city if they identify a problem with their sewer system. The plumbing company and/or property owner should contact the city public works department only after it has been determined that the problem appears to be in the city line rather than the privately owned system. 
    Upon contact from a plumbing company or property owner indicating a problem in the city owned line, a public works department crew will be dispatched to determine if the blockage is in city lines and, if appropriate, eliminate the blockage. The superintendent, or his designated representative, will normally make a determination as to whether or not the problem is/was in the city owned line. If the blockage is not in the city owned line, the property owner or plumbing company will be advised and the property owner will be responsible for correcting the problem and for all damages. 
(Former § 11-002(3)) 
Sec. 11-54. - Private sewage disposal. 
(a)  Private sewage required in absence of public sewage. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of subsection 11-53(d) above, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Permit required. Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the superintendent and by a duly authorized representative of the Walton County Health Department. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the city, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the superintendent. A permit inspection fee of $5.00 shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Inspection. A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the superintendent. He shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 72 hours of the receipt of notice by the superintendent. 
(d)  Specifications. The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the department of public health. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  Public sewer required, once available. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in subsection (d) above, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article within 60 days, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned, cleaned of sludge, and filled with clean bank-run gravel, dirt or other suitable material. 
(f)  Private facilities to be sanitary. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(g)  County health officer. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Walton County Health Department or the county health officer. 
(Former § 11-002(4)) 
Sec. 11-55. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  Disturbance of public sewers. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, or use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. 
(b)  Building sewer permits. There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the superintendent. A permit and inspection fee of $5.00 for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and $25.00 for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  Owner liable for all costs. All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  Separate sewers required; exceptions. A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building, the sewer line from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(e)  Old sewers to meet requirements of section. Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(f)  Adherence to building regulations. The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements hereof and other applicable rules and regulations of the city. To the extent applicable, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the A.S.T.M. and W.P.C.F Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Gravity flow desirable. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  Surface runoff prohibited. No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(i)  Building codes to be followed. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of this Code pertaining to the building and plumbing codes, and the administration thereof, adopted by the city. All such connections shall be made gas tight and water tight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the building inspector in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Code. 
(j)  EPA regulations. Any new industry or establishment producing industrial wastes shall comply with all regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency and the state environmental protection division of the department of natural resources, prior to connection with the city sewer system. 
(k)  Connection to be overseen by superintendent. The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the superintendent or his or her representative. 
(l)  Care of public property. All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(Former § 11-002(5)) 
Sec. 11-56. - Use of the public sewers. 
(a)  Surface runoff prohibited. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(b)  Combined sewers or storm sewers. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(c)  Prohibited waters and wastes. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewers: 
(1)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; 
(2)  Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, including but not limited to cyanides in excess of two mg/l as CN in the wastes as discharged to the public sewer; 
(3)  Any wastes or waters having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment and personnel of the sewage works; or 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, or paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole or ground by garbage grinders. 
(d)  Superintendent may prohibit other wastes and waters. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely in the opinion of the superintendent that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In determining the acceptability of these wastes, the superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers; materials of construction of the sewers; nature of the sewage treatment process; capacity of the sewage treatment plant; degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant; and other pertinent factors. The substances prohibited are: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees F or 65 degrees C; 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l or containing substances that may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees F and 150 degrees F (0 degrees C and 65 degrees C); 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent; 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine treatment, to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established by the superintendent for such works; 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
(6)  Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits that may be established by the superintendent as necessary after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters; 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(8)  Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.0; 
(9)  Materials that exert or cause: 
a.  Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (including but not limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (including but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium sulfate); 
b.  Excessive discoloration (including but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions); 
c.  Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works; and 
d.  Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein; and 
(10)  Waters or wastes containing substances that are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(e)  Duties and options of the superintendent. If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in sections 11-54 and 11-55 of this article, and which in the judgment of the superintendent, may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the city manager may: 
(1)  Reject the wastes; 
(2)  Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers; 
(3)  Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; 
(4)  Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and creating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges; 
(5)  Review and approve the design and installation of any plants and equipment use to pretreat or equalize waste flows; and/or 
(6)  Review and approve the admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having: 
a.  A five-day BOD greater than 300 mg/l; 
b.  Containing more than 350 mg/l of suspended solids; or 
c.  Having an average daily flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city. 
(f)  Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the superintendent, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(g)  Preliminary treatment facilities. Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the owner at his expense. 
(h)  Control manhole. When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  Sampling. All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published by the American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls whereas pH levels are determined from periodic grab samples.) 
(j)  Industrial agreements. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment thereof by the industrial concern. 
(Former § 11-002(6)) 
Sec. 11-57. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city sewer system. 
(Former § 11-002(7)) 
Sec. 11-58. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Powers of superintendent and other city employees. The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Limitations of authority. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(c)  Indemnity. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in subsection (a) above, the superintendent or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in subsection 11-56(h). 
(d)  Easements. The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the city holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to the private property. 
(Former § 11-002(8)) 
Sec. 11-59. - Penalties. 
(a)  Notice of violations. Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article except section 11-57 shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Fines. Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) above, or who shall violate section 11-57 above, shall be guilty of a violation under the terms of this article and on conviction thereof shall be fined in the amount not exceeding $100.00 for each violation. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Damages. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned the city by reason of such violation. 
(Former § 11-002(9)) 
Sec. 11-60. - Incorporation by reference. 
    The sewer use ordinance approved by the council on December 9, 1996, and the industrial pretreatment program regulations approved by the council on December 9, 1996 are incorporated herein and made a part hereof by reference. In the event of a conflict between said ordinance and/or regulations and this Code, the more stringent provision shall govern. 
(Former § 11-002(10)) 
Secs. 11-61-11-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMUNICATIONS UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY ENCROACHMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, adopted May 16, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as chapter 11, article IV, sections 11-76-11-84 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 11-76. - Declaration of findings and purpose, scope, definitions. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The City of Social Circle (the "city") is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote with the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city, and to protect public work infrastructure. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the state, including but not limited to Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. § 36-66B-4, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2 and O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3, has adopted the ordinance from which this article derives for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(b)  Scope. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. Where a franchise agreement, pole attachment agreement, or other agreement for the use of the city's rights-of-way has been entered into with the city, the provisions of such agreement shall control if any such provisions are in conflict with this chapter. 
(c)  Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. References hereafter to "sections" are, unless otherwise specified, preferences to sections in this chapter. Defined terms remain defined terms whether or not capitalized. 
    City means the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
    City clerk means the city clerk of the City of Social Circle, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
    Codified ordinances means the codified ordinances of the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
    Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make at least one of its facilities representatives is available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
    Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code. 
    Public works director means the public works director of the City of Social Circle, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
    Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
    Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of Registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or use of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-77. - Utility registration. 
(a)  Administration. The city clerk or her designee shall be the city official responsible for the administration of this section. 
(b)  Registration required. 
(1)  Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this article derives, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city clerk within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. 
(2)  Following the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, each utility who seeks to have facilities located in the rights-of-way under the control of the city, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the city clerk. 
(c)  Registration procedure. The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city clerk and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e., partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address, if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements. 
(4)  A copy of the service agreement, if applicable, or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(5)  All required information pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b) for those utilities which are considered a "telephone company" under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1(b) and seeking to install lines and similar facilities with the city's rights-of-way. 
(d)  Incomplete registration. If a registration is incomplete, the city clerk shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. If a registration is complete, the city clerk shall so notify the utility in writing. 
(e)  Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(f)  Facilities in place without registration. Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-78. - Construction notification. 
(a)  Notification required. It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without first providing written notification to the office of the public works director in accordance with the terms of this section. 
(b)  Notification procedure. Written notification of construction shall be made to the office of the public works director on a form approved by the public works director and shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  The estimated cost of the project; 
(7)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(c)  Emergency situations. In the event that the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility, for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(d)  Locate requests required. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 25-9-6, the "Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act", and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform or engage in blasting or excavating with mechanized equipment unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the Utilities Protection Center or by calling 8-1-1, beginning the next business day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than business days. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-79. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
    The failure to comply with any of the terms and conditions set forth in this section may result in the revocation of registration and removal of facilities from the rights-of-way. 
(1)  Utility Accommodation Manual adopted. The 2009 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification contained in this chapter. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the public works director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the manual. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(2)  Mobile Broadband Infrastructure Leads to Development Act Incorporated. The 2014 BILD Act is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated in the article as if fully set forth herein. 
(3)  Protection of traffic and roadway. No utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the city from reasonably maintain the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(4)  Grading. If the grades or lines of any street within the right-of-way are changed at any time by the city and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon reasonable notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocate all or any part of the facilities without any liability the city and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(5)  Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wireholding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-80. - Restoration of property. 
    A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may be come disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as or better than its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure of property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-81. - Discontinuance of operations, abandoned and unused facilities. 
(a)  A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: 
(1)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this article and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; 
(2)  Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities; 
(3)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities which must be approved by the public works director; 
(4)  Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; or 
(5)  Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities of the city. If a utility proceeds to transfer ownership to the city, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: 
a.  Purchase the facilities; 
b.  Accept donation of some or all facilities; or 
c.  Require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(b)  Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities; evicting the utility from the right-of-way prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-82. - Termination of registration. 
(a)  The registration statement shall remain in place for one year and renew each subsequent year automatically unless the utility is in default. The city shall give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: 
(1)  Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a registration application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; 
(2)  Attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; 
(3)  Practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or 
(4)  Made a material misrepresentation of fact in its application for registration. 
(b)  If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after such notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and the city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the approval of registration. If the public works director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: 
(1)  The city shall serve the utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow the utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. 
(2)  If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the registration terminated. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-83. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
(a)  No utility shall use the rights-of-way to operate any facilities that have not been authorized by the city in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(b)  No utility shall place or have placed in any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this article. 
(c)  Each and every unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation of this article and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(d)  No utility shall fail to comply with the provisions of this article. Each and every failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this article continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. 
(e)  Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Sec. 11-84. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
(b)  Reservation of regulatory and police powers. The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, the state and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(c)  Compliance. No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(d)  Appeal of administrative decisions. All appeals provided for by this article and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the public works director or city clerk as specified in this chapter. 
(e)  Chapter [section] headings. Chapter [section] headings are for convenience only and shall not be used to interpret any portion of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-10, § 1, 5-16-2017) 
Chapter 12 - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Tax sales provisions. 
(a)  Purpose. The city recognizes that in order to enhance the payment of ad valorem taxes to the city, it is essential that a city officer be given the power to conduct tax sales under Georgia law. The time, place, and manner of the sale of property, both real and personal, for taxes due the city, shall be the same as provided by Georgia law. 
(b)  Powers of the mayor. The mayor shall have the right to conduct tax sales for the city as a duly authorized officer of the city, and to take all steps required by state law to hold such a sale. Such a sale may be held in the council chamber at city hall or the usual place of meeting of the council. 
(Former § 12-001) 
Sec. 12-2. - Skateboard regulations. 
(a)  Purpose. Since the use of skateboards within the city is increasing; the use of skateboards within the central business district constitutes a hazard; and the unregulated use of skateboards within the other portions of said city also constitutes a hazard, it is the best interest of the public health, safety and well-being to regulate the use of skateboards within the city. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Central business district, for the purpose of this section, is the main area of business of the city, and consists of the areas along and near South Cherokee Road, from its intersection with Sycamore Street to its intersection with Hightower Trail; North Cherokee Road, from its intersection with Hightower Trail to its intersection with Holly Street; Hightower Trail, from its intersection with Clark Street to its intersection with Adams Street. This area is further identified on a map exhibit located in the office of the clerk. 
    Skateboard means a narrow board mounted on roller-skate or similar type wheels. 
(c)  Restrictions on the use of skateboards. 
(1)  Skateboard riding prohibited in central business district. No person shall ride a skateboard upon the public streets or sidewalks within the central business district of the city. 
(2)  Skateboard riding regulated in other areas of city. All persons riding a skateboard within the city outside of the central business district must do so in conformance with section 8-1 of this Code and with the state's Uniform Rules of the Road as therein incorporated. 
(3)  Penalties. Every person convicted of a violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(Former § 12-003) 
Sec. 12-3. - Commode regulations. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)  On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six-tenths gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of two and one-half gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and one-half gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections (b)(1)-(5). 
(d)  The requirements of subsection (b) shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building which includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(e)  (1)  Exemptions. New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b), (c), and (d) when: 
a.  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
b.  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this Section were installed; 
c.  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
d.  Units to be installed are: 
1.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
2.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
3.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(2)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (1)a., b., c. or d. of this subsection (e) shall request the exemption by applying at the office of the building inspector for the city. A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(f)  Enforcement; penalty. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by the office of the building inspector of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building inspector of the city. 
(2)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this section shall be tried before the city court. Upon conviction, a violation of this section may be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 or imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. 
(Former § 12-004) 
Sec. 12-4. - Bed and breakfast regulations. 
(a)  A bed and breakfast is defined as a structure occupied by all of its owners, wherein lodging or lodging and breakfast only are provided to guests for compensation. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the operator or operators, and said operator or operators shall live in the structure when the bed and breakfast operation is in operation. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to hotels, inns, motels, motor lodges, boarding houses, rooming houses or other establishments providing rooms to guests for compensation. None of said establishments shall be permitted in said city except as otherwise allowed by the City Code. No bed and breakfast establishment shall be operated except as allowed herein. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to bed and breakfast establishments being operated on a temporary basis for charitable or civic organizations. Said establishments shall be permitted at the discretion of the council upon application for no more than four consecutive days and for no more than eight days per calendar year. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bed and breakfast establishment without having first obtained a license. The annual fee for such license shall be $100.00 for the whole or any part of one year, and shall be paid at city hall no later than December 15th of the preceding year or upon the filing of an application for said license. 
(e)  Each operator shall keep a register of all guests of the bed and breakfast operation. Such list shall be available for inspection by said city or its agents at all reasonable times. 
(f)  The maximum stay for any occupant of bed and breakfast operations shall be seven consecutive days. 
(g)  All applicants for a license to operate a bed and breakfast shall submit the following materials to the city for review: 
(1)  A floor plan of the single-family dwelling unit, illustrating that the proposed operation will comply with all ordinances and regulations of the said city, and all other governmental agencies or bodies. 
(2)  A completed and signed application form. 
(3)  A plat of survey of the subject real estate by a Georgia registered surveyor which shows all improvements located on said real estate and the distance from the bed and breakfast dwelling to the nearest bed and breakfast dwelling. 
(4)  A non-refundable license application fee of $100.00. Said fee is in addition to the $100.00 annual license fee, which license fee must be paid at the same time and is refundable in the event the license application is not approved. 
(h)  No bed and breakfast license shall be granted to any applicant until the bed and breakfast premises have been inspected by the building inspector of the city who finds that the electrical and plumbing systems of the premises are in safe and satisfactory condition. 
(i)  All licenses granted hereunder shall be issued for one year or until December 31st, whichever date is earlier. 
(j)  All license holders shall maintain separate records which show all activities of their bed and breakfast operation and shall keep a profit and loss statement. All of said documents and related papers shall be available to said city or its agents at all reasonable times. 
(k)  In deciding whether to grant, renew, suspend or revoke a license hereunder, the council shall consider the following: 
(1)  Compliance by the applicant or license holder with the provisions hereof and all other relevant laws or ordinances, regulations and resolutions of said city and any other governmental body or agency; 
(2)  The character and reputation of the applicant or license holder; 
(3)  The conduct of the business(es) of the applicant or license holder; 
(4)  The actual or proposed effect of the bed and breakfast on nearby properties, including but not limited to noise, pollution, dirt, property values and all other relevant considerations; 
(5)  The actual or proposed effect of the bed and breakfast on the city including the services and utilities of said city; 
(6)  The profit and loss of the bed and breakfast establishments and reason for operation by the license holder or applicant; and 
(7)  All other relevant issues, including, but not limited to, the public health, safety, morals, interest and convenience. 
(l)  No bed and breakfast shall be located nearer than 500 feet from another bed and breakfast as measured from the entrance of each establishment via the nearest street or streets. 
(m)  No bed and breakfast establishment shall be allowed except in areas zoned historic preservation residential district, single-family residential district, professional district, or central commercial district, according to the sectional atlas property maps bound in one volume entitled "Official Zoning District Maps for Social Circle, Georgia", adopted November 9, 1998, as amended, which are hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
(n)  No more than a total of six bed and breakfast establishments shall be allowed in the combined total of areas zoned historic preservation residential district and single-family residential district according to the sectional atlas property maps bound in one volume entitled "Official Zoning District Maps for Social Circle, Georgia", as amended, which are hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
(o)  No premises shall be utilized for bed and breakfast operation unless all the following conditions have been met: 
(1)  There shall be no more than four bedrooms per dwelling unit used for bed and breakfast operation. 
(2)  Indoor lavatories and bathing facilities must be available to all guests using any bed and breakfast operation. 
(3)  No pets of the guests shall be permitted either inside or outside the premises. 
(4)  Except for existing signs and one sign made out of wood or wood-like material measuring no larger than two feet by one foot affixed to the bed and breakfast structure and the background color of the sign being the same color as the exterior of the bed and breakfast, no signs indicating the structure is being used as a bed and breakfast shall be allowed on the property. 
(5)  Adequate off-street parking must be available for the bed and breakfast operation. No on-street parking for guests or operators of the bed and breakfast shall be permitted. 
(6)  No cooking by guests shall be allowed. 
(7)  The dwelling unit shall contain at least 2,500 square feet of heated living area, and be detached from any other dwelling. 
a.  There shall be no outside evidence of bed and breakfast operation, and no changes within six months of the date of application by the applicant shall be made in the bed and breakfast structure that are visible from the exterior. 
b.  The bed and breakfast shall be totally operated in the principal existing structure and not in any accessory structure. 
(8)  No more than one non-family worker shall be allowed outside or inside the premises exclusive of maintenance personnel. All family workers must permanently reside inside the premises. 
(9)  Alcoholic beverages, beer and/or wine shall not be sold to any guest at the premises. 
(10)  No meals except breakfast may be served to any guest. 
(p)  All bed and breakfasts located in areas zoned historic preservation residential district or single-family residential district according to the sectional atlas property maps bound in one volume entitled "Official Zoning District Maps for Social Circle, Georgia", as amended, which are hereby incorporated herein by reference, shall be used exclusively for residential and for bed and breakfast purposes. No type of home occupation or commercial activity shall be conducted on any portion of the subject real estate. 
(q)  A bed and breakfast license shall be immediately voided upon the sale or transfer of the subject real estate. 
(r)  No owner of a bed and breakfast establishment shall discriminate regarding his/her guests on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, creed or natural origin. 
(s)  All bed and breakfast operations shall be subject to the hotel/motel tax of the city. 
(t)  Any violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and shall subject the offender to a fine of not more than $500.00. In addition thereto, any such violation shall be cause for revocation, suspension or non-renewal of the offender's bed and breakfast license. 
(Former § 12-005) 
Sec. 12-5. - Drug-free commercial zone. 
(a)  Purpose. O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6 authorizes drug-free commercial zones, whereupon conviction of any person for a drug offense will allow increased criminal punishment. 
(b)  Passage by city in 2004. Law enforcement documented a high rate of drug related crime in and surrounding that certain commercial and contiguous area described in more detail in Exhibit "B" to the ordinance originally passed by the mayor and council in 2004, which law enforcement believed would be curbed by the enhanced punishment under O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6 for manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, or possessing with intent to distribute controlled substances or marijuana within a drug-free commercial zone. That documentation, ordinance and map are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein and includes all previously zoned commercial property within the marked boundaries, and all residential property within the marked boundaries contiguous to such commercially zoned area and within one-half mile from any portion of the commercially zoned area. 
(c)  Signage. The city posted signage designating the area as a drug-free commercial zone in prominent and conspicuous places on the boundaries of and throughout the zone. 
(d)  Administration. The city filed the required documentation of the zone with the department of community affairs, obtained the required adoption of the zone by the general assembly, provide the department of community affairs with copies of the amendment, map, initial report, and annual reports, maintained said records in a permanent register, published the three-week notice of designation, and permitted enforcement of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-32.6 commencing 30 days after adoption of the zone by the general assembly. 
(Former § 12-007) 
Sec. 12-6. - Sidewalk cafes. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this division is to provide for regulation of sidewalk cafes operated by qualified restaurants on public sidewalks, and to more fully promote the public interest by contributing to a viable and attractive commercial and pedestrian environment. In recognition thereof, reasonable regulation of sidewalk cafes is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and the interest of the city and the primary use of the public streets and sidewalks by vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this section, the words below shall have the following meaning: 
    City manager shall mean the city manager of the City of Social Circle and those to whom he delegates or assigns duties under this section, including but not limited to the Social Circle Downtown Development Authority. 
    Operator or permittee shall mean the person operating the restaurant with its associated sidewalk cafe, and shall include, but not be limited to, an owner, lessor, renter or manager. 
    Person shall mean both natural persons and legal persons such as corporations, partnerships or LLCs. 
(c)  Qualifications. The use of sidewalks for restaurant tables shall only be permitted incidental to the operation of a "restaurant" or "convenience store" as defined in appendix A, article III of the city zoning code. No permit is required unless the operator desires to sell alcohol on the sidewalk area. However, the use of the sidewalk to operate a sidewalk cafe is a privilege, not a right, and any person who violates the conditions of this section may be forbidden to operate a sidewalk cafe after notice and a hearing. A permit is required to sell alcohol on the sidewalk as set forth below. 
(d)  Temporary closing of sidewalk cafes. 
(1)  Sidewalk cafes may be ordered closed temporarily by the city whenever deemed necessary in the sole discretion of the city, whenever the area may be needed for a public purpose, including but not limited to construction, maintenance, public health, safety or welfare, emergencies, and public events such as parades or street parties. 
(2)  The city may order the immediate removal or relocation of all, or parts of, a sidewalk cafe in emergency situations or for safety considerations, without notice. The city and its officers and employees shall not be responsible for sidewalk cafe fixtures relocated during emergencies. 
(e)  Restrictions on use of sidewalks. 
(1)  In no event shall the uses permitted by this division reduce that portion of any sidewalk customarily used by pedestrians to less than five feet in width. Additionally, contiguous pedestrian flow must be maintained between two or more adjacent sidewalk cafes. The city may designate portions of the sidewalk which must not be obstructed under any circumstances, and may restrict usage in any manner deemed necessary by the city. 
(2)  Nothing will be placed within five feet of a fire hydrant, pedestrian crosswalk or handicapped corner curb cut. 
(3)  The city reserves the right of access to all portions of the sidewalk included in areas permitted for the purposes of sidewalk repair or other necessary purposes. 
(4)  Sidewalk cafe operator shall maintain the sidewalk and the curb and gutter immediately adjacent to it in a clean and safe condition. Full daily cleaning is required. Refuse shall not be disposed of in the city's sidewalk trash receptacles. The area shall be kept clear of all debris. The operator shall also be responsible for cleaning the ground or floor surface on which the sidewalk cafe is located and the gutter area immediately adjacent to the sidewalk cafe. Such cleaning may include pressure cleaning. If the area is not maintained in a neat and orderly appearance after notice, the city may then take steps necessary to place the property in a neat and clean order and charge the operator with the reasonable cost of cleaning or repairs. Such action by the city does not create a continuing obligation on the part of the city to make further repairs or to maintain the property and does not create any liability against the city for any damages to the property if such cleaning or repairs were completed in good faith. 
(5)  No tables, chairs, or any other parts of sidewalk cafes shall be attached, chained or in any manner affixed to any tree, post, sign or other fixture, curb, or sidewalk in or near the permitted area. 
(6)  Only the area in front of a restaurant, as defined by projecting its interior width outward perpendicular to the street to a point at which it intersects the roadway (or within the sidewalk frontage of the building where the validly licensed restaurant is located provided that written approval is supplied by the building owner) can be used by the restaurant. Placement of tables and chairs will be permitted in areas more than ten feet from the front of the building only when the city manager determines it is in the best interest of the public to permit such placement. All tables and chairs must be of a design, material, and specification suitable for outside dining. 
(f)  Insurance prerequisite. 
(1)  The operator of a sidewalk cafe agrees to, and does by its operation of a sidewalk cafe, indemnify, defend, save and hold harmless the city, its officers and employees from any and all claims, liability, lawsuits, damages and causes of action which may arise out of operator's activity on the demised premises. The operator shall provide indemnification to the city in writing on a form provided by the city manager. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to operate a sidewalk cafe unless the applicant shall furnish in a form acceptable to the city manager evidence of commercial general liability insurance, and alcohol license liability insurance if serving alcohol, naming the city as a co-insured party and insuring the city against any liability resulting from the uses permitted pursuant to this section. This coverage shall not be less than $500,000.00 per occurrence. 
(3)  It shall not be lawful to operate a sidewalk cafe at any time the insurance required by this section is not maintained and evidence of its continuance filed with the city. 
(g)  Revocation. The privilege of an operator to use the sidewalk of the city may be revoked at any time by written notice to be served on the operator; such service to be by certified mail or personal service. Upon receipt of such revocation notice, the permittee shall have ten days to appeal such revocation to the mayor and council, whose decision after notice and hearing as required by the governing mayor and council section of this Code shall be final. 
(h)  Sale of alcoholic beverages at sidewalk cafe. Only a properly permitted restaurant with a sidewalk cafe, which holds a valid alcohol license for consumption on the premises, may serve alcohol to customers in the sidewalk cafe, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  Alcohol may not be served in its original container, but must be served in clear plastic cups. No bottles or cans are allowed. 
(2)  Only a single serving of alcohol may be in possession of any patron. 
(3)  Patrons must be seated while consuming an alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  Patrons may not remove any alcohol from the premises of the restaurant where the alcoholic beverage was purchased. 
(i)  Combination permits. Beginning with the alcohol permit renewals of 2017, each party seeking to use the sidewalks for the purposes allowed under this Code section shall seek a sidewalk cafe permit and a separate alcohol serving permit in one application pursuant to the requirements of the alcohol ordinance. In addition to the normal alcohol permit requirements, this includes a requirement of a scale drawing of the exact area that may be used for serving alcohol on the public sidewalk as an exception to the open container laws of the state. 
(j)  Right to limit or deny admission or service. Within the designated area of a cafe, the operator holding a permit under this section shall have the right to limit access and occupancy to only bona fide paying customers of that operator's restaurant who are behaving in a lawful manner. 
(k)  Penalties. In addition to losing the privilege of operating a sidewalk cafe, any person, firm, corporation or agent, servant, employee, officer or contractor for any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision, requirement, term, or condition of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. The performance of any act prohibited by any section or provision of this section, or the failure to perform any act required thereby, shall constitute a violation and an offense hereunder and any person found guilty of a violation of any section or provision of this section shall be punished as provided under the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city and may be punished with a fine up to $1,000.00 and as set forth in other provision of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-4, § 1, 4-18-2017) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2017-4, § 1, adopted April 18, 2017, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 12-6 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 12-7. - Wrecker service call list. 
(a)  The city police department maintains two call lists which are used to notify wrecker service operators of the need for a wrecker service vehicle. All requests for wrecker service by police department personnel shall be made to the police dispatcher. The police dispatcher shall make calls for wrecker service on a rotating basis from the appropriate call list when a specific service is requested. Each list requires specific equipment as is listed below. 
(1)  Standard duty call list. Every qualified wrecker service can enroll and be placed upon the police department standard duty call list. A standard duty wrecker is a wrecker which has at least a 10,000-pound minimum gross vehicle weight (GVW) rating, equipped with an 8,000-pound P.T.O. mechanically-driven power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels or of equal capabilities. For purposes of towing, a standard duty wrecker shall be capable of towing cars, light trucks and similar size vehicles. 
(2)  Heavy duty call list. Every qualified wrecker service can enroll and be placed upon the police department heavy duty call list. A heavy duty wrecker is a wrecker which has at least a 25,000-pound minimum GVW rating, equipped with a 16-ton or larger P.T.O. mechanically-driven power winch, crane and boom having dual wheels or of equal capabilities. The wrecker service shall have the equipment capable of moving all types of vehicles including large trucks, buses and loaded and unloaded tractor trailers. 
(b)  For documentation purposes, the police dispatcher shall maintain tour logs which include a standard duty log, a heavy duty log, an owner request log and an emergency call log. Each log shall include wrecker call time, date, location, police officer making the request and police dispatcher on duty. In addition, the owner request log shall indicate the name and address of the party making the specific request. 
(c)  A wrecker service on either rotating call list that has been called by the department and canceled will receive the next rotating call. 
(d)  In case of emergency (i.e., trapped person or major intersection blocked), the nearest qualified wrecker will be called along with the city fire department. Emergency status shall be determined by the county fire department or watch commander on the scene. 
(e)  Wrecker services shall be required to be available via listed phone numbers 24 hours a day, seven days a week with adequate manpower to respond to calls immediately. 
(f)  A wrecker service shall respond to a call within a maximum of 25 minutes for standard duty and within a maximum of 45 minutes for heavy duty. 
(1)  A wrecker service that fails to respond to a call as required in subsection (d) of this section or to answer a telephone call from the police department within the first seven rings will lose its turn on the rotation list. 
(2)  It shall be deemed an offense under this section if a wrecker service accepts a call for service from a police dispatcher, but fails to arrive on the scene 15 minutes beyond the maximum response time. Response time shall be measured from the time the wrecker service operator accepts the call for service from the police dispatcher. 
In any 12-month period, if a wrecker service is found to be in noncompliance with the response time standards of this division, the wrecker service shall be notified by the city police department and provided with written notice of such noncompliance and removed from the appropriate call lists according to the following schedule: 
a.  First offense: Two rotations off list; 
b.  Second offense: Five rotations off list; 
c.  Third offense: Ten rotations off list; 
d.  Fourth offense: Removal from both lists. 
(g)  When a wrecker service is unavailable for calls for an extended period, the wrecker service operator shall inform the chief of police or designee of the period of time during which said service is unavailable and the following procedure applies: 
    The name of the wrecker service will be skipped on the list during the period of non-availability. The wrecker service operator shall be responsible for notifying the police chief or designee of a return to availability status. 
(h)  Wrecker services only can be listed on the police department rotating call lists and only under the name as registered on the business license and as registered on the permit issued pursuant to this division. Any services, functions, business opportunities or products performed by the wrecker service deemed by the chief of police to be in conflict with the services required by this division, including service, repair or body shops, shall be investigated by the chief of police or their designee. If a conflict of interest is determined to exist, it shall be documented in writing and the wrecker service shall be prohibited from joining or remaining on the police department rotating call lists. 
(i)  Only businesses directly operating wrecker service vehicles are eligible for the police department rotating call lists. Businesses that subcontract for wrecker services are not eligible. 
(Ord. No. 2018-1, § 1, 2-20-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-1, § 1, adopted February 20, 2018, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, inclusion as section 12-7 is at the discretion of the editor. 
Secs. 12-8-12-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY AND ROADS FOR PARADES, FILMING, ETC. 

Sec. 12-26. - Basis for this article. 
(a)  Requests by private entities to use public property. Private organizations and groups of private persons have from time to time sought to use public property and public roads within the city for private purposes. Such uses have included parades, television and/or movie filming, advertisement filming, road closings and other related activities. 
(b)  Private uses of public property should not interfere with safety. It is in the public interest that the uses described in subsection (a) not interfere unduly with the rights of citizens not participating therein nor endanger the public safety nor obstruct the orderly flow of traffic; thus it is right and proper for the security, welfare, health and convenience of the citizens of the city and for the preservation of the peace and good order that rules and regulations for certain activities be established. 
(Former § 12-002(1.)) 
Sec. 12-27. - Definitions. 
    Manager means the city manager shall be the administrator for the receipt and processing of applications for a permit for a private organization or group of private persons to hold a parade, television and/or movie filming, advertisement filming, road closing, or other use of public property and roads for private purposes. The manager may be assisted by other city employees. 
    Private organization or group of private persons shall apply to any firm, partnership, corporation, association, or group of individuals more than three in number, or their representatives, acting as a unit. 
    Private purpose shall be any purpose not commanded or directed by statute, ordinance or other regulation to be performed by the state, county, city or other governmental entity. 
(Former § 12-002(2.)) 
Sec. 12-28. - Permit regulations. 
(a)  Permit required. Every private organization or group of private persons who wishes to use public property or roads within the city for private purposes in holding a parade, television and/or movie filming, advertisement filming, road closing or other similar activity is hereby required to have a permit from the city for the privilege of engaging in any such activity, unless such permit is prohibited under state law or the activity is otherwise exempted by law, ordinance, or other valid regulation. 
(b)  Application for permit required. Every private organization or group of private persons required to procure a permit under this article shall submit an application for the permit to the city manager, which application shall conform to the requirements of this article and all other applicable laws of the city and shall be in form substantially as set out in this article below. 
(c)  Timely submittal of application. Each application shall be a written statement upon forms provided by the city manager and submitted within a reasonable time prior to the planned activity, for security checks, verifications and arrangements to be made. The city manager will act on the completed application within ten days of the receipt of said application. 
(d)  Application information. Each application for a permit to hold a parade, television and/or movie filming, advertisement filming, road closing or other similar activity shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and home address of the applicant if an individual, or main office address if a corporation or partnership or other organization, and telephone number where applicant may be contacted; 
(2)  Date, time and place where the proposed activity is to be carried on, including proposed routes of passage; 
(3)  Kind and class of activity to be carried on; 
(4)  Names and home addresses of the partners, if a partnership; 
(5)  Names and home addresses of the officers and directors or members, if a corporation or other organization; and 
(6)  Any additional information which the city manager may find reasonably necessary to the fair administration of this article, which may include a complete record of all arrests and convictions against the applicant and every partner, officer, member or director of the applicant for violations of any and all laws and ordinances of the city, county, state or federal government, other than minor traffic violations. 
(e)  Application to be signed. Each application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant if an individual, or by a partner of a partnership or by an officer if a corporation or other organization. 
(f)  City to use application for administrative purposes only. All information furnished or secured under the authority of this article should be used solely in administering the provisions of this article. 
(g)  False statements. False statements in any application for a permit shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit, denial of the application, and/or denial of future applications. 
(h)  Fees. Any application, permit and registration fees, as fixed from time to time by the council, required under this article, shall accompany the application. 
(Former § 12-002(3.)) 
Sec. 12-29. - Procedures for issuing permits. 
(a)  Administration. The city manager shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the application and the issuance of permits thereunder. 
(b)  Duties of city manager. The manager, or an authorized representative, shall have, among others, the following duties: 
(1)  To prepare and provide for the necessary forms for the application for a permit and for the submission of any required information as may be necessary to properly administer and enforce the provisions of this article; 
(2)  To review the application for completeness, collect whatever fees may be required, designate or coordinate sites and set time schedules, and, where appropriate, receive the approval of the state department of transportation, state highway patrol, and the sheriff of Walton County or a representative of the city department of public safety, or any other necessary public officer, for the requested activity; and 
(3)  To issue to the private organization or group of private persons a permit within ten days of such approval. The city manager may, however, when he deems it appropriate for the public health, safety and welfare, defer the issuance of a permit until the application for same shall have been approved by the council. 
(c)  Other officer(s) to make recommendation to city manager. When this article provides for the review of an application for a permit by a city officer designated therein, the manager shall forward a copy of the application to that officer. The officer charged with reviewing the application shall make a recommendation to the manager after receiving a copy of the application. 
(d)  Manager to act on application or forward to council. Upon the receipt of the recommendation of the reviewing officer as hereinabove provided, or upon the receipt of the application if no reviewing officer is designated, the city manager shall take action upon the recommendation and application, although when he deems it appropriate for the public health, safety and welfare he may refer the same to the council for consideration and action at its next public meeting. 
(e)  Valid reason must exist for denying permit. Unless some material interference with the rights of non-participant citizens exists, or the orderly flow of traffic would be obstructed unreasonably, or there is a reasonable likelihood of a clear and present endangerment to citizens of the city, or there would be other unreasonable interference with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience of the general public, the permit shall be granted. 
(f)  City manager may designate sites, set time schedules, etc. Where more than one permit is sought for the same date or where the proposed route would result in interference as described in subsection (e) above, the city manager shall have the authority to designate reasonable sites and/or routes and set time schedules for the beginning and ending of the activity. The city manager shall have authority to cancel the permit where the activity fails to begin within a reasonable time after the time set for it to begin based on other activities for which permits have been granted or based on the unreasonable interference caused by such delay with the public welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience to the general public. 
(g)  Manager to issue permit. Once the applicant submits his application per this article, and once the city manager completes the permit issuance procedures described in this article, the city manager shall issue a permit to the applicant, which permit shall state the nature of the activity authorized and bear the date of issuance and the signature of the city manager. 
(Former § 12-002(4.)) 
Sec. 12-30. - Appeals of denied applications. 
(a)  Applicants may appeal denied applications. Any applicant whose application for a permit under this article is denied by the city manager, may appeal such denial to the council, which shall consider such appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting next following the receipt of the applicant's appeal. 
(b)  City manager must justify decision to deny application. The council shall consider the appeal by requiring the city manager to explain why the permit was denied. Unless the city manager can show material interference with the rights of non-participating citizens; unreasonable obstruction of the orderly flow of traffic; a reasonable likelihood of a clear and present endangerment to citizens of the city; other unreasonable interference with the welfare, peace, safety, health, good order and convenience of the general public; or failure to comply with the dictates of this article the permit shall be granted. 
(Former § 12-002(5.)) 
Sec. 12-31. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Violation of article. Any person who violates or fails to comply with any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be amenable to the processes of the city court. 
(b)  Punishment for violations. Any person or organization convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of this article shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by confinement not to exceed six months, or both, in the discretion of the city court. 
(c)  Civil penalties. Any person, being an officer or employee of the city, who shall violate any provision of this article may be discharged from public service or employment or be subjected to such other disciplinary action as may be appropriate. 
(d)  Defense to prosecution. It shall not be a defense to any prosecution under this article for failure to obtain a permit before engaging in any activity described in this article that a permit has in fact been issued unless, at his trial, the accused produces in court a valid permit or certified copy thereof. 
(Former § 12-002(6.)) 
Sec. 12-32. - Deposits and financial responsibility. 
(a)  Permittee responsible for damage and injuries. Nothing in this article shall relieve any person or persons or organization from responsibility for any injuries or damage to persons or property, private or public, occasioned by their acts or omissions arising from the activity for which any permit under this article was issued. 
(b)  Security deposit for event. After examining the application and receiving the advice and assistance of any other officer named herein, the manager, after consideration of the facts reported in the application and any such advice and assistance from another public officer as herein provided, including prior experiences involving the same or similar activity, may require, as a condition for the issuance of the permit, that a fee be paid in an amount reasonably necessary to provide for, among other things, clean up after the event, special first aid or medical resources, security for vehicles at any staging area, special traffic considerations, toilet facilities, and similar special expenses occasioned by the activity. This amount shall not exceed $1,000.00. 
(c)  Special sanitation, medical and other provisions for event may be required. As a condition to issuing a permit, the city manager may require the organization or group to provide personnel for trash cleanup of affected areas littered during the activity for which a permit is sought, the provision of first aid and medical resources if considered necessary by the city manager, proof of sufficient storage areas for a large influx of motor vehicles occasioned by the permitted activity, provision of temporary toilet facilities and other similar special and extraordinary items considered to be necessary for the permitted activity in the opinion of the city manager, which may be based on any past experience with such activities and any coordination with other governmental employees and officials. In no event shall the city manager require private organizations or groups of private persons engaging in a parade to provide personnel for normal governmental functions, such as traffic control and police protection. If additional requirements are placed on organizations or groups in accordance with this subsection, and those requirements are not met, then said failure to comply with the requirements shall be grounds for denial of any subsequent permit requested by said organization or group and for any claims for funds expended by the city for those expenses agreed to but not provided by the applicant. 
(d)  Individuals may be excused from security deposit requirements. If the organization be other than individuals, a permit will not be issued without the making of the necessary deposit; individuals may be excused from such a deposit on account of indigence upon execution under oath by the individual applicant, or by each individual in a group applying for a permit, of a pauper's affidavit. Prior to receipt of such an affidavit, the city manager shall advise the applicant orally or in writing of the penalties for the execution of a false document. 
(Former § 12-002(7.)) 
Sec. 12-33. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Funeral processions, provided the city manager is notified at least 24 hours in advance of the time and route; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational or school activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  Uses of the recreational property of the city for recreational purposes. 
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT 
    For parade, assembly, demonstration, road closing or related activity on public property or on public roads in the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
Applicant's Section 
Name of applicant applying for permit: _____ 
Street address of applicant: _____ 
Mailing address of applicant: _____ 
Telephone numbers where applicant may be contacted: _____ 
Date of proposed activity: _____ 
Time to begin and end activity: _____ 
Place for activity (attach route or map if applicable): _____ 
Kind and class of activity: _____
  
_____ 
Name of organization: _____ (if any) 
Names and home address of all partners if a partnership (Attach list if necessary) _____ 
Names and home addresses of all Officers, members and directors of organization (attach list if necessary) _____ 
Have you or any of the persons named above ever plead guilty to or convicted for violation of any ordinance or law of the City, Walton County, the State, or the Federal Government, other than minor traffic violations? _____ 
If so, attach a supplement setting out the date, description and disposition in each case. 
Have you read the warning set out below? _____ 
Have you read and signed the indemnity agreement? _____ 
Have you paid the application fee? _____ 
If a deposit for extraordinary expenses of law enforcement is required, do you understand that the same may be waived only if each member of the group is indigent and completes a pauper's affidavit? _____ 
If a deposit is required, have you paid it or completed a pauper's affidavit? _____ 
APPLICANT SIGNATURE: _____ 
The foregoing was sworn to and subscribed before me _______, 20__. 
___________ 
Notary Public,________Co., GA My commission expires: _____ 
WARNING: False statements shall be grounds for immediate revocation of this permit or denial of the application or denial of future applications. Applications must be readable. 
CITY MANAGER'S SECTION 
Application fee of $ _______ set. 
Application received on: _______ 
In cash/check #_______, on ___________ 
(name of financial institution)/with pauper's affidavit signed and sworn to. 
Approval of Department of Transportation, State Highway Patrol, City Policy Chief, Sheriff or a representative of the Social Circle Department of Public Safety, other necessary public officials required/not required . 
Approval received on _______, 20__. 
Date, time and place of activity as set out in application is approved/not approved . 
Approval is given for alternate date _______, 20__, time _______, place _______, (attach route for or map if applicable), for the following reasons: 
_________________________________________________ 
Deposit for extraordinary expenses is necessary/not necessary in the amount of $ _______. 
Deposit has been received in the form of cash/check #_________ on _______, (institution) in the specified amount. 
Pauper's affidavit by each member of the group received and attached hereto on _______, 20__. 
Approval of application is withheld for referral to the Council at the next public meeting on _______, 20__. 
The permit is denied for the following reasons: _____ 
____________________________________________ 
___________City Manager, Social Circle, Georgia 
Date signed: ___________, 20__. 
(Former § 12-002(8.)) 
Secs. 12-34-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - YARD SALE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 12-51. - Permit required; number of permits limited. 
    Any person desiring to sell used merchandise or personal property of such person's own, or of another person, on such person's own premises or at other locations within the city, shall obtain a permit from the city for such sale. Upon request, any one family unit shall be issued a permit for a period of two days; however, no family unit will receive more than four permits in any one-year period. The permit shall be displayed for the duration of the sale. 
(Former § 12-006(a.)) 
Sec. 12-52. - Signs. 
    Signs are permitted. These signs may be placed on the public right-of-way no sooner than 24 hours before the first permit day. These signs must be removed from the public right-of-way within 24 hours of the last permit day. 
(Former § 12-006(b.)) 
Sec. 12-53. - Times. 
    All garage/yard sales shall be operated or conducted during the daylight hours, from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., for no longer than two consecutive days. 
(Former § 12-006(c.)) 
Sec. 12-54. - Exemptions. 
    Sales and display at carnivals, festivals, BHT/Main Street sponsored city-wide yard sales and bazaars are not regulated hereunder. 
(Former § 12-006(d.)) 
Chapter 14 - NATURAL GAS 

Sec. 14-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "natural gas code" of the city and may be cited as such. 
(Former § 14-001) 
Sec. 14-2. - Purpose and scope. 
    This chapter is to provide minimum standards, provisions and requirements for safe installation of consumer's gas piping and gas appliances. All such gas piping and gas appliances installed, replaced, maintained, or repaired within the corporate limits of the city shall conform to the requirements of this chapter and to the specifications, rules and regulations of the building code. These specifications, rules, and regulations shall be kept in file in the office of the clerk. In any instance where the building code shall be in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter, the more stringent regulations shall prevail. 
(Former § 14-002) 
Sec. 14-3. - Use of existing piping and appliances. 
    Notwithstanding any provision in this chapter to the contrary, consumer's piping installed prior to December 31, 1996, or piping installed to supply other than natural gas, may be converted to natural gas, if the gas inspector finds, upon inspection and proper tests, that such piping will render reasonably satisfactory gas service to the consumer and will not in any way endanger life or property, otherwise, such piping shall be altered or replaced, in whole or in part, to conform with the requirements of this section. 
(Former § 14-003) 
Sec. 14-4. - Bond and license. 
(a)  No person shall engage in or work on the installation, extension, or alteration of gas piping or gas appliances, until such person shall have secured a license as hereinafter provided, and shall have executed and delivered to the clerk a good and sufficient bond in the sum of $1,000.00 with reasonably sufficient corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of all such work, entered upon or contracted for, in strict accordance and compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The bond herein required shall expire on the first day of January next following its approval by the clerk, and thereafter on the first day of January of each year a new bond, in form and substance as herein required, shall be given by such person to cover all such work as shall be done during such year. 
(b)  Upon approval of said bond, the person desiring to do such work shall secure from the clerk a non-transferable license which shall run until the first day of January next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner revoked. The person obtaining a license shall pay an annual license fee of $15.00 to the clerk; contractors, including subcontractors, shall pay an annual license fee of $25.00. The above work is to be licensed as skilled trade and is to be licensed regardless of whether by contract or time, or any other bond; however, any person may obtain a license for one-half year, provided he purchases a one-year license in advance thereof. 
(c)  Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting an individual from installing or repairing his own appliances or installing, extending, replacing, altering or repairing consumer's piping on his own premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual doing such work on his own premises; provided, however, that all such work must be done in conformity with all other provisions of this chapter, including those relating to permits, inspection, and fees. 
(Former § 14-004) 
Sec. 14-5. - Gas inspector and assistants. 
    To provide for the administration and enforcement of this chapter, the office of the gas inspector (inspector) is hereby created. The inspector, and such assistants as may be necessary in the proper performance of the duties of the office, shall be appointed by the council and the compensation for such office shall be determined at the time of appointment. 
(Former § 14-005) 
Sec. 14-6. - Powers and duties of inspector. 
(a)  The inspector is authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter, and the inspector, upon presentation of proper credentials, may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of making inspections or preventing violations of this chapter. 
(b)  The inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture or appliance for which there has not been granted a certificate of approval as required by this chapter, or which is found defective or in such condition as to endanger life or property, or where there is evidence of tampering with or damage to any city equipment, including meter locks. Where such a disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture, or appliance disconnected by the inspector, which notice shall state that the same has been disconnected by the inspector, together with the reason or reasons therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove said notice or reconnect said gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the inspector, and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put in service or used until the inspector has attached his certificate of approval in lieu of prior disconnection notice. 
(Former § 14-006) 
Sec. 14-7. - Permits. 
(a)  No person shall install a gas conversion burner, floor furnace, central heating plant, vented recessed heater, water heater, boiler, consumer's gas piping, or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas without first obtaining a permit to do such work from the city clerk; however, permits will not be required for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the repair of leaks in house piping. 
(b)  When only temporary use of gas is desired, the inspector may issue a permit for such use, for a period not to exceed 60 days, provided the consumer's gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a final piping inspection. 
(c)  Gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters or to extend, relocate, remove, or repair its service lines, mains, or other facilities, or for work having to do with its own gas system. 
(Former § 14-007) 
Sec. 14-8. - Inspection. 
(a)  Rough piping inspection shall be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has been covered or concealed by plastering or otherwise or any fixture or gas appliances have been attached thereto. 
(b)  Final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached hereto. This inspection shall include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury 12 inches in height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least 15 minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge shall be used for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor, and assistance necessary for the tests shall be furnished by the installer of such piping. 
(Former § 14-008) 
Sec. 14-9. - Certificates. 
    The inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at the completion of the work for which a permit for consumer piping has been issued, if after inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions of this chapter. A duplicate of each certificate issued for consumer's gas piping shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its authority to render gas service. 
(Former § 14-009) 
Sec. 14-10. - Fees. 
(a)  The total fees for inspection of consumer's gas piping at one location (including both rough and final inspection) shall be $1.50 for one to four outlets, inclusive, and $0.50 for each outlet above five. 
(b)  The fees for inspecting conversion burners and floor furnaces shall be $10.00 for each unit. 
(c)  The fees for inspecting vented recessed heaters and water heaters shall be $1.00 for each unit. 
(d)  If the inspector is called back, after correction of defects, an additional fee of $10.00 shall be made for each return inspection. 
(e)  Any and all fees shall be paid by the person to whom the permit is issued. 
(Former § 14-010) 
Sec. 14-11. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person that shall fail to comply with or shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than $25.00, nor more than $200.00, or the license of such person may be revoked, or both fine and revocation of license may be imposed. 
(Former § 14-011) 
Sec. 14-12. - Non-liability of city. 
    This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by installation thereof, nor shall the city or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or the certificate of approval issued by the inspector. 
(Former § 14-012) 
Sec. 14-13. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions, along with those contained in the Standard Building Code, latest edition, and the Standard Gas Code, latest edition, are provided for the purpose of interpretation and administration of this chapter. 
    Certain appliances means conversion burners, floor furnaces, central heating plants, vented recessed heaters, water heaters, and boilers. 
    Certificate of approval means a document or tag issued and/or attached by the inspector to the inspected material, piping, or appliance installation, filled out, together with date, address of the premises, and signed by the inspector. 
    Gas company means any person distributing natural gas in the gas system of the city or authorized and proposing to. 
    Inspector or gas inspector shall mean the person appointed as inspector, and shall include each assistant inspector (if any), from time to time action as such under this section by appointment of the council. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, firm, corporation, or any other organization. 
(Former § 14-013) 
Sec. 14-14. - Rates. 
    Per the laws of Georgia, it is necessary and expedient for the city to establish rates regarding natural gas service. 
(1)  Natural gas availability. Natural gas service may be obtained where it is currently available. Natural gas service is also available on the city's distribution system if sufficient capacity exists under the following circumstances: Where city natural gas lines run contiguous to the customer's property, and it is economically feasible for the city to provide service. If there is no city gas line contiguous to the property, but it is economically feasible for the city to provide gas service to the customer, service may be provided at the city's discretion. 
(2)  New service line. The base new service line rate shall be $200.00. This charge includes setting a meter and installing up to 100 feet of pipe. Additional pipe will be billed at $2.00 per foot. The $200.00 new service line charge may be decreased or increased by applicable rebates and charges. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Gas appliance rebates. Customers who install certain gas appliances for connection to the city's natural gas line shall be entitled to rebates up to, but not exceeding, the new service line fee, as follows: 
a.  Water heater: $125.00 
b.  Gas clothes dryer: $75.00 
c.  Gas range: $50.00 
d.  Gas logs: $25.00 
e.  Gas lights: $25.00 
f.  Gas cooling: $200.00 
g.  Combination gas furnace/space heater with water heater: $175.00 
(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Rebate limitations. Large industrial or commercial customers which require special metering and/or pressure regulating equipment are not entitled to the rebates. All rates for such customers will be individually determined prior to service. 
(8)  Dual fuel heat pumps. There shall be a $500.00 tap fee surcharge for a customer who installs a dual fuel heat pump. A dual fuel heat pump is an electric heat pump which uses a natural gas fired furnace to provide backup heat. A customer who has installed a dual fuel heat pump shall pay a $6.00 per month capacity charge in addition to all other applicable charges. 
(Former § 14-014) 
Chapter 15 - CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings set forth in this section, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
    Cable services means "cable services" as defined in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended by the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, and as may be further amended from time to time (the "Cable Act"). In the event that "cable services" is no longer defined in the Cable Act or the definition in the Cable Act otherwise becomes inapplicable, "cable services" shall mean "cable services" as defined in the Cable Act immediately prior to such term no longer being defined in the Cable Act or such definition otherwise becoming inapplicable. 
    Cable system means any "cable system" as defined in the Cable Act. 
    Franchise means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by the city, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the occupation and use of the streets to provide telecommunications services. 
    Grantee means the legal entity to which is granted the right, authority and responsibility to construct, install, operate and maintain a system of equipment as necessary to furnish, supply and distribute cable or telecommunications services or both, to inhabitants within the franchise area. 
    Streets means the surface of, and the spaces above and below, all streets, alleyways, avenues, highways, boulevards, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, public grounds or waters, and other public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. 
    Telecommunications services means the receipt and/or distribution, through any means, including, without limitation, coaxial cable, optical fiber, or satellite or microwave transmission, of one or more audio, voice or data signals. Telecommunications services includes both cable services and non-cable telecommunications services. 
(Former § 15-001(1.1)) 
Sec. 15-2. - Granting authority. 
(a)  No person shall provide cable services or operate a cable system without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this section and no person shall use or occupy the streets to provide any telecommunications service other than cable services without a franchise granted in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  The council may grant one or more franchises in accordance with this section, provided that the council reserves the right to modify any provision of this section by amendment hereof. 
(c)  The grant of any franchise shall be made by adoption of a separate ordinance and shall be on such terms and conditions as may be specified in said separate ordinance and/or a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(d)  Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises as it deems appropriate and or itself engage in the provision of telecommunications services. 
(e)  A franchise may be granted for all or any defined portion of the city and for all or less than all telecommunications services, and for telecommunications services for all or less than all purposes. 
(f)  The grant of franchises by the city shall be subject to the provisions of applicable law, such as the provisions in the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, governing cable television franchises and renewals thereof. 
(Former § 15-001(2.1)) 
Sec. 15-3. - Franchise applications. 
(a)  Applications for franchises shall be submitted in such form and be issued on such terms and conditions as the council may determine, subject to applicable laws and regulations. 
(b)  Any application for a franchise shall contain and/or require the following information with respect to the proposed franchise and such other information as the council shall deem necessary or appropriate: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, and federal employer identification number or social security number; copy of applicant's corporate charter or partnership agreement as applicable; and any trade names (and registrations) used by applicant; 
(2)  A detailed statement of the corporation or business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following, and to whatever extent required by the city: 
a.  The names and the residence and business addresses of all officers, members and directors of the applicant; 
b.  The names, residence, and business addresses of all persons and entities having any share of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each person or entity; 
c.  The names and address of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to telecommunications or cable systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent, and subsidiary, and the areas served thereby; 
d.  A detailed and complete financial statement of applicant, certified by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year immediately preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed telecommunications or cable system in the city, or a statement from an independent certified public accountant certifying the applicant has available sufficient free, net, and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed cable or telecommunications system in the city; 
e.  A detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, the projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedules, income statements, and a sources and uses of funds statement; and 
f.  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable system or telecommunication franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of said franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such franchised cable or telecommunication system(s); and the amount of applicant's and its parent's or subsidiary's resources committed to the completion thereof; 
(3)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include the following: 
a.  A description of the cable services and any other telecommunications services proposed to be provided; 
b.  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be serviced; 
c.  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of said classifications, including installation charges, cable service charges, and any other telecommunications service charges; 
d.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant; 
e.  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber to cable or telecommunications services; and 
f.  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm, or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise; 
(4)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any utility providing for the use of any facilities of the utility, including but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits; and 
(5)  Any other details, statements, supplementary information, or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any other provision of law or regulation. 
(c)  Non-refundable application fees for new franchises. No application for a new franchise shall be considered without payment by the applicant of the application fees as provided in this section. If a franchise is granted, the application fees will not be deemed a credit towards any other fees or sums due by the grantee. If an application is denied, the application fee will not be refunded. 
(1)  Purpose of application fees. The application fees provided by this section will serve to cover the direct and indirect costs incurred by the city in processing the application, evaluating the applicant, and granting a franchise, and shall include, but not be limited to, administrative, engineering, publication, legal, and consultant's expenses. 
(2)  Application fee. The applicant will be expected to pay the reasonable costs of the city in evaluating the application. Notwithstanding any other requirement of this section, each applicant must furnish with its proposal a non-refundable application fee in the amount of $2,000.00 by certified check or cashier's check made payable to the city. 
(Former § 15-001(2.2)) 
Sec. 15-4. - Responsibilities of applicants. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each applicant for a franchise to comply with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other directives of the city and any federal, state or local governmental authority having jurisdiction. 
(Former § 15-001(2.3)) 
Sec. 15-5. - Public availability of applications. 
    To the extent required by law, applications for franchises, including any additions, modifications or amendments thereto, shall be available for public inspection at a designated city office during normal business hours. 
(Former § 15-001(2.4)) 
Sec. 15-6. - Evaluation criteria. 
    In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a franchise, the council may consider such factors as it deems appropriate and in the public interest, including, without limitation: 
(1)  The adequacy of the proposed compensation to be paid to the city, including the value of any facilities and telecommunications services offered by the applicant to the city; 
(2)  The legal, financial, technical and other appropriate qualifications of the applicant; 
(3)  The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the city in good condition throughout the term of the franchise; 
(4)  The value and efficiency to the city and its residents of the cable services and other telecommunications services to be provided, including the type of telecommunications services to be provided as well as alternatives to those services and services that may be precluded by the grant of the franchise; 
(5)  The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction and physical requirements and to abide by all purpose and policy conditions, limitations and requirements with respect to the franchise; and 
(6)  Any other public interest factors or considerations deemed pertinent for safeguarding the city and the public. 
(Former § 15-001(2.5)) 
Sec. 15-7. - Procedure for consideration of and action on applications. 
(a)  The city may make such investigations and take or authorize the taking of such other steps as the council deems necessary or appropriate to consider and act on applications for franchises and determine whether a franchise should be granted to an applicant, and may require the applicant to furnish additional information and data for this purpose. In considering applications, the council may seek advice from other city officials or bodies, from such other advisory bodies as it may establish or determine appropriate, and/or from the public, and may request the preparation of one or more reports to be submitted to the council, which may include recommendations with respect to such applications. 
(b)  If the council, after considering such information as it determines to be appropriate, elects to further consider one or more applications, the council shall set one or more public hearings for consideration of the application(s), fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objections thereto may file written comments and appear before the council and be heard, and providing notice of such public hearing(s) per applicable law. 
(c)  The council may authorize negotiations between city officials and applicants to determine whether the city and such applicants are able to reach agreement on the terms of the proposed franchise. 
(d)  Upon completion of the steps deemed appropriate by the council, the council may grant the franchise, and may specify the conditions under which the franchise is granted. Alternatively, the council may reject any and all applications from whatever source and whenever received except that a franchising authority may not grant an exclusive franchise and may not unreasonably refuse to award an additional competitive franchise. The council also reserves the right to waive any or all requirements when it determines that the best interests of the city may be served thereby and may, if it so desires, request new or additional proposals. 
(Former § 15-001(2.6)) 
Sec. 15-8. - Terms and conditions of franchise. 
    The terms and conditions applicable to any franchise granted pursuant to this section shall be set forth in the separate ordinance granting the franchise or in a separate written agreement. Such separate ordinance or written agreement, among other things, shall address the following subjects: 
(1)  The term of the franchise; 
(2)  The franchise area and the cable services and other telecommunications services and purposes of such other telecommunications services, if any, which are the subject of the franchise; 
(3)  The compensation to be paid to city, which may include the payment of fees or the provision of facilities or services, or both; 
(4)  The circumstances upon which the franchise may be terminated or cancelled; 
(5)  The mechanisms, such as performance bonds, security funds or letters of credit, to be put in place to ensure the performance of the franchisee's obligations under the franchise; 
(6)  The city's right to inspect the facilities and records of the franchisee; 
(7)  Insurance and indemnification requirements applicable to the franchisee; 
(8)  The obligation of the franchisee to maintain complete and accurate books of account and records, and the city's inspection rights with respect thereto; 
(9)  Provisions to ensure quality workmanship and construction methods; 
(10)  Provisions to ensure that the franchisee will comply with all applicable city, state and federal laws, regulations, rules and policies, including, without limitation, those related to employment, purchasing and investigations; 
(11)  Provisions to ensure adequate oversight and regulation of the franchisee by the city; 
(12)  Provisions to restrict the assignment or other transfer of the franchise without the prior written consent of the city; 
(13)  Remedies available to the city to protect the city's interest in the event of the franchisee's failure to comply with terms and conditions of the franchise; 
(14)  Provisions to ensure that franchisee will obtain all necessary licenses and permits from and comply with all laws, regulations, rules and policies of any governmental body having jurisdiction over franchisee, including the Federal Communications Commission; 
(15)  Provisions to ensure franchisee will protect property of city and the delivery of public services from damage or interruption resulting from construction, operation, maintenance, repair or removal of improvements related to the franchise; 
(16)  Provisions designed to minimize the extent to which the public use of the streets of the city are disrupted in connection with the construction of improvements relating to the franchise; and 
(17)  Such other provisions as the city determines are necessary or appropriate in the furtherance of the public interest. 
(Former § 15-001(2.7)) 
Sec. 15-9. - Delegation. 
    Consistent with applicable law, the council shall have the right to delegate and re-delegate, and to revoke any such delegation or re-delegation, from time to time, any of its rights or obligations under this section to any body, organization or official. Any such delegation, re-delegation or revocation, no matter how often made, shall not be deemed an amendment to this section or to require the consent of any applicant for a franchise or franchisee. The council may also establish and appoint one or more advisory boards, with such duration and such number of members as the council shall determine, to advise it on such of the matters which are the subject of this section. 
(Former § 15-001(3.1)) 
Sec. 15-10. - Regulations for satellite receivers stations. 
(a)  The city has become aware of the availability for residential use of dish type satellite signal receiving stations, and, it is the desire of the city to both permit reasonable use of property owners of their property and to protect the rights of other property owners. The city is aware of its duty to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and the city will not prohibit the use of such receiving stations, but will permit their use subject to reasonable regulations. The placement of such stations shall be only in the rear portion of the property, and such stations shall be otherwise regulated. 
(b)  Dish type satellite receiving stations (stations"), subject to the following regulations, may be located in the city. 
(c)  Stations shall not be linked to receivers not located on the same lot or property as the station. 
(d)  Stations shall be located in the rear yard only, and behind the principal dwelling or structure located on the lot, and shall be located so that however turned or otherwise used, all parts of the station will be set back at least six feet from the side yard lines and shall be set back from the rear lot line no less than six feet or one-half the depth of the rear yard, whichever is greater. 
(e)  The height of the station, with the dish antennae turned perpendicular to the ground, shall not extend beyond 15 feet, and the maximum diameter of any dish antennae shall not exceed 12 feet. 
(f)  No installation of the station shall commence before a permit is obtained from the city building inspector or his designee. 
(g)  All stations, together with all other structures, patios, decks and impervious surfaces (excluding driveways), may occupy an area of land no larger than 50 percent of the rear yard. 
(h)  Vegetation screening and/or fencing with a minimum height of six feet shall be required between the station and residential properties which abut the rear yard, between the antennae and any street that borders the front or corner side yard of the property in question, and between the antennae and residential property across such a front or side street, so as to screen the station from the view of persons inside nearby residential properties and from persons on those public streets. 
(i)  As an additional remedy, the unauthorized or improper operation or maintenance of any dish type satellite signal receiving station shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a competent court of jurisdiction. 
(j)  Any person violating any portion of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and following conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding $100.00. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. 
(Former § 15-002) 
Secs. 15-11-15-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - UTILITY USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY AND PERMITS AND REGISTRATION 

Sec. 15-26. - Intent and purpose. 
    Pursuant to the Charter of the city, it is empowered to regulate roadside areas, including rights-of-way. The city is vitally concerned with the use, construction within, and occupancy of all rights-of-way in the city as such rights-of-way are a valuable and limited resource which must be utilized to promote the public health, safety, welfare, economic development of the city and to protect public work infrastructure. Per O.C.G.A. §§ 36-76-1 et seq. known as the "Consumer Choice for Television Act" of 2007, the city retains regulatory powers over certain activity of cable and video providers with respect to public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. Per O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1 et seq. telephone companies shall comply with all applicable local laws and regulations, including municipal ordinances and regulations, regarding the placement and maintenance of facilities in the public rights-of-way that are reasonable, nondiscriminatory, and applicable to all users of the public rights-of-way within or belonging to the city. The city desires to establish reasonable nondiscriminatory regulations for the installation construction, maintenance, renewal, removal and relocations of utility facilities that are not more restrictive than equivalent regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Transportation with respect to utilities on the state highway system under authority of O.C.G.A. § 32-4-70. Therefore, the city, under the authority of the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, including but not limited to Article 9, Section 1, Paragraph 1 of the Georgia Constitution, O.C.G.A. §§ 36-1-20 and O.C.G.A. 32-4-42(6), has adopted the ordinance from which this chapter derives for the purpose of regulating public and private entities which use the city rights-of-way. 
(Former § 15-003(1.)) 
Sec. 15-27. - Scope. 
    This chapter shall apply to all utilities and facilities occupying the rights-of-way as provided herein. 
(Former § 15-003(2.)) 
Sec. 15-28. - Definitions. 
    For this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations have the meanings set forth herein. 
    Construct means, but shall not be limited to, dig, bore, tunnel, trench, excavate, obstruct, install or remove signs, or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construct shall also include the act of opening and/or cutting into the surface of any paved or improved surface that is any part of the right-of-way. 
    Construction means, but shall not be limited to, the act or process of digging, boring, tunneling, trenching, excavating, obstructing, installing or removing signs or facilities, other than landscaping or ornamental plantings, in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through any part of the rights-of-way. Construction shall also include the act of opening, boring and/or cutting into the surface of any part of the right-of-way. 
    Director means the city manager or his/her designee. 
    Emergency means a condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life, health, or safety of a person, or of significant damage or loss of real or personal property. 
    Facility or facilities means any tangible thing, including but not limited to pipes, mains, conduits, cables, wires, poles, towers, traffic and other signals, and other equipment, appurtenances, appliances and future technology of any utility in, on, along, over, or under any part of the rights-of-way within the city. 
    Facilities representative(s) means the specifically identified agent(s)/employee(s) of a utility who are authorized to direct field activities of that utility and serve as official notice agent(s) for facilities related information. Utility shall be required to make sure at least one of its facilities representatives available at all times to receive notice of, and immediately direct response to, facilities related emergencies or situations. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission or any successor thereto. 
    Permit means an authorization which grants permission to conduct specific regulated activities on, in, over, under or within any public right-of-way, and which may be subject to conditions specified in a written agreement with the city or in a related provision of this Code of Ordinances. 
    Right(s)-of-way means the surface and space in, on, above, within, over, below, under or through any real property in which the city has an interest in law or equity, whether held in fee, or other estate or interest, or as a trustee for the public, including, but not limited to any public street, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or any other place, area, or real property owned by or under the legal or equitable control of the city, now or hereafter, that consistent with the purposes for which it was dedicated, may be used for the purposes of constructing, operating, repairing or replacing facilities. 
    Service(s) means the offering of any service by a utility for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively available directly to the public, or alternatively, the provision of any service by a utility between two or more points for a proprietary purpose to a class of users other than the general public. 
    Service agreement means a valid license agreement, service agreement, franchise agreement, or operating agreement issued by the city or state pursuant to law and accepted by a utility or entered into by and between the city and a utility, which allows such utility to operate or provide service within the geographic limits of the city. 
    Street or streets means the surface of, as well as the spaces above and below, any and all the streets, alleys, avenues, roads, bridges, tunnels and public places of the city within the corporate limits of the city, as the same now exist or may be hereafter extended or altered, and any location thereon, thereover or thereunder, and any portion thereof. 
    Transfer means the disposal by the utility, directly or indirectly, by gift, assignment, sale, merger, consolidation, or otherwise, of more than 50 percent at one time of the ownership or controlling interest in the facilities, or of more than 50 percent cumulatively over the term of a written approval of Registration of such interests to a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, trust, or association, or person or group of persons acting in concert. 
    Unused facilities means facilities located in the rights-of-way which have remained unused for 12 months and for which the utility is unable to provide the city with a plan detailing the procedure by which the utility intends to begin actively using such facilities within the next 12 months, or that it has a potential purchaser or user of the facilities who will be actively using the facilities within the next 12 months, or, that the availability of such facilities is required by the utility to adequately and efficiently operate its facilities. 
    Utility or utilities means all privately, publicly, or cooperatively owned systems for producing, transmitting, or distributing communication, data, information, telecommunication, cable television, video services, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil, crude products, water/sewer, steam, fire and police signals, traffic control devices, and street lighting systems, and housing or conduit for any of the foregoing, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. The term "utility" may also be used to refer to the owner, operator, utility, service, contractor or subcontractor, or any agent thereof, of any above-described utility or utility facility. 
(Former § 15-003(3.)) 
Sec. 15-29. - Registration required. 
    Each utility who occupies, uses or has facilities in the rights-of-way at the time of passage of the ordinance from which this chapter derives, including by lease, sublease or assignment, to operate facilities located in the rights-of-way, unless specifically exempted by state or federal law or this Code, shall file a registration statement with the department within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. 
(Former § 15-003(4.)) 
Sec. 15-30. - Registration procedure. 
    The registration information provided to the city shall be on a form approved by the city and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  The name, legal status (i.e. partnership, corporation, etc.), street address, email address, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the utility filing the registration statement (the "registrant"). If the registrant is not the owner of the facility in the right-of-way, the registration shall include the name, street address, email address if applicable, and telephone and facsimile numbers of the owner; 
(2)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s). Current information regarding how to contact the facilities representative(s) in an emergency shall be provided at the time of filing a registration and shall be updated as necessary to assure accurate contact information is available to the city at all times; 
(3)  A copy, if requested, of the utility's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; 
(4)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the registration. 
(Former § 15-003(5.)) 
Sec. 15-31. - Incomplete registration. 
    If a registration is incomplete, the director shall notify the registrant and shall provide a reasonable period of time in which to complete the registration. 
(Former § 15-003(6.)) 
Sec. 15-32. - Complete registration. 
    If a registration is complete, the director shall so notify the utility in writing. Acceptance of the registration shall not convey title in the rights-of-way. Acceptance of the registration is only the nonexclusive, limited right to occupy rights-of-way in the city for the limited purposes stated in the acceptance. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from obtaining permits required by city ordinances nor from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before using the facilities of others, including the city. Acceptance of the registration does not excuse a utility from notifying the city of construction as required herein. 
(Former § 15-003(7.)) 
Sec. 15-33. - Facilities in place without registration. 
    Beginning one year after the effective date of this chapter, any facilities or part of a facility found in a right-of-way for which registration is required but has not been obtained unless specifically exempted by law, and for which no valid service agreement exists with the city, may be deemed to be a nuisance and an unauthorized use of the rights-of-way. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise allowed in law or in equity. 
(Former § 15-003(8.)) 
Sec. 15-34. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any utility to excavate or to construct, install, maintain, renew, remove or relocate facilities in, on, along, over or under the public roads of the city without a permit from the city per this chapter. 
(Former § 15-003(9.)) 
Sec. 15-35. - Permit procedure. 
    Utility permits shall be obtained from the director (or such other person as the city manager may designate) upon application made on forms prescribed by the city. The written application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the utility; 
(2)  The nature, extent, and location of any work proposed to be done, along with satisfactory plans as attachments showing in detail the location of the proposed facility or operations as described in the permit application. The plans shall show the size or capacity of facilities to be installed; their relationship to street features such as right-of-way lines, pavement edge, structures, etc., horizontal and vertical clearance to critical elements of the roadway and any other information necessary to evaluate the impact on the street and its operation; 
(3)  The name and address of the person or firm who is to do such work; 
(4)  The name, street address, email address if applicable and telephone and facsimile numbers of one or more facilities representative(s); 
(5)  The projected dates for the work to be started and finished; 
(6)  An indemnity bond or other acceptable security in an amount to be set by the city to pay any damages to any part of the city road system or other city property or to any city employee or member of the public caused by activity or work of the utility performed under authority of the permit issued; 
(7)  A copy, if requested, of the registrant's certificate of authority (or other acceptable evidence of authority to operate) from the Georgia Public Service Commission and/or the FCC and any other similar approvals, permits, or agreements; and 
(8)  A copy, if requested, of the service agreement, if applicable or other legal instrument that authorizes the utility to use or occupy the right-of-way for the purpose described in the application. 
(Former § 15-003(10.)) 
Sec. 15-36. - Permit fees. 
    Fees shall be determined by the director, subject to the approval by resolution of the city council. A fee schedule shall be available at the offices of the director and the city clerk and open for public inspection. 
(Former § 15-003(11.)) 
Sec. 15-37. - Issuance of permit. 
    If the director determines the applicant has satisfied the following requirements, the director may issue a permit. Whether issuing of the approval will be consistent with this chapter; whether applicant has submitted a complete application and has secured all certificates and other authorizations required by law, if applicable, in order to construct facilities in the manner proposed by the applicant; and the impact on safety, visual quality of the streets, traffic flow, and other users of the right-of-way and the difficulty and length of time of the project, construction or maintenance. 
(Former § 15-003(12.)) 
Sec. 15-38. - Emergency situations. 
    Each utility shall, as soon as reasonably practicable, notify the director of any event regarding its facilities which is an emergency. The utility shall take whatever actions are necessary to respond to the emergency. A utility who engages in an emergency excavation shall take all reasonable precautions to avoid or minimize damage to any existing facilities. If the city becomes aware of an emergency regarding utility facilities, the city may attempt to contact the affected utility or facilities representative. The city may take whatever action it deems necessary in order to respond to the emergency, including cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers, appliances, or other parts of the facilities. The city shall not incur any liability to the utility for such emergency actions, and the cost of such shall be paid by each utility affected by the emergency. 
(Former § 15-003(13.)) 
Sec. 15-39. - Effective period of permit. 
    Each permit shall have a set commencement and expiration date based on information provided in the applicant's permit application. The permit shall remain in place until construction is completed or until its expiration date unless the utility is in default. The director may give written notice of default to a utility if it is determined that a utility has: Violated any provision or requirement of the issuance or acceptance of a permit application or any law of the city, state, or federal government; attempted to evade any provision or requirement of this chapter; practiced any fraud or deceit upon the city; or made a material misrepresentation or omission of fact in its permit application. 
(Former § 15-003(14.)) 
Sec. 15-40. - Cancellation for cause. 
    If a utility fails to cure a default within 20 working days after notice is provided to the utility by the city, then such default shall be a material breach and city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity to terminate the permit. If the director decides there is cause or reason to terminate, the following procedure shall be followed: City shall serve a utility with a written notice of the reason or cause for proposed termination and shall allow a utility a minimum of 15 calendar days to cure its breach. If the utility fails to cure within 15 calendar days, the city may declare the permit terminated. 
(Former § 15-003(15.)) 
Sec. 15-41. - Expiration of permit. 
    If work is not begun within six months of the date of issuance, the permit will automatically expire. 
(Former § 15-003(16.)) 
Sec. 15-42. - Utility Accommodation Manual adopted. 
    The 1988 Utility Accommodation Policy and Standards Manual, including all references contained therein to codes, rules, regulations, schedules, forms and appendix items, except Appendix B (permit forms and supporting documents), promulgated by the state department of transportation, as may be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as if fully set forth herein, subject to the amendments and modification herein. A copy of the manual shall be maintained at the offices of the director or his designee and open for public inspection. Any conflicts between this chapter and the manual shall be resolved in favor of the more stringent requirement. References to state personnel, agencies, and fees shall be interpreted, where required, as meaning the city municipal equivalents. 
(Former § 15-003(17.)) 
Sec. 15-43. - Protection of traffic and roadway. 
    Unless specifically in the permit, no utility may occupy the city rights-of-way unless sufficient space is available so that the free flow and safety of traffic and other capacity considerations are not unduly impaired and the installation does not prevent the department from reasonably maintaining the streets, structures, traffic control devices and other appurtenant facilities, and further provided that maintenance and operations of the facilities do not jeopardize the traffic, street structure, other users of the right-of-way or the right-of-way itself. 
(Former § 15-003(18.)) 
Sec. 15-44. - Grading. 
    If the grades or lines of any street within the city right-of-way are changed at any time by the city during the term of the permit and this change involves an area in which the utility's facilities are located, then the utility shall, at its own cost and expense and upon the request of the city upon at least ten business days' notice, protect or promptly alter or relocate the facilities, or any part thereof, so as to conform with such new grades or lines. In the event the utility refuses or neglects to so protect, alter, or relocate all or part of the facilities, the city shall have the right to break through, remove, alter, or relocated all or any part of the facilities without any liability to the utility and the utility shall pay to the city the costs incurred in connection with such breaking through, removal, alteration, or relocation. 
(Former § 15-003(19.)) 
Sec. 15-45. - Installation of poles and other wireholding structures and relocation. 
    Unless otherwise provided in a valid service agreement, no placement of any pole or wire holding structure of the utility is to be considered a vested interest in the right-of-way, and such poles or structures are to be removed, relocated underground, or modified by the utility at its own expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience or welfare would be enhanced thereby. The facilities shall be so located and installed as to cause minimum interference with the rights and convenience of property owners. 
(Former § 15-003(20.)) 
Sec. 15-46. - Blasting. 
    As provided in O.C.G.A § 25-9-6 (the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act) and other applicable state law currently in place or as amended, no utility shall commence, perform, or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating facilities unless and until the utility planning the blasting or excavating has given 48 hours' notice by submitting a locate request to the utility protection center, beginning the next working day after such notice is provided, excluding hours during days other than working days. 
(Former § 15-003(21.)) 
Sec. 15-47. - Repair. 
    Each utility shall be responsible for the cost of repairing any facilities in the rights-of-way and adjoining property or other facilities which it or its facilities damage. A utility shall be liable, at its own cost and expense, to replace, restore or repair, any street, facilities or property or structure thereon, thereunder, thereover or adjacent thereto that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of the construction or installation, operation, upgrade, repair or removal of facilities to a condition as good as its condition before the work performed by the utility that caused such disturbance or damage. If the utility does not commence such replacement or repair after 20 working days following written notice from the city, the city or the owner of the affected structure or property may make such replacement or repair and the utility shall pay the reasonable and actual cost of the same. 
(Former § 15-003(22.)) 
Sec. 15-48. - Inspection. 
    The utility shall make the construction site available to the director and to all others as authorized by law for inspection at all reasonable times during the execution and upon completion of the construction. At any time, including the time of inspection, the director may order the immediate cessation of any work which poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, violates any law, or which violates the terms and conditions of the permit and/or this chapter or issue an order to correct work which does not conform to the permit and/or applicable standards, conditions or codes. When the construction under any permit is completed, the utility shall notify the department. 
(Former § 15-003(23.)) 
Sec. 15-49. - Additional permits required. 
    The utility shall obtain all construction, building or other permits or approvals as according to city ordinance, state and federal law. In addition, a permittee shall comply with all requirements of laws, shall complete work in a way as to not cause any unnecessary or unauthorized obstructions of sidewalks, streets, waterways or railways, and is responsible for all work done in the rights-of-way. No rights-of-way obstruction or excavation may be performed when seasonally prohibited or when conditions are unreasonable for such work, except in the case of an Emergency as outlined above. 
(Former § 15-003(24.)) 
Sec. 15-50. - Abandonment. 
    Facilities of a utility who fails to comply with the above provision shall be deemed to be abandoned. Abandoned facilities are deemed to be a nuisance. The city may exercise any remedies or rights it has at law or in equity, including, but not limited to abating the nuisance; taking possession of the facilities, evicting the utility from the right-of-way; prosecuting the violator; and/or any other remedy provided by city ordinance or otherwise at law or in equity. 
(Former § 15-003(25.)) 
Sec. 15-51. - Prohibitions and penalties. 
    No utility shall use the rights-of-way to operate any facilities that have not been authorized by the city in accordance with this chapter. No utility shall place or have placed any facilities in, on, above, within, over, below, under, or through the rights-of-way, unless allowed under this chapter. Each unauthorized use shall be deemed to be a violation and a distinct and separate offense. Each and every day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. No utility shall fail to comply with this chapter. Each failure to comply shall be deemed a distinct and separate offense. Each day any violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense. Every utility convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00 per violation. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
(Former § 15-003(26.)) 
Sec. 15-52. - Reservation of regulatory and police powers. 
    The city by issuing a written approval of registration under this chapter, does not surrender or to any extent lose, waive, impair, or lessen the lawful powers and rights, which it has now or may be hereafter vested in the city under the Constitution and laws of the United States, the state and the City Charter, and under the provisions of the city's codified ordinances to regulate the use of the rights-of-way. The utility by applying for and being issued a written permit, is deemed to acknowledge that all lawful powers and rights, regulatory power, or police power, or otherwise as are or the same may be from time to time vested in or reserved to the city, shall be in full force and effect and subject to the exercise thereof by the city at any time. A utility is deemed to acknowledge that its interests are subject to the regulatory and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public and is deemed to agree to comply with all applicable general laws enacted by the city pursuant to such powers. In particular, all utilities shall comply with city zoning and other land use requirements pertaining to the placement and specifications of facilities. 
(Former § 15-003(27.)) 
Sec. 15-53. - Compliance. 
    No person shall be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter by reason of any failure of city to enforce compliance. 
(Former § 15-003(28.)) 
Sec. 15-54. - Appeal of administrative decisions. 
    All appeals provided for by this chapter and any notification to the city required by this chapter shall be in writing and sent via certified mail to the director as specified in this chapter. 
(Former § 15-003(29.)) 
Sec. 15-55. - Discontinuance. 
    A utility who has discontinued or is discontinuing operation of any facilities in the city shall: 
(1)  Provide information satisfactory to the city that the utility's obligations for its facilities in the rights-of-way under this chapter and any other provision in the codified ordinances or other laws have been lawfully assumed by another utility; 
(2)  Submit a written proposal to re-use its facilities; 
(c)  Submit a written proposal for abandonment of facilities. Said proposal must be approved by the director; 
(d)  Remove its entire facilities within a reasonable amount of time and in a manner acceptable to the city; 
(5)  Submit to the city, in good faith and within a reasonable amount of time, a proposal for transferring ownership of its facilities to the city. If a utility proceeds under this clause, the city may, at its option do one or more of the following: purchase the facilities; accept donation of some or all facilities, or require the utility to post a bond in an amount sufficient to reimburse the city for its reasonably anticipated costs to be incurred in removing the facilities. 
(Former § 15-003(30.)) 
Chapter 17 - EFFECTIVITY AND VALIDITY OF CODE 

Sec. 17-1. - Effectivity and validity of Code. 
(a)  This Code shall become effective immediately upon passage. 
(b)  If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this Code shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Code. 
(c)  The passage hereof shall not bar or affect the validity of, any actions or rights of the city taken or enforced, or to be taken or enforced, under applicable pre-existing regulations and/or ordinances of the city. 
(d)  Regulations and ordinances not inconsistent with this Code shall survive passage hereof. 
(e)  Unless otherwise expressly provided herein, conviction of any provision of this Code or of any other city regulation or ordinance shall be punished by a fine of up to $1,000.00, incarceration of up to six months, or both. Each act of violation, and each day of violation, shall constitute separate offenses. Such penalties shall not bar the city from pursuing other remedies. 
(Former ch. 17) 
Appendix A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance of the city, Ordinance No. 2017-11, as adopted by the city council on June 20, 2017. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - SHORT TITLE 
    This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Social Circle." 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE II. - PURPOSE AND ENACTMENT 

Sec. 100. - General purpose. 
    This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes, among others: 
1.  To promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and the general welfare of the city. 
2.  To achieve such timing, density and distribution of land development and use as will prevent overcrowding of land so as to avoid undue concentration of population; to encourage such distribution and population to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public services. 
3.  To encourage such distribution and population, land development and use as will secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers. 
4.  To regulate the location of trades, professions, businesses, and industries. 
5.  To achieve such density, design and distribution of housing as will protect and enhance residential property values. 
6.  To preserve the city's historical and natural beauty, and encourage architecturally pleasing development. 
7.  To improve the quality of life through protection of the city's total environment including, but not limited to, the prevention of air, water and noise pollution. 
8.  To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development, redevelopment, and preservation of city in accordance with a well-considered comprehensive plan and with long-term objectives, principles, and standards deemed beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people. 
9.  To protect the established character and the social and economic benefit of all property. 
10.  To promote the efficient utilization of land. 
11.  To promote the preservation of open space. 
12.  To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other dangers. 
13.  To reduce or prevent congestion in the public streets. 
14.  To facilitate a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community. 
15.  To encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, both built and natural, and to provide for regulations that protect and enhance these aesthetic considerations. 
16.  To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base. 
17.  To promote the preservation of the unique natural and physical resources of the city, including forested areas, streambeds, and archaeological sites. 
18.  To achieve compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. 
19.  To provide for and promote housing for all income groups within the city and to promote the stability of neighborhoods. 
20.  To implement the authority, powers, and duties of the planning commission and mayor and council pursuant to state and local law, including but not limited to the Constitution of the State of Georgia, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4 and Ga. L. 1956, p. 3332, as amended. 
21.  To provide for protection of the constitutional rights and obligations of all citizens within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 101. - Enactment clause. 
    The mayor and council of Social Circle, Georgia under the authority of Article IX, Section 2, Paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, and O.C.G.A. tit. 36, ch. 66, ordains and enacts into law the Official Zoning Ordinance for the City of Social Circle. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 102. - Interpretation, application and jurisdiction. 
    Whenever the provisions of this ordinance impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings or upon the height of buildings or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied than the provisions of other ordinances, rules, regulations, permits or any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, the provisions of this ordinance shall govern as provided below. 
1.  All other conflicting ordinances or resolutions are repealed to the extent inconsistent herewith; provided, that nothing herein shall repeal or modify the conditions accompanying zoning approvals or use permits issued under previous zoning ordinances or resolutions; however, modification or repeal of these past conditions of approval may be accomplished as provided by this ordinance. 
2.  All variances and exceptions heretofore granted shall remain in force, and all conditions imposed shall remain in effect. Prior ordinances shall remain in effect insofar as required for the initiation of any proceedings against these violations heretofore commenced. 
3.  No building, structure, premises or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, remodeled, extended, enlarged, constructed, moved, or altered in a manner that increases the extent of non-conformity except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is or is to be located. 
4.  No lot, even if it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, inner or outer courts, lot area per family or other requirements of this ordinance are not met. This Section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE III. - DEFINITIONS 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this ordinance shall be as defined in the Illustrated Book of Development Definitions (1981, Rutgers). Words not defined herein or in the above book shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use, and shall be interpreted within the context in which they occur. For the purpose of this ordinance, certain words or terms used herein shall be defined as follows: Words used in the singular include the plural and words used in the plural include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The word "erected" includes the words "constructed", "moved", "located" or "relocated". The word "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel". The word "map" or "zoning map" means the official zoning district maps of Social Circle, Georgia. The word "person" includes the words "individuals", "firms", "partnerships", "corporations", "associations", "governmental bodies" and all other legal entities. The word "shall" is always mandatory and never discretionary. The words "used" or "occupied" include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
    Accessory structure. A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal building or use. 
    Accessory use. A use of land or of a building or portion thereof customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
    Adult use. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, which: provides adult entertainment services or activities, offers adult entertainment live performances, dancing or modeling, provides accommodations (rents, leases, or lets rooms) for an adult entertainment purpose, or specializes in, meaning having a substantial stock-in-trade, and offers for retail sale the following adult entertainment items: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion picture, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations; or instruments, devices, equipment or paraphernalia. 
    Adult entertainment. Means distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined below. Adult uses, include without limitation, the following: adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater, adult sauna, adult theatre, adult massage parlor, and adult sexual paraphernalia store. This definition does not include services or treatment administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist, or similar professional person licensed by the state. 
    Adult use, specified anatomical areas. As used herein, specific anatomical areas means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Adult use, specified sexual activities. As used herein, specific sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
(4)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities as set forth in subsections (1) through (3) of this definition. 
    Agritourism. The activities conducted on a farm, open space, or forest, and offered to the public or to invited groups for recreation, entertainment, education, active involvement in farm operation, sale of produce or other farm products, or special events. Agritourism may or may not be supplemental to an agricultural enterprise. Agritourism provides an opportunity for supplemental income to the property owner. Agritourism activities do not pose an adverse impact to rural character. Examples of agritourism include dinner on the farm where paid meals are prepared for members of the public from products of the farm, roadside markets, winery, agricultural craft and gift sales, garden and nursery sales, and special events. 
    Animal hospital. Facility for the treatment and temporary boarding of domestic animals operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
    Animal quarters. Any structure which is used to shelter, feed, exercise, train, or show any animals. 
    Automobile graveyard. Establishment for wrecked, scrapped or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts. 
    Apartment. A room or suite of rooms used as a dwelling for one family which does its cooking therein. 
    Apartment house. A residential structure containing three or more apartments. 
    Auto service station. Any lot, including structures thereon, used for the retail sales of gasoline or oil, automobile accessories or incidental services including facilities for lubricating, washing or otherwise servicing automobiles, but excluding painting and major repair. 
    Barn. A large farm building used for storing grain, hay, or straw, or housing livestock or storing equipment. 
    Basement. That portion of any building for which the finished surface of its floor is more than six feet below the finished ground level for more than 50 percent of the total building perimeter; or more than 12 feet below the finished ground level at any point. 
    Bed and breakfast. A building or group of buildings containing one to six guest rooms for an overnight stay which are rented at a daily rate and where breakfast is the only meal served to guests; the primary use is for a residence as opposed to business use. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Management procedures, schedules of activities, prohibitions on practices and other management practices which have been demonstrated to effectively control the quality and/or quantity of stormwater runoff and which are compatible with the planned use. Design of BMPs shall be in accordance with the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, most recent edition. 
    Boarding or rooming house. A dwelling in which meals and lodging are furnished for compensation to three to ten non-transient persons. 
    Buffer. Land area used to visibly separate one use from another through screening and distance; to shield or block noise, light, glare, or visual or other conditions; to block physical passage to non-similar areas; or to reduce air pollution, dust, dirt, and litter. 
    Buffer, construction. A type of buffer which remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
    Buildable area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided. 
    Building height. The vertical distance measured from the average finished grade at the front of the structure, to the highest point of the building, excluding any antenna. 
    Building line. A line established, in general, parallel to the front street line, side property line, or rear property line between which line and the property line no part of a building shall project. 
    Canopy. A protective covering or a roof like structure that is free standing, for protection from the elements, not for human habitation, but affixed permanently to the ground. All canopies shall be located at least 15 feet from any public rights-of-way. 
    Certificate of occupancy. A permit authorized and issued by the city building inspector indicating that the use of the building or land in question is in conformity with this ordinance, or that a legal variance therefrom has been approved. 
    Clearing. The removal of vegetation from a property, whether by cutting or other means. 
    Community park. A public park serving residents and usually including restrooms and lighted outdoor recreation facilities and other facilities such as swimming pools, recreation centers, on-site parking, and group picnic areas. 
    Conditional use. A use which is not automatically permitted by right, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this ordinance or as required by the governing body after a public hearing. 
    Conditional zoning. The granting or adoption of zoning for a property subject to compliance with restrictions as to use, size, project design or timing of development, stipulated by the mayor and council of the city to mitigate adverse impacts that could be expected without the imposition of such conditions. 
    Condominium. A multifamily dwelling, office building, or other multiple-unit complex in which each unit is owned and financed by the occupant, but in which halls, entrance ways and underlying lands are owned jointly. Included by reference Georgia State Code Title 44 Chapter 3 Article 3 known as the Georgia Condominium Act. 
    Congregate personal care home. Home for individuals which offers care to 16 or more persons (see Personal care home ). 
    Construction buffer. A buffer which is temporary and remains in effect during the construction of a project. 
    Convenience store. A one-story, retail store containing less than 3,500 square feet of floor area, designed and stocked to sell primarily pre-packaged food, beverages, household items, and fuel, to customers who purchase only a relatively few items. 
    Customary home occupation. An occupation customarily carried on within a dwelling unit for gain or support involving the sale of only those articles, products or services produced on the premise, conducted entirely within the dwelling by members of the immediate family residing in the dwelling unit with equipment customarily used for household purposes and involving no display of articles or products and no outdoor advertising. 
(1)  Customary home occupations may include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  The accommodation of not more than two boarders or roomers. 
b.  The office of a professional person where clients do not generally visit the premises to receive service. 
c.  Art studio, dressmaking, sewing, canning, baking. 
d.  Teaching individual musical instruments, dance, or academic pupils one at a time. 
e.  The care of not more than six children for compensation. 
(2)  A customary home occupation specifically does not include the following: 
a.  Dancing or band instrument instruction in groups. 
b.  Florists or flower shops. 
c.  Tearooms and restaurants. 
d.  Tourist homes, boarding houses, or rooming houses. 
e.  Beauty parlors or shops and barbershops. 
f.  Fish hatcheries, worm farms or bait houses. 
g.  Offices for real estate salesmen or brokers. 
h.  Convalescent and nursing homes. 
i.  Kennels and animal hospitals. 
j.  Clinics and hospitals. 
k.  Retail sales. 
l.  Firewood sales. 
    Day care facility. A structure or portion of a structure wherein is provided care and supervision of persons away from their place of residence for less than 24 hours per day on a regular basis for compensation. For the purposes of this ordinance the term "day care" shall include but not be limited to the terms "nursery school," "early learning center," "pre-kindergarten," "private kindergarten," "play school," "pre-school," "group day care home," and "family day care home." 
    Day care home, family. Customary home occupation which provides for no more than six persons not residents of the premises, with care and supervision by a state registered resident adult for less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis for compensation. 
    Day care home, group. An occupied dwelling in which the owner-occupant is licensed by the State of Georgia to provide care and supervision for more than six, but less than 19, persons who are not residents of the dwelling. Such care shall be provided for less than 24 hours a day on a regular basis for compensation. 
    Density. The number of families, individuals, dwelling units or housing structures per unit of land. Gross density includes all the land within the boundaries of the particular area excluding nothing. Net density excludes street right-of-way dedications, land identified as a flood hazard area or within any electricity or gas transmission easement or right-of-way. 
    Diameter breast height (DBH). The diameter of a tree measured at a point four and one-half feet above the ground. 
    Drive-in restaurant. Any place or premises used for the sale, dispensing, or service of food, refreshments, or beverages in automobiles, including those establishments where customers may eat or drink on the premises. 
    Duplex. A dwelling containing two and only two dwelling units. 
    Dwelling. A building designed or used exclusively for residential purposes, but not including hotels and motels. 
    Dwelling, attached. A dwelling containing three or more dwelling units which are joined only by common vertical walls. 
    Dwelling, multiple. Dwelling containing three or more dwelling units or designed for occupancy by three or more boarders or roomers. 
    Dwelling, single-family. A dwelling containing one and only one dwelling unit, detached, with a minimum roof pitch greater than 4:12, and a roof overhang of at least one foot measured from the vertical side. 
    Dwelling unit. One or more rooms designed for the occupancy, cooking, and sleeping of one or more persons living as a family. 
    Dwelling unit, efficiency. Dwelling unit of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and bathroom. 
    Family. An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, or a group of not more than four unrelated persons, occupying a single dwelling unit. 
    Family personal care home. A customary home occupation which provides a home for individuals in a family-type residence, non-institutional in character, which offers care to two to six persons. 
    Farming, general. Low-impact agriculture, including cattle (no more than one head per acre), horses (no more than one head per acre), crop production, dirt farming, sod production, goats, sheep, forestry and timber harvesting, nurseries, and greenhouses. A use of a tract of land devoted to agricultural purposes, but specifically excluding the following activities and/or uses: Feed lots, fish farms, fur farms, poultry houses/farms and application of chicken litter on the property, turkey ranges, hog parlors, dairy barns, commercial slaughtering of livestock, poultry and/or fowl, and any other agricultural activity or use which is objectionable by reason of odor, noise, dust or sanitary conditions. 
    Floor area. The gross heated, finished horizontal area of the several floors of a building or dwelling unit exclusive of basement, attic, carport, or garage. 
    Frontage, building. The width between the side exterior walls of a building facing a street. 
    Frontage, lot. The distance for which the front line of the lot joins the street. 
    Frontage, road. The location where a parcel of land adjoins a street. 
    Garage. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used primarily for vehicle storage. 
    Garage, repair. A building or portion thereof, other than a private or parking garage, designed or used for the storage, servicing, repairing, equipping and/or hiring of motor driven vehicles. 
    Group personal care home. A home for individual persons in a residence or other type building, non-institutional in character, which offers care to seven through 15 persons. 
    Guest house. A secondary building incidental to the principal residence which is used only for the non-commercial boarding of guests or full time workers. 
    Hazardous waste. Any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3. 
    Home occupation. See Customary home occupation. 
    Hotel. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided for more than 20 persons for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office. 
    Household pets. Domesticated animals weighing less than 150 pounds and cared for by the members of the household and which are not livestock as defined herein. 
    Impervious surface. A man-made structure or surface, which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools or patios. 
    Industrial, heavy. Uses engaged in the processing and/or manufacturing of materials or products predominantly from extracted or raw materials. Includes manufacturing processes using flammable or explosive materials; storage of flammable or explosive materials; or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Operations typically do not make reasonable attempts to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as smoke, noise, soot, dirt, vibration, odor, etc. Heavy industrial is prohibited in the city. 
    Industrial, light. Establishments engaged in the non-polluting manufacture, predominantly from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales, or distribution of such products. Further, "light industrial" and "industrial" shall not include loud, dusty, polluting, odorous or other intensive industrial uses or those which tend to produce smoke, soot, or vibration, or those uses such as including without limitation mining and extracting industries, asphalt plants, concrete plants, cement plants, abattoirs, chicken houses, slaughterhouses, use or storage of flammable or explosive materials, use of radioactive materials, poisons, pesticides, or herbicides, or petrochemical industries, rubber refining, primary metal, or related or similar industries. 
    Industrialized home. A dwelling unit manufactured in accordance with the Georgia Industrialized Building Act (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq.), and the Rules of the Commissioner of the Georgia Department of Community Affairs issued pursuant thereto, and meeting the following development standards: 
(1)  A minimum width in excess of 28 feet. 
(2)  A minimum roof pitch of 5:12, which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. Any dwelling unit for which a building permit was obtained prior to the adoption of this ordinance may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this ordinance with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the previous building permit. 
(3)  A minimum roof overhang of 12 inches is required. All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel), clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(4)  Exterior siding consisting of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or stone, comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site dwellings. 
(5)  A curtain wall, un-pierced except for required ventilation and access, must be installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. Such a wall shall have a minimum thickness of four inches and shall be constructed of masonry or similar material as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  The dwelling must be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirement of the Standard Building Code. In addition, the dwelling shall be completely underpinned with masonry, stone, or other similar materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning as approved by the zoning administrator. Installation shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner and shall be completed prior to permanent electrical service. 
(7)  Utility meters must be mounted to the structure rather than on a utility pole, and all axles, tongues, and transporting and towing apparatus must be removed before occupancy. 
(8)  A landing must be installed at each doorway. The minimum size of the landing shall be four feet by six feet (excluding steps) at each doorway. The structure must include steps which lead to ground level, and both landing and steps must meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
(9)  The dwelling must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-110 et seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
    Junk. Any old or scrapped metal, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber, debris, junked dismantled to wrecked automobiles, or parts therefrom, old lumber, and other scrapped ferrous or non-ferrous materials. 
    Junkyard. Property used for keeping junk. 
    Land disturbance permit (LDP). A permit that authorizes clearing or grading. 
    Landfill, construction and demolition waste. A landfill in which construction/demolition waste is disposed. Construction/demolition waste means those wastes limited to building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such permitted wastes are wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material and other non-putrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. Applicant must comply with the provisions contained in this ordinance and all applicable provisions of the city solid waste management plan and the erosion and sedimentation control regulations and any city solid waste management facility ordinance, which are referenced hereinafter. 
    Landfill, inert waste. A landfill in which inert waste is disposed. Inert waste means those wastes limited to earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. Applicant must comply with the provisions contained in this ordinance and all applicable provisions of the city solid waste management plan and the erosion and sedimentation control regulations and any city solid waste management facility ordinance, which are referenced hereinafter. 
    Landfill, municipal solid waste. A landfill accepting any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and from community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or by-product material as defined by the federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (68 Stat. 923). The city has made provision for its solid waste disposal needs via its DCA approved solid waste plan, such that it currently does not designate solid waste landfills as a permitted or special use in city, the city being exempt from zoning regulation. 
    Landscape business. A business whose primary operation is the sale and/or installation of organic and inorganic material, plants, pine straw, and other limited accessory products for the landscape industry, and the storage and use of associated landscape vehicles and equipment. 
    Livestock. Any animal raised for food, raw materials or pleasure, and customarily kept on a farm, including but not limited to, beef and dairy cattle, sheep, swine, poultry, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, turkeys, bison, llama, emus and any animal having hooves. This definition of livestock shall not apply to pet chickens owned pursuant to section 9-72 as domesticated animals. 
    Loading space. Off-street vehicle parking space reserved for bulk pickups and deliveries. 
    Lot. A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership legally transferable as a single unit of land. A lot must meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must have lot frontage on a street. For the purpose of this ordinance, the term does not include any portion of a right-of-way. 
    Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured generally perpendicular to the front lot line. 
    Lot, through. A lot having frontage on two streets that are approximately parallel. 
    Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line. 
    Lot width (cul-de-sac). For a lot having the majority of its frontage on a cul-de-sac, the lot width shall be the horizontal distance between the side lines of the lot, measured at the minimum required front yard (building setback) line or at a line parallel to said setback line, which is no more than twice the minimum front yard setback distance from the street. 
    Manufactured home. A dwelling unit, meeting the definition of "manufactured home" contained in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160, fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act, 42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq., and meeting the following development standards, rendering it a Type A manufactured home: 
(1)  A minimum width in excess of 28 feet. 
(2)  A minimum roof pitch of 5:12, which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. Any dwelling unit for which a building permit was obtained prior to the adoption of this Ordinance may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this Ordinance with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the previous building permit. 
(3)  A minimum roof overhang of 12 inches is required. All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel), clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(4)  Exterior siding consisting of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, stone, or aluminum (vinyl covered or painted, but in no case exceeding the reflectivity of gloss white paint) comparable in composition, appearance, and durability to the exterior siding commonly used in site-built dwellings. 
(5)  A curtain wall, un-pierced except for required ventilation and access, must be installed so that it encloses the area located under the home to the ground level. Such a wall shall have a minimum thickness of four inches and shall be constructed of masonry or similar material as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(6)  The dwelling must be placed on a permanent foundation, either slab or pier, which meets the requirement of the Standard Building Code. In addition, the dwelling shall be completely underpinned with masonry, stone, or other similar materials manufactured for the purpose of underpinning as approved by the zoning administrator. Installation shall be in accordance with the Rules and Regulations for Manufactured Homes made and promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner and shall be completed prior to permanent electrical service. 
(7)  Utility meters must be mounted to the structure rather than on a utility pole, and all axles, tongues, and transporting and towing apparatus must be removed before occupancy. 
(8)  A landing must be installed at each outside doorway. The minimum size of the landing shall be four feet by six feet (excluding steps) at each doorway. The structure must include steps which lead to ground level, and both landing and steps must meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
(9)  The dwelling must be installed in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-160 et seq., and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
    Manufactured home lot. A parcel of land for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single manufactured home. 
    Manufactured home park. A manufactured home park is a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of manufactured homes for non-transient use. Not permitted in the city. 
    Motel. A building or group of buildings where lodging is provided for more than ten persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which access to and from all rooms are made through private exterior entrances. 
    Office park. A development on a tract of land that contains a number of separate office buildings, supporting uses and open space designed, planned, constructed and managed on an integrated and coordinated basis. 
    Open space. A parcel or area of land or water set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for public or private use in an essentially undeveloped or unimproved state that would: (1) conserve and enhance natural or scenic resources; (2) protect streams or water supply; (3) promote conservation of soils or wetlands; (4) enhance the value to the public of abutting or neighboring parks, forests, wildlife preserves, nature reservations, or sanctuaries; or (5) enhance passive or active recreation areas. It shall be recorded as part of a land subdivision plat which is reserved for the use of adjoining owners, occupants and their guests. Open space shall not include any portion of an overhead power line easement or stormwater detention pond which is not part of an existing or proposed permanent lake. 
    Overlay district. A zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that imposes additional requirements above that required by the underlying zone. 
    Pet grooming. The business of grooming dogs or cats, within a building, where the animals are not kept overnight. 
    Planned unit development (PUD). Three or more buildings on a lot at least two acres, not subdivided, which provides common open spaces and a variety of choice in housing types and land utilization. Land ownership or rental patterns may vary. If common open spaces, including streets, are not dedicated for public use, legal agreements shall include provision for adequate future maintenance. 
    Recreation center. A neighborhood facility located within a high density residential area, dedicated for recreational purposes, to primarily serve the residents of the surrounding area. May include club house, pool, tennis courts, playgrounds, etc. 
    Residential districts. Zoning districts that include the following: AG, AG-2, R-25, R-15, RMD, PUD, and RHD. Unless otherwise authorized by this ordinance, there shall be only one primary residence per lot of record. 
    Restaurant. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed primarily within the principal building. The term encompasses cafes, grills, and lunch counters and includes outdoor customer dining areas and carry-out/take-out service but excludes without limitation drive-in and drive-through restaurants. 
    Road frontage. The distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or public road right-of-way dedicated to and accepted by the city or the county for vehicular traffic or over which the city or the county may hold a prescriptive easement for public access, and including designated and numbered U.S. and state highways. 
    Road, minor collectors. A road/street serving county-wide traffic, these roads collect traffic from local roads/streets and bring developed areas within a reasonable distance of a major collector road; provide service to smaller communities; and link the locally important traffic generators with other areas. 
    Road, major collectors. The primary purpose of a collector road is to collect and distribute traffic between the local streets and the major and minor arterial streets and to provide access to adjacent properties. These roads, with minor collectors, primarily serve county rather than state traffic. More moderate speeds are typical. They serve traffic generators of intra county importance, such as consolidated schools, shipping points, county parks, and important business and agricultural areas. They link these places with nearby cities, arterials and freeways, and serve the more important intra county travel corridors. 
    Road, rural minor arterials. With the principal arterial system, these roads form a rural network that links other cities, larger Cities, and other traffic generators capable of attracting travel over long distances; links all developed areas of the state; and serve corridors with trip lengths and travel density greater than those predominantly served by rural collector or local systems. Minor arterials' design should provide for relatively high overall travel speeds, with minimum interference to through-movement. 
    Road, rural principal arterials. A road, which includes interstates and rural freeways, that serves substantial statewide or interstate traffic, as defined by high mileage or volume; often connects urban areas of 25,000 or more; and provides an integrated network. 
    Rural character. The patterns of land use and development established by the comprehensive plan in which open space, the natural landscape, and vegetation predominate over the built environment, that fosters traditional rural lifestyles, rural based economies, and opportunities to both live and work in rural areas, that provides visual landscapes that are traditionally found in rural areas and communities, that is compatible with the use of the land by wildlife and for fish and wildlife habitat, that reduces the inappropriate conversion of undeveloped land into sprawling residential or commercial development, and that generally do not require the extension of urban governmental services, and that is consistent with the protection of natural surface water flows and ground water and surface water recharge and discharge area. 
    Screening. Shielding a structure or use from another by opaque fencing, walls, berms, vegetation or similar. 
    Sign. The term "sign" shall mean and include every outdoor advertising device, billboard, poster panel, statuary, free-standing ground sign, sign painted on a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy, and shall include any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote any interests when the same is in view of the general public. 
    Sign, animated. A sign with action, motion or changing colors. This definition does not include signs which indicate only time, temperature and date. 
    Sign, area of. The area of a sign shall be computed as including the entire area within a regular geometric form or combinations of regular geometric forms, comprising all of the display area of the sign and including all of the elements of the matter displayed. Structural frames and members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area. 
    Sign, directional. A sign located within a development at a street intersection or private drive (other than an entrance) on which the name of a street and/or the institutionalized corporate/business names or other building identification with addresses indicating direction to their location. The purpose of this sign is to provide directions to the tenants. 
    Sign, directory. A sign which is located within the boundary of a development, as defined by the approved plat on which the address and name of the businesses, tenants and/or occupants of the development is placed. Directional information may also be placed on the sign (e.g., map of the project showing streets, etc.). 
    Sign, double faced. A sign which has two display areas against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
    Sign face. The part of a sign that is or can be used for display purposes. 
    Sign, ground. A permanently affixed sign which is wholly independent of a building for support. 
    Sign, ground; height. Height from the elevation of the adjacent dedicated public street, edge of pavement, to the highest point of the sign structure. For property with elevation higher than the adjacent public street, the height shall be measured from ground level at base of sign to the highest point of the sign structure. The ground shall not be altered for the sole purpose of providing additional sign height. 
    Sign, illuminated direct. A sign illuminated by an internal light source. 
    Sign, illuminated indirect. A sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
    Sign, marquee. A business sign painted on, attached to, or hung from a marquee. 
    Sign, number. For the purposes of determining number of signs, ground signs shall be equal to the number of sign structures. All other non-ground signs shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relationship of elements, such element shall be considered to be a single sign. 
    Sign, planned center. A serial sign which identifies the names of businesses, offices, professionals, industries or other entities located within a planned center. 
    Sign, political. Signs identifying or urging voter support for a particular election issue, political party or candidate for public office. 
    Sign, portable. Signs which are attached to vehicles, trailers, movable structures, or attached to sign structures which are not securely anchored into the ground, or any sign which may be transported or is designed to be transported. Such signs include, but are not limited to, "A" and "T" type, sidewalk, sandwich, trailer signs, curb-type signs, banners or other commercial advertisement attached to vehicles and trailers which offer products or services "For Sale" or announce when the "Sale" is to occur. Exceptions: Signs painted or attached to a vehicle stating only the name, address, business logo and telephone number of a business. Signs which are placed in the bed of a truck or trunk of an automobile, or a banner attached to the vehicle regardless of the information contained thereon or method of attachment are not included in this exception. (Note: All vehicles must be parked in locations consistent with this ordinance.) 
    Sign, projecting. A sign projecting more than six inches from the outside wall of a building. 
    Sign, real estate. A temporary sign advertising the real property upon which the sign is located for rent or sale. 
    Sign, roof. A sign projecting over the coping of a flat roof, or over the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, and supported by or attached to said roof. 
    Sign, sidewalk or sandwich. A moveable A-frame sign. 
    Sign structure. Poles, posts, foundations, and the like, which provide structural support of the sign. 
    Sign, surface area. Includes all of the display area of the sign: structural frames and members not bearing advertising matter shall not be included in computation of surface area. 
    Sign, temporary. A sign of a non-permanent nature. 
    Sign, trailer. Any sign which is mounted on wheels and which may be moved from one location to another. 
    Sign, wall. A sign applied to or mounted to the wall or surface of a building or structure, the display surface which does not project more than six inches from the outside wall. The total lettering on one side of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign. 
    Site built home. A dwelling unit constructed on the building site from basic materials delivered to the site, constructed in accordance with the applicable building code and meeting the following development standards: 
(1)  A minimum width in excess of 28 feet. 
(2)  A minimum roof pitch of 5:12, which means having a pitch equal to at least five inches of vertical height for every 12 inches of horizontal run. Any dwelling unit for which a building permit was obtained prior to the adoption of this ordinance may be extended, enlarged or repaired as otherwise provided by this ordinance with the same roof pitch as that allowed by the previous building permit. 
(3)  A minimum roof overhang of 12 inches is required. All roof surfaces exposed to view shall be covered with asphalt or fiberglass shingles, wood shakes or shingles, standing seam (non-corrugated tin or steel), clay tiles, slate, or similar materials. 
(4)  Exterior siding consisting of wood, hardboard, vinyl, brick, masonry, or stone, or similar material as approved by the zoning administrator. 
(5)  A landing must be installed at each outside doorway. The minimum size of the landing shall be four feet by six feet (excluding steps) at each doorway. The structure must include steps which lead to ground level, and both landing and steps must meet the requirements of the Standard Building Code. 
    Solid waste. Putrescible and non-putrescible wastes, except water-carried body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, sewage sludges, animal manure, industrial wastes, abandoned automobiles, dredging wastes, construction wastes, hazardous wastes and any other waste material in a solid or semi-solid state not otherwise defined in these regulations. 
    Special events. A use or facility where events such as weddings, conferences, concerts, meetings, fundraisers and similar gatherings are held. A special event facility is typically rented or for paying guests. Special events have specific time frame per event, a definite number of attendees, and do not pose an adverse impact to rural character. Special events are usually of short duration. 
    Street, local nonresidential. A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent, existing, or planned commercial or industrial development and not through traffic. 
    Street, local residential. A surface street intended primarily to provide local access to adjacent residential development and not for through traffic. 
    Subdivision. Any division of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions; provided, however, that the following are not included in this definition: 
(1)  The division into parcels of five acres or more, if each resulting parcel has at least 150 feet of frontage on an existing public road; 
(2)  The sale or exchange of land between owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the modified lots comply with this ordinance and the city subdivision regulations. 
    Telecommunications tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas: self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, and cellular communications towers. 
    Tree diameter. Widest cross-sectional dimension of a tree trunk measured at diameter breast height (DBH) or at a point below DBH for new trees or multi-trunked species, but in no case less than six inches from the ground. 
    Tree service. A business whose primary operation is the trimming or removal of trees and the storage and use of associated equipment and vehicles. Does not include stock piling of by-product for more than 14 days. 
    Utility structures. Electric transformer stations, telephone exchanges, gas regulator stations, water and wastewater pumping stations, and water tanks may be located in any zone as necessary to serve the public interest, provided such facilities comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Any building or structure, except a surrounding fence, shall be set back at least 30 feet from any property line. 
(2)  The facility shall be completely surrounded by a chain link fence at least eight feet high. 
(3)  When located in any residential or office-institutional zone, the facility shall be furnished with a planted buffer not less than ten feet wide to create an effective visual screen on all sides bordering residential or office-institutional property. 
(4)  The facility may not be used for office space, storage space, or for the storage of vehicles or equipment. 
    Veterinary clinic. Facility for the treatment of domestic animals, operated under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. The boarding of animals is limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic use and does not take place in outside runs or kennels. 
    Waste transfer station. A facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transport to a disposal facility or processing operation. 
    Wetlands. Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. See Division 420. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (33 CFR 32.93) The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrophytic vegetation, and hydrological conditions that involve a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. Freshwater wetlands do not include any areas defined as "coastal marshlands" by the State Coastal Marshlands Protection Act. 
    Yard. An open space between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line, and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein. 
    Yard, front. An open, unoccupied space extending the full width of the lot, between the street line and the front line of the building projected parallel to the street to the side lines of the lot. Corner lots have two front yards. 
    Yard, rear. An open space unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the full width of the lot, between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building or use, projected to the side lines of the lot. 
    Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space located between the building or use and the side line of the lot, and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
    Zoning buffer. A buffer required by the zoning ordinance or as a condition of zoning, conditional use or variance approval for a specific property. 
(Amd. of 12-20-2016; Ord. No. 2017-9, § 3, 5-16-2017; Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-16, § 1, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 2017-23, § 1, 11-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-4, § 1, 10-16-2018; Ord. No. 2018-6, § 1, 10-16-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICTS 

Sec. 400. - District designations. 
    The city is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 
AG Agricultural District; for agriculture, forestry, very low density residential development, and limited other uses under specific conditions. 
AG-2 Agricultural District 2; provides for very low density development contiguous to unincorporated areas. 
R-25 Low Density Single-Family Residential District. 
R-15 Medium Density Single-Family Residential District. 
R-12 Medium Density Single-Family Residential District. 
RMD Residential Medium Density Residential One and Two Family District. 
PUD Planned Unit Development District. The purpose of planned unit developments is to encourage the best possible site plans and buildings arrangements under a unified plan of developments rather than under lot-by-lot regulation. 
RHD Residential-High Density Residential District; provides multi-unit structures which is attached housing. 
OI Office-Institutional District; for limited commercial and institutional land uses where traffic, noise and congestion are minimized. 
NC Neighborhood Commercial District; provides for limited commercial uses that serve the immediate neighborhood. 
CBD Central Business District providing for shops, services, and offices. 
GC General Commercial District: provides for retail, wholesale, storage, repair services and garages. 
I-1 Light Industrial District; provides for most heavy commercial and light industrial uses which can meet rigid standards for control of noise, odor, and other off-site disturbance. 
I-2 Industrial District; provides for a number of industrial uses. 
MUBP Mixed Use Business Park District. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 401. - Location and boundaries of zoning districts. 
    The location and boundaries of the zoning district are established as shown on the map entitled, "The Official Zoning District Map for Social Circle, Georgia," adopted November 9, 1998, made a part of this ordinance by reference. The zoning map may be amended from time to time, and shall be kept on file in the Social Circle City Hall where it shall be available for public inspection. The official zoning map in city hall, as amended and reflected in the minutes, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. The zoning map shall be signed by the mayor and council and attested by the clerk of the city. 
    Zoning of streets, alleys, public ways, state highways, interstate highways and railroad rights-of-way. All streets, alleys, public ways, state highways, interstate highways and railroad rights-of-way, if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same zoning designation as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways, state highways, interstate highways and railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 402. - Interpretation of zoning district boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any zoning district shown on the zoning map of the city, the following rules shall apply: 
1.  Where a zoning district boundary is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a lot line or the centerline of a road, railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such line shall be the district boundary line. 
2.  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, highway or railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such district boundary line, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall be at the scaled distance there from and parallel thereto. 
3.  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies applies to the balance of the lot. 
4.  In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets, that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 
5.  Where a public road, street or alley is officially vacated or abandoned, the ordinances applicable to the property to which it is reverted shall apply to such vacated or abandoned road, street or alley. 
6.  In case the exact location of a boundary cannot be determined by the foregoing methods, the mayor and council shall, upon application, determine the location of the boundary pursuant to a public hearing advertised per the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 403. - Annexation and other adjustments to city limits. 
    Where city limit boundaries change, the land areas incorporated will be zoned in accordance with procedure required by O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4, the Zoning Procedures Act and the provision of the 2017 zoning ordinance of the city governing amendments. Where additions in the total land area require adjustments in the zoning district boundaries, said adjustment shall be made on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-22, § 1, 11-21-2017) 
ARTICLE V. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 

Sec. 500. - Use, occupancy and construction. 
    No building, structure or land shall be used, constructed, moved or altered except in conformity with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 501. - Height and density. 
    No building or structure shall hereafter be constructed, or altered to: 
1.  Exceed the height limits. 
2.  Have a greater density per acre or occupy a smaller lot than herein required. 
3.  Have narrower or smaller front, rear or side yards than herein required. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 502. - Reduction in lot size. 
    No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area or any other requirement of this ordinance is not maintained. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 503. - Yards and other spaces. 
    No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces shall be included as part of the yard or off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 504. - Only one principal building or use on a lot. 
    Within residential districts (AG, AG-2, R-25, R-15, R-12, RMD, PUD, and RHD), only excepting group developments, such as apartments/condominiums, not more than one principal building or structure or use and its customary accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted on any lot. In nonresidential districts, more than one structure housing a principal permitted use may be erected on a single lot, provided that yard and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each structure between structures and the property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 505. - Accessory uses or structures. 
1.  Accessory structures shall be permitted only in rear yards, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. In a residential district, accessory uses customarily located within front or side yards of residences are the following: walls and fences as permitted herein, mailboxes, driveways, walkways, lamp posts, landscaping, vegetable gardens, provided they do not exceed 30 percent of the front yard, and basketball goals adjacent to driveways. No accessory uses or structures, except driveways, mailboxes or minimal landscaping shall be located within a public right-of-way. 
2.  Accessory uses customarily located in rear yards of residences are the following: storage buildings, patios, swimming pools, dog runs, dog pens and houses, detached garages, tennis courts, playground equipment, fences and walls as permitted in section 700. Any accessory use or structure, except walls, fences, driveways and landscaping, shall be set back not less than five feet from any lot line, or not less than the distance established by other portions of this ordinance. 
3.  No accessory structure shall be erected prior to construction of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
4.  In residential districts, unless otherwise allowed by this ordinance, no accessory building shall exceed 1,000 square feet and the total floor area of accessory structures shall not exceed 50 percent of the principal dwelling. 
5.  No accessory building shall be utilized unless the principal structure is also occupied. There shall be a distance of not less than 20 feet between a principal and accessory building located on the same lot or parcel unless the principal building and the accessory building share a common wall. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 506. - Classification of streets. 
    All of the streets, roads and highways in the city are classified as roads based upon the thoroughfares functional classification map in the county comprehensive plan or the city comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE VI. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 600. - City approvals. 
    All city, county and state approvals and permits required for the use/operation of the land, structures and/or businesses shall be obtained by the applicant before the use/operation begins. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 601. - Code requirements. 
    All structures shall meet the requirements of all adopted codes. Where such codes exceed the requirements of this ordinance, the stricter provisions apply. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 602. - Approvals for residential subdivisions, business, and industrial developments on state highways. 
    For all residential subdivision, business and industrial developments fronting on a state highway, no building or development permits shall be issued until the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation of entrances and exits, curbs, drainage and other matters. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 603. - Erosion and sedimentation control. 
    All land disturbing activity within the city shall comply with current erosion and sedimentation control regulations of the city, and with the rules and regulations of EPD. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 604. - Uses not listed. 
    Uses not listed are prohibited. However, the applicant may apply for a text amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 605. - Minimum floor area requirements. 
    All dwelling units shall have a minimum heated finished living area, as provided for in the article entitled use provisions for each residential zoning classification. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 606. - Area, yard and height requirements. 
    All requirements of area, yard, and height requirements shall be met unless otherwise specified. All height requirements must be met unless otherwise specified. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 607. - Minimum lot size for residential septic tank use. 
    No residence to be served by a septic tank shall be permitted on a lot containing less square footage than required by the county board of health, or the minimum required by the department of natural resources for lots in a groundwater recharge area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 608. - Flood hazard. 
    Except for stormwater retention facilities, no structures or obstruction to storm water flow shall be erected within the maximum flood elevation of a 100-year recurrence interval storm. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 609. - Frontage on corner lots. 
    On corner lots, the required front yard shall be provided for each frontage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 610. - Street frontage requirement. 
    No structure shall be erected on a lot that does not abut at least 25 feet upon a publicly dedicated and maintained street. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 611. - Vision clearance at intersection. 
    In all zoning districts, except the central business district, no other obstruction to vision between two and one-half feet and ten feet, except utility poles, light or street sign standards or tree trunks, shall be permitted within 20 feet of the intersection of the right-of-way lines of streets, roads, highways or railroads. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 612. - Access to public streets. 
    Access to public streets shall be maintained per the following: 
1.  Each principal use shall be on a lot with frontage on a public street having a right-of-way width of not less than 30 feet. 
2.  For single-family and two-family uses, there shall be: 
a.  Access from internal subdivision streets, if the lot has frontage on the interior street of a subdivision. 
b.  Access as follows for all other existing streets or roads: No more than one access way per 100 feet of individual lot frontage on a roadway, which shall not exceed 30 feet in width, measured at the edge of the roadway surface at a line five feet outside and parallel to the edge of the roadway surface. The width of the rest of said access way shall not exceed 20 feet, which shall not be increased until said line five feet from the roadway. 
3.  All uses other than single-family and two-family (including industrial, commercial, business and multi-family uses) shall have no more than one access way on any one street frontage of less than 140 feet, nor more than two access ways on any one street frontage of 140 feet to 210 feet. Such access way shall not exceed 80 feet in width, measured at the edge of the roadway surface, and shall be gradually reduced (by equivalent radii or tapers) so as not to exceed 30 feet in width at a line drawn parallel to, and between 12 feet and 25 feet from the outside edge of the roadway surface. All such access ways should intersect the roadway at 90 degrees, however, when circumstances exist, such that this is not practical or desirable, the city manager may permit the intersection to occur at an angle of not less than 45 degrees, with compatible radii or tapers. 
4.  At roadway intersections, no access way shall be established within five feet of the points of tangency of the curve connecting such roadways. Measurements shall be made along the edge of the roadway surface from the nearest point of tangency. 
5.  All uses other than single-family and two-family shall have no access way within ten feet of the intersection of a straight line projection of any side (or rear) lot line and the edge of the roadway surface, and all uses other than single-family and two-family shall not have any access ways less than 20 feet apart, at the edge of the roadway. 
6.  No curbs or rights-of-way shall be cut, paved, established, or otherwise altered until a scale plan, indicating compliance with these requirements, has been approved by the city manager. 
7.  Access ways shall be defined by paving or use of curbs. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 613. - Exterior building materials and landscaping. 
    Sheet metal, vinyl siding, exposed common concrete block and similar materials shall not be permitted as exterior materials on sides of buildings facing any road. The exterior material of the face of said buildings on the sides facing a road shall consist of glass, brick, stone, textured masonry block, real stucco, wood or similar building materials. Front and side yards shall be landscaped with ground cover, shrubbery and trees that are well-maintained. 
    In residential zoning districts, sheet metal, vinyl siding, exposed common concrete block and similar materials shall not be permitted as exterior building materials. Soffits, gables and eaves may be finished in vinyl. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 614. - Requirements for customary home occupations. 
    In addition to the limitations under article III, definitions, the following apply: 
1.  The occupation shall be carried on only by members of the family residing in the residence. 
2.  No on-site sale of any item or service may occur. 
3.  The home occupation shall not involve group instruction or group assembly. 
4.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation. 
5.  The home occupation shall not increase traffic or parking. 
6.  No equipment may be used or stored except that normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. Samples may be kept on the premises, but not sold or distributed from the residence. 
7.  Signs identifying the home occupation are prohibited. 
8.  No more than 25 percent of the dwelling unit may be used for the home occupation. 
9.  Only one business vehicle, used exclusively by the resident, is allowed. It must be parked in a carport, garage, or rear yard. It shall be no larger than a pick-up truck or van, nor have a carrying capacity of more than one and one-half tons. 
10.  The following uses may not be considered for home occupations: Auto repair, sales, or similar operations, restaurants, funeral homes, keeping of animals, retail or wholesale sales, storage or warehousing of material, equipment, or merchandise, hotel or motel type establishments, adult entertainment, any business involving alcohol, drugs or medications, or any use that is in conflict with the intent of this ordinance. 
11.  No equipment or processes shall be used in such home occupation, which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference, outside the dwelling unit. In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any television or radio receivers off the premises, or cause fluctuations in line voltage off the premises. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 615. - Outdoor storage. 
    Outdoor storage of inoperative automobiles, machinery, equipment, used building materials, trash, solid waste, appliances and similar items and materials shall be limited to junk yards. Outdoor storage of materials or equipment sold or used in conjunction with an approved permitted use must be located in a zoning district which permits outdoor storage. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 616. - Telecommunications tower and antenna. 
1.  No towers may be located in residential or agricultural zoning districts. 
2.  Notwithstanding setback regulations, the required setback to any public right-of-way or property line is equal to the height of the tower. The setback shall be measured from the base of the tower. 
3.  Telecommunications towers and antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the Federal Aviation Administration or Federal Communications Commission, be painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the maximum extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment shall be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. No advertising sign or logo is permitted on any tower or antenna. 
4.  Radio, television or other electromagnetic transmission or reception on other properties will not be disturbed. 
5.  The tower will have lighting which consists of a red light at night and strobes in daylight, when lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration. The lighting shall be oriented so as not to project directly onto surrounding residential property. The owner shall submit documentation from the FAA that the lighting is the minimum required by the FAA. 
6.  Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be entirely enclosed by a security fence not less than six feet tall. Towers shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device. This requirement shall not apply to alternative tower structures provided equivalent alternative security measures are installed. 
7.  In addition to any other landscaping or buffer requirements that may apply, telecommunications towers and antennas shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant material that effectively reduces the visual obtrusiveness of the tower site from adjacent uses. Existing tree growth and natural land forms on site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. At a minimum, a landscaped buffer strip 25 feet in width shall be provided around the perimeter of the site. The tower compound shall be surrounded by a tight evergreen vegetative screen not less than six feet tall and shall consist of evergreen trees and/or shrubs that will normally obtain a height of eight feet within five years. Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. 
8.  Telecommunications towers and antennas shall be constructed to the minimum height necessary to accomplish their required telecommunications purpose. 
9.  Output power levels from the tower and/or associated antennas shall not exceed the current federally approved levels for exposure to electromagnetic radiation. 
10.  Each applicant requesting a conditional use permit shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the building and code official to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance. Any information of an engineering nature shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
11.  Each applicant for a tower and/or antenna shall also provide an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the city or one-fourth mile thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for land use approvals and permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the city. However, the city is not, by sharing such information, representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
12.  The planning commission and council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit for a telecommunication facility: 
a)  Height of the proposed tower; 
b)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
c)  Type of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d)  Surrounding topography; 
e)  Design of the tower, particularly as to visual obtrusiveness; 
f)  Proposed ingress and egress; 
g)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed above; and 
h)  Whether the tower is designed to accommodate additional antennas. 
13.  All decisions by the city or its officials regarding a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications tower or antenna shall be in writing and supported by a written record documenting the reasons for the denial and the evidence in support thereof. All such decisions shall be made within a reasonable time from the date a completed application is duly filed with the appropriate department. Applications in all cases where the telecommunications tower or antenna is an authorized use shall be made to and decided by the mayor and council upon review and recommendations of an Engineer pursuant to all standards and requirements herein. 
14.  Co-location of antennas is encouraged. Each applicant for a telecommunications tower or antenna shall provide to the city an inventory of existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of Social Circle or within one-quarter mile of the boundaries thereof, including information regarding the location, height, and design of each tower. The city may share such information with other applicants applying for conditional use permits under this ordinance or with other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of Social Circle, provided, however, that the city is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of Social Circle that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence shall be submitted at the time of application which demonstrates that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna and may consist of the following: 
a)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements. 
b)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e)  The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. 
f)  The applicant demonstrates other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
15.  All transmission towers installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be structurally and mechanically capable of accommodating the antenna or array of antennae of more than one user/transmitter, unless the tower is incapable of supporting more than one user/transmitter due to the design of the tower which is incorporated into another structure in compliance. Monopoles shall accommodate a minimum of two total users, lattice or other types of towers shall accommodate a minimum of three total users. To ensure structural integrity, towers and antennas shall be maintained in compliance with the building code and the current applicable standards published by the Electronic Industries Association. If the city concludes that a tower or antenna fails to comply and/or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice to the owner, the owner shall have thirty days to bring such tower or antenna into compliance. If the owner fails to do so, the city may remove such tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal shall be as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
16.  To further encourage co-location, additional users and associated equipment which do not add to the tower height, may be added without additional approval. However, additional building code regulations may apply. Site plans must show the locations for at least two equipment buildings, even if the tower is proposed for a single user. 
17.  Installation of an antenna on an existing alternative tower structures (a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing non-residential structure) 50 feet tall or greater is permitted, subject to zoning district restrictions. 
18.  The placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment necessarily required in connection with an otherwise authorized telecommunications tower or antenna is authorized. 
19.  Any telecommunications tower or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice by Social Circle notifying the owner of such abandonment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 617. - Development of regional impact. 
    When an application for rezoning, conditional use permit or preliminary plat review includes any uses which exceed the applicable development thresholds as established by the department of community affairs or the Northeast Georgia Regional Development Center (NEGRDC), it shall be deemed to be a Development of Regional Impact (DRI). The application for such rezoning, conditional use permit or preliminary plat review shall include three copies of a completed traffic study prepared in conformity with the subdivision regulations and two copies of completed forms for review of development of regional impact by the NEGRDC and other affected state and local government agencies as they shall deem appropriate. No action shall occur on such a rezoning, conditional use permit or preliminary plat review application by the mayor and council until a recommendation is received from the NEGRDC regarding the development of regional impact, provided that such application shall have been complete in every respect and was received by the city within 90 days of the date that the completed DRI review application forms were received by the NEGRDC. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 618. - Landscaping businesses. 
    Outside storage is permitted only in the rear yards and located at least 25 feet from any property zoned or used for residential. Such storage shall be screened from neighboring residential properties and streets with an opaque fence or a vegetative screen, subject to the approval of the city. Vehicles such as tractors, mowers, trucks, and trailers, shall not be parked in the front yard. Employee parking may not be within the front yard if adjacent or across the street from residential property, zoned or used. No storage or parking may occur within buffers or landscaping areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 619. - Livestock. 
    No livestock barns, shelters, pens or other quarters are to be located closer than 100 feet to any property line. Adequate off-street parking shall be provided for livestock trailers, tractors, vehicles, etc. associated with the use, in addition to the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 620. - Churches, temples and synagogues. 
    If located in a residential district, the site must be a minimum of three acres. Accessory uses include Sunday School facilities, recreational areas, parking, cemetery, caretaker's housing in a separate residential structure, and residential living facilities such as a convent, abbey, or parsonage. All accessory uses must meet the requirements of this ordinance. When located in a residential district, the following conditions shall apply: 
1.  Place of worship must be located on a collector or arterial street; 
2.  A 50-foot buffer or 25-foot buffer with opaque screening adjacent to residential zoning is required; driveways and parking areas must set back 25 feet from side property lines; 
3.  No school, child care, adult day care, gymnasium, homeless shelter, and caretaker's housing within the church building, amphitheater, or lighted ball field shall be allowed without a conditional use; 
4.  Active recreation fields, such as for baseball, football or soccer, or any amphitheater must be located at least 100 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential district or use. 
    Parking lot landscaping standards shall apply. The provisions of this section are not intended to impose a substantial burden on the exercise of religion by a person, religious assemble or institution, and such burdening of religious exercise is not allowed except for provisions that serve a compelling government interest. In considering a request for a variance from any term imposed under this section, and if the variance is not warranted under the existing standards, the planning staff shall consider the following: 
1.  Whether the regulation imposes a substantial burden on exercise of a religion; 
2.  Whether the regulation serves a compelling government interest; and 
3.  Whether the regulation is the least restrictive means to serve that interest; or 
4.  Whether the request can be granted without harming that interest. 
    If any provision of this section is found to impose a substantial burden on the exercise of a religion and does not serve a compelling government interest or is not the least restrictive means to serve that interest, the variance shall be granted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 621. - Recreation center. 
    Buildings and structures shall be set back not less than 100 feet from any property line, except when such property line is a street line. In such case, the front yard setback of the district shall apply. Recreation facilities shall comply with the subdivision regulations. Swimming pools shall comply with the standards herein. Outdoor activity shall cease by 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 622. - Schools, K-12. 
    Minimum lot size for private elementary, middle, and high schools: One acre, plus one additional acre for each 100 students. Active recreation fields, such as for baseball, football or soccer must be located at least 100 feet from any property line adjacent to a residential zone or use. A minimum buffer of 50 feet shall be required adjacent to any residential use or zone. No play area may be within the buffer or landscape area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 623. - Tree service. 
    Parking of vehicles and equipment shall be set back no less than 100 feet from property zoned or used as residential and 50 feet from any right-of way. No activity such as grinding, mulching may occur within 200 feet of all property lines. Burning is prohibited. A minimum 50-foot buffer, or 25-foot buffer with an eight-foot high opaque wooden fence, is required adjacent to all interior property lines, and a 25-foot buffer along any public right-of-way. Stockpiling of product may be no more than 14 days. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 624. - Day care facility. 
    The use must provide at least 100 square feet of outdoor recreation area as required by state day care requirements. The outdoor play area must be enclosed with a four-foot high fence. The use shall comply with all applicable state day care requirements for standards, licensing, and inspections. The use shall provide paved driveways with drop-off areas and turn-arounds to be reviewed by the city engineer so that traffic associated with the use does not impede the flow of traffic on adjacent streets. Uses located within residential districts shall maintain a residential appearance. Day care in residential structures must be occupied by a full time resident, either the owner or a tenant under written lease agreement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 625. - When traffic study required. 
    A traffic study is required for a rezoning, conditional use permit or preliminary plat review application for a project meeting any of the following criteria: (Note: The Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation Handbook uses square footage as an indicator of traffic generation for commercial and industrial developments.) 
1.  Single-family developments with over 25 new lots or units at build-out; or 
2.  Retail developments with over 25,000 square feet; or 
3.  Office developments with over 25,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 626. - Inert and construction and demolition landfills. 
1.  The following conditions must be met, except inert landfills only require a distance of one-half of each of the distance requirements listed below: 
a.  The location and boundaries of the site shall be surveyed and a plat and legal description provided to the city, together with other exhibits as required in this ordinance. The landfill shall have primary access via a state or federal highway or a paved road. All such operations shall be located on a road that does not create traffic through an area developed primarily for residential purposes. A stop sign shall be erected and maintained by the owner/operator at all egress roads from the landfill. Under no circumstances shall trucks use private drives or private access routes to or from the applicants' property that are within 300 feet of any residence. 
b.  A landfill shall only be permitted where all roads used for access have been built to a standard sufficient to withstand the projected number of trips per day at maximum weight for the vehicles expected. If a landfill is proposed adjacent to roads that are not sufficient to withstand the loads, or were not designed for such loads, the landfill owner must pay to bring such roads up to standard from the entrance(s) of the landfill to the nearest county or state road of sufficient strength; or the landfill shall be denied. Truck traffic shall be restricted to roads of sufficient strength and width, with either a turning lane or four lanes. 
c.  To allow for an adequate buffer, the landfill shall be located on a parcel of land not less than 250 acres in size, and the landfill "cell" area (that is, holding actual waste) may not exceed 30 percent of the total acreage, with landfill operations areas (i.e., "cells" plus scales, offices, storage, other buildings, etc.) not exceeding 40 percent. No landfill cell may exceed 60 feet in height above the original natural grade, when fully filled, covered and vegetated. No more than ten acres of the property can be active landfill cell at any one time. 
d.  The proposed facility shall not be located within two miles of a significant groundwater recharge area nor within two miles upgradient of any water supply watershed nor within 1000 feet of a wetland nor in the 100-year floodplain nor in seismic impact zones nor in unstable areas nor within 400 feet of a fault that has had displacement in Holocene time. 
e.  Such facility shall not be situated within two miles upgradient of any surface water intake for a public water drinking water source. 
f.  The applicant shall include with any rezoning application a report detailing the phasing of the landfill. 
2.  Such use shall also comply with the following regulations: 
a.  The landfill shall be suitably fenced to control access to the premises and to prevent the spread of materials. All landfill cell areas and landfill operations areas must be surrounded by a chain link fence at least eight feet high, topped with three strands of barbed wire, angled 45 degrees toward the outside of the premises to the top. All entrances shall have an eight-foot high gate, which shall be closed and locked at all times that the landfill is not open. 
b.  Upon final closure of the landfill, the site shall be left in a stabilized and vegetated condition in accordance with a post closure plan approved by the state department of natural resources. Furthermore, the reclamation plan for the closed landfill shall be submitted to and be subject to approval by the mayor and council. The plan shall propose reclamation or redevelopment that will best serve the needs and interests of the citizens of city. Reclamation or redevelopment shall be accomplished as soon as practicable following closure of any areas of the landfill. Substantial completion of reclamation or redevelopment shall be effected within two years after termination of the waste disposal facility. Inactivity for six consecutive months shall constitute, for this purpose, termination of disposal activities. 
c.  Materials placed in landfills shall be compacted to the extent possible with available equipment and covered with earth at least monthly or more frequently as may be required to meet industry standards. 
d.  The disposal site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto and from the landfill surface, to prevent erosion and to drain water from the surface of the landfill. 
e.  All-weather access roads shall be provided to the disposal site and provisions shall be made for waste moving and grading equipment repair or replacement when needed within a reasonable period of time. 
f.  The applicant shall follow all applicable federal and state laws and city regulations so as to prevent air, land and water pollution, public health hazards or nuisances. 
g.  Suitable means shall be provided to prevent and control fires, including sufficient dirt stockpiled near the active cell to extinguish fires. 
h.  Rodents and insects shall be controlled to meet industry standards. 
i.  The applicant shall submit to the city the design and operation plans of the landfill facility once they are approved by the state. All landfills shall be double composite lined, designed and installed under the supervision of a licensed professional engineer, with a leak detection system between the two liners, and leachate collection per EPA Subtitle D. However, inert landfills shall only require one such composite liner. 
j.  A minimum 400-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between all active waste burial areas and exterior property lines except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. The buffer must be sufficiently vegetated to be completely opaque and prevent viewing of any landfill cell at all times of the year. If the preexisting natural buffer is insufficient, the buffer shall be enhanced with a berm of at least ten feet in height and 50 feet wide at the top and plantings of evergreen trees, not more than ten feet apart, or evergreen shrubbery not more than five feet apart, in staggered rows, on the berm, parallel to the boundaries of the property. Evergreens shall be at least two-year transplants at the time of planting, shall grow to not less than ten feet in height within two years or less, and shall be sufficiently spaced to provide effective sight barriers when ten feet in height. Trees or shrubs that die must be promptly replaced with the same type tree that will grow to at least 10 feet high within two years. 
k.  The waste disposal boundary of any landfill or lateral expansion of an existing landfill shall not be located within 1,000 feet of any occupied dwelling. Any security lighting deemed necessary by the owner/operator shall be the sodium vapor type and shall be aligned so that no part of the illuminated field falls on adjacent property. 
l.  A minimum 75-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided between non-waste disposal operations and exterior property lines except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
m.  The limits of any 100-year floodplain or a stream buffer of 500 feet, whichever is greater, shall be preserved as natural, undisturbed area except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
n.  No disposal area shall interfere with the established natural flow of surface waters to the detriment or damage to adjoining public or private properties. The mayor and council shall have the right to require an applicant to construct adequate sediment basins if it appears that substantial water or sediment may be carried into any nearby property or state waters. 
o.  Sufficient setback shall be provided from all property lines and public highways to assure adequate lateral support for the maintenance of adjacent public and private property. No disposal area shall be permitted closer than 400 feet from the interior boundary lines. Disposal areas shall at no time be permitted where adjoining lateral support for the maintenance of adjoining land is not maintained. 
p.  Hours of operation of any landfill shall be no greater than 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday to Friday. No operation is allowed on Saturday or Sunday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation and prohibiting dumping at all other times shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance. Disposal facilities shall have qualified personnel on duty at all times to direct the dumping, spreading, compaction, and covering of materials. All such personnel shall reside in close enough proximity to respond in the event of a fire. 
q.  All litter shall be collected from the landfill site by the end of each working day and either placed in the fill, compacted and covered that day, or stored in a covered container. 
r.  Any landfill shall be open to use by residents, property owners, and businesses, during established business hours, at a rate to be agreed upon by the mayor and council. Special handling fees may be charged for bulky or difficult to process items. 
s.  A mitigation trust fund shall be established at a bank within the city chosen by the mayor and council. The operator shall pay $5.00 per ton of waste disposed into this trust fund for the life of the landfill. Expenditures from the trust fund are to be approved by a committee consisting of one citizen appointment by the mayor and council, the mayor, and one representative of the owner/operator. Funds may be used, without limitation, for off-site litter control, groundwater and surface water monitoring, provision of alternative water supplies, and payments to adjacent property owners and others, at the discretion of the committee, for damages caused as a result of the landfill or its related operations. The trust fund shall exist and earn interest for 90 years following the expiration of the post-closure period, and at that time the remaining funds shall be paid to the owner/operator or its successor or assigns. 
3.  Further requirements. 
a.  Each person proposing to locate a solid waste management facility in the city shall submit an application for a letter of assurance demonstrating compliance with the provisions contained in this ordinance and consistency with the city solid waste management plan. Before the applicant identifies a potential site and conducts a hydrological study for submission to the environmental protection division for site suitability, the applicant shall notify the local government and participate in a public meeting to discuss the waste management needs of the local government, to describe the siting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. The local government shall give notice of the meeting published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice per week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The cost of publication shall be the applicant's responsibility. 
b.  Each person proposing to locate a solid waste management facility in city shall submit an application compliant with the provisions contained in this ordinance and the city solid waste management plan and the city solid waste management facility ordinance. 
c.  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing so that the applicant can present his plans and answer questions regarding the same. The applicant shall be required to pay for notice to be published at least twice in the county legal organ prior to the hearing. Notice shall be published beginning at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of all ads or a certification from the publisher must be submitted to the city prior to each hearing. 
d.  The mayor and council shall require an application fee in the amount of $5,000.00 to $25,000.00 to reimburse the city for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a facility on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the application shall be returned to the applicant. Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand shall result in termination of the application process or cancellation of the letter of assurance. The mayor and council may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred to the city up to the point of termination. 
e.  The applicant shall submit to the city 12 copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a city permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the mayor and council. 
f.  Once a completed application is submitted to the city the applicant shall be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of the city on the date of the application, and to all property owners where any portion of their property is within 1,000 feet of the boundary of the facility. This notice shall be required to state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for a solid waste management facility. Certification of this notice must be provided to the mayor and council, along with a list of all owners prior to the public meeting for public comment on the completed application. 
g.  The mayor and council, before deciding whether to approve the application or to accept it with modifications, shall determine if such facility complies with the location standards and is consistent with the city solid waste management plan including the solid waste management facility ordinance, using as criteria and standards those set forth in the city solid waste management plan including the solid waste management facility ordinance. If approved, the mayor and council shall issue a letter of assurance as required by state law and regulations. 
h.  Any proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, maps, elevation renderings, and other detailed plans to insure that the development is erected in accordance with the presented materials. The approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on the neighboring property, streets, and so forth. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 627. - Waste transfer station. 
    A facility used to transfer solid waste from one transportation vehicle to another for transport to a disposal facility or processing operation. A transfer station must comply with the "Rules of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, § 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management," effective June 27, 1993, and as amended. 
1.  The following conditions must be met: 
a.  A plat and legal description shall be provided to the mayor and council, together with other exhibits as required in this ordinance. The transfer station shall have primary access via a state or federal highway or a paved road. All such operations shall be located on a road that does not create traffic through an area developed primarily for residential purposes. A stop sign shall be erected and maintained by the owner/operator at all egress roads from the transfer station. Under no circumstances shall trucks use private drives or private access routes to or from the applicants' property that are within 300 feet of any residence. 
b.  A transfer station shall only be permitted where all roads used for access have been built to a standard sufficient to withstand the projected number of trips per day at maximum weight for the vehicles expected. If a transfer station is proposed adjacent to roads that are not sufficient to withstand the loads, or were not designed for such loads, the transfer station owner must pay to bring such roads up to standard from the entrance(s) of the transfer station to the nearest county or state road of sufficient strength; or the transfer station shall be denied. Truck traffic shall be restricted to roads of sufficient strength and width, with either a turning lane or four lanes. 
c.  To allow for an adequate buffer, the transfer station shall be located on a parcel of land not less than 25 acres in size. 
d.  The proposed facility shall not be located within one mile of a significant groundwater recharge area nor within one mile upgradient of any water supply watershed nor within 500 feet of a wetland nor in the 100-year floodplain nor in seismic impact zones nor in unstable areas nor within 400 feet of a fault that has had displacement in Holocene time. 
e.  Such facility shall not be situated within one mile upgradient of any surface water intake for a public water drinking water source. 
2.  Such use shall also comply with the following regulations: 
a.  The transfer station shall be suitably fenced to control access to the premises and to prevent the spread of materials. All transfer station operations areas must be surrounded by a chain link fence at least eight feet high. All entrances shall have an eight-foot high gate, which shall be closed and locked at all times that the transfer station is not open. 
b.  The site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto and from the transfer station surface, to prevent erosion and contamination. 
c.  The applicant shall follow all applicable federal and state laws and city regulations so as to prevent air, land and water pollution, public health hazards or nuisances. 
d.  Rodents and insects shall be controlled to meet industry standards. 
e.  The applicant shall submit to the city the design and operation plans of the transfer station facility once they are approved by the state. 
f.  A minimum 200-foot natural, undisturbed buffer shall be provided on all exterior property lines except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. The buffer must be sufficiently vegetated to be completely opaque and prevent viewing of the transfer station at all times of the year. If the preexisting natural buffer is insufficient, the buffer shall be enhanced with a berm of at least ten feet in height and 50 feet wide at the top and plantings of evergreen trees, not more than ten feet apart, or evergreen shrubbery not more than five feet apart, in staggered rows, on the berm, parallel to the boundaries of the property. Evergreens shall be at least two-year transplants at the time of planting, shall grow to not less than ten feet in height within two years or less, and shall be sufficiently spaced to provide effective sight barriers when ten feet in height. Trees or shrubs that die must be promptly replaced with the same type tree that will grow to at least ten feet high within two years. 
g.  The boundary shall not be located within 500 feet of any occupied dwelling. Any security lighting deemed necessary by the owner/operator shall be the sodium vapor type and shall be aligned so that no part of the illuminated field falls on adjacent property. 
h.  The limits of any 100-year floodplain or a stream buffer of 500 feet, whichever is greater, shall be preserved as natural, undisturbed area except for approved perpendicular access and utility crossings. 
i.  No transfer station area shall interfere with the established natural flow of surface waters to the detriment or damage to adjoining public or private properties. The mayor and council shall have the right to require an applicant to construct adequate sediment basins if it appears that substantial water or sediment may be carried into any nearby property or state waters. 
j.  Hours of operation shall be no greater than 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday to Friday. No operation is allowed on Saturday or Sunday. A sign clearly indicating the hours of operation and prohibiting waste transfer at all other times shall be placed in a conspicuous location at the entrance. Qualified personnel shall be on duty at all times to direct all operations and activities. All such personnel shall reside in close enough proximity to respond in the event of a fire. 
k.  All litter shall be collected from the site by the end of each working day and stored in a covered container. 
l.  Any transfer station shall be open to use by residents, property owners, and businesses, during established business hours, at a rate to be agreed upon by the mayor and council. Special handling fees may be charged for bulky or difficult to process items. 
m.  A mitigation trust fund shall be established at a bank within the city chosen by the mayor and council. The operator shall pay $1.00 per ton of waste transferred into this trust fund for the life of the transfer station. Expenditures from the trust fund are to be approved by a committee consisting of one citizen appointment by the mayor and council, the mayor, and one representative of the owner/operator. Funds may be used, without limitation, for off-site litter control, groundwater and surface water monitoring, provision of alternative water supplies, and payments to adjacent property owners and others, at the discretion of the committee, for damages caused as a result of the transfer station or its related operations. The trust fund shall exist and earn interest for 90 years following the expiration of the post-closure period, and at that time the remaining funds shall be paid to the owner/operator or its successor or assigns. 
3.  Further requirements. 
a.  Each person proposing to locate a transfer station in city shall submit an application for a letter of assurance demonstrating compliance with the provisions contained in this ordinance and consistency with the city solid waste management plan. Before the applicant identifies a potential site and conducts a hydrological study for submission to the environmental protection division for site suitability, the applicant shall notify the local government and participate in a public meeting to discuss the waste management needs of the local government, to describe the siting process to be followed, and to allow for public input. The local government shall give notice of the meeting published in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice per week for two weeks immediately preceding the date of the meeting. The cost of publication shall be the applicant's responsibility. 
b.  Each person proposing to locate a transfer station in city shall submit an application compliant with the provisions contained in this ordinance and the city solid waste management plan. 
c.  Within 45 days of the submission of the application, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing so that the applicant can present his plans and answer questions regarding the same. The applicant shall be required to pay for notice to be published at least twice in the county legal organ prior to the hearing. Notice shall be published beginning at least 15 but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of the hearing. Copies of all ads or a certification from the publisher must be submitted to the city prior to each hearing. 
d.  The mayor and council shall require an application fee in the amount of $1,000.00 to $5,000.00 to reimburse the city for the costs of any needed professional assistance that may be required to evaluate the application and amendments, verify its contents and evaluate the impact of such a facility on the community, public health and environment. This assistance may include, but shall not be limited to, the assistance of lawyers, biologists, geologists, engineers, chemists, hydrologists, emergency response, transportation and public health experts, land appraisers and professional testing laboratories. Funds not so expended in the legitimate review of the application shall be returned to the applicant. Failure to provide these funds within 30 days of demand shall result in termination of the application process or cancellation of the letter of assurance. The mayor and council may take legal action against the applicant for any costs incurred to the city up to the point of termination. 
e.  The applicant shall submit to the mayor and council two copies of all information required by federal and state agencies for the facility for which it requests a city permit at the time such information is submitted to the state and federal government. The review procedure shall not begin nor shall the application be designated as complete until such time as all required data are submitted and the appropriate fees are paid, or suitable arrangements for payment have been approved by the mayor and council. 
f.  Once a completed application is submitted to the city the applicant shall be required to send a letter via first class mail to all adjoining property owners, as shown on the tax records of the city on the date of the application, and to all property owners where any portion of their property is within 500 feet of the boundary of the facility. This notice shall be required to state that the applicant is seeking a letter of assurance for a waste transfer station. Certification of this notice must be provided to the mayor and council, along with a list of all owners prior to the public meeting for public comment on the completed application. 
g.  The mayor and council, before deciding whether to approve the application or to accept it with modifications, shall determine if such facility complies with the location standards and is consistent with the city solid waste management plan, using as criteria and standards those set forth in the city solid waste management plan. If approved, the mayor and council shall issue a letter of assurance as required by state law and regulations. 
h.  Any proposal shall be specifically conditioned to the site plan, maps, elevation renderings, and other detailed plans to insure that the development is erected in accordance with the presented materials. The approval may also impose additional conditions, if the conditions are designed to minimize the impact of the use on the neighboring property, streets, and so forth. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 628. - Other applicable city regulations including without limitation water regulations. 
    All other applicable city regulations apply to land uses in the city, including without limitation regarding soil erosion and sedimentation control, protected resources, stormwater management, and flood damage prevention. Maps associated therewith are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE VII. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 700. - Walls and fences. 
    Walls and fences are permitted in any district and are not subject to setback requirements, except: 
1.  All fences and walls shall comply with all existing ordinances of the city and shall be constructed as to not obstruct the view of adjoining property owners entering or leaving a roadway. Adequate provisions shall be made for access of normal utility service, including garbage collection, water and other utility meters and mail delivery. No fence or wall may interfere with required off-street parking. The side of wooden or structural fences visible to the public must be the finished side of the fence. 
2.  Walls or fences in a residential zoning district: 
a.  No wall or fence shall exceed eight feet in height within a side yard or rear yard. The side of the fence visible to the public must be the finished side of the fence. 
b.  Fences in front yards of residential zones shall be ornamental or decorative and constructed of quality brick, stone, wood, stucco, or wrought iron. 
c.  Any subdivision entrance, wall or fence shall not exceed eight feet except 12 feet in height for monuments or columns, and shall be subject to approval of the city manager, after the submission to the planning and development department, of a landscape plan, site plan and architectural elevations. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 701. - Structures excluded from height limitations. 
    The height limitations of this ordinance shall not apply to church spires, belfries, flagpoles, monuments, cupolas, domes, observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, electric transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, derricks, parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the roof line of the building, or to necessary mechanical roof appurtenances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 702. - Substandard lots of record. 
    Any platted lot of record which was legally existing prior to the adoption of this ordinance, which has an area or a width less than required by this ordinance, may be used, subject to the following: when two or more such lots with continuous frontage are in one ownership at any time after the adoption of this ordinance, such lots shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of the minimum width and area required in the district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 703. - Reduction of front yard requirements. 
    The front yard requirements shall not apply where the average depth of the front yard of existing buildings located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot within the same block or zoning district and fronting on the same side of the street is less than the minimum required front-yard depth. The depth of the front yard shall not be less than the aforementioned average. However, in no case shall the front yard setbacks be less than 15 feet. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 704. - Temporary building. 
    A temporary building for a construction project or development requires a temporary six month renewable permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 705. - Permitted encroachments upon required setbacks. 
    Cornices, eaves, chimneys, landings, porches, bay windows, or other similar architectural features may extend into the required front, side, and rear yard, not to exceed three feet. Decks and patios may extend into the side or rear yard but no closer than five feet from any property line. Steps and landings may extend into the required setbacks, not to exceed ten feet for the front yard and three feet for side yards. Steps and landings may extend into the rear yard, but, no closer than five feet from the property line. Canopies, covered entrances or walkways for non-residential day care facilities, churches, or other similar uses may extend into the required side or rear yard provided such extension does not exceed three feet and may extend into the required front yard not to extend any closer than fifteen feet from the street right-of-way line or future right-of-way. However, canopies over pump islands or over sidewalks may extend up to the street right-of-way line or future right-of-way line. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 706A. - Corridor overlay. 
1.  Purpose. The mayor and council of the city hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this regulation to establish a uniform procedure for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of the North Cherokee Road and South Cherokee Road Corridor and Social Circle Parkway and North Cherokee Road and South Cherokee Road and Social Circle Parkway Corridor ("Corridors") in Social Circle, as the corridor has a direct impact on places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, and works of art with special historical, cultural, or aesthetic interests or values. Suburban sprawl and roadside commercial developments, when set into a traditional quasi-rural community with valuable historic buildings such as Social Circle, can produce an adverse effect on city character and quality of life. Conventional planning models and zoning ordinances can produce linear development, homogeneous architecture, large expanses of asphalt and a proliferation of signage. 
    Careful planning, particularly along heavily traveled and developed corridors such as the corridors, can allow new developments to be successfully blended into the existing city without compromising the unique character of Social Circle. The purpose of this ordinance is to implement the development of appropriate regulations and planning techniques to protect Social Circle's entry corridor along the corridors. The city also seeks to enhance open space conservation. 
    The mayor and council recognize commercial strip development spawns traffic congestion, extensive and competing signage and incompatible architecture. In order to preserve Social Circle's rural ambiance and historic elements, guidelines are necessary to prevent the emergence and expansion of long linear commercial strips within the corridors. The primary goal of this ordinance is to protect the character of these gateways while utilizing appropriate standards and criteria to direct future development in harmony with the city. The objectives also include the safe and efficient use of the roadways, and the encouragement of quality, sensible development in harmony with the rural character and historic elements of Social Circle. A further purpose is limitation on linear shopping centers and the parking lots associated therewith. The construction of new, smaller scale traditional buildings along the roadside and frontage can assist in achieving the desired effect by buffering views of asphalt lots. 
    The city also seeks to enhance open space conservation, by taking a parcel of land, calculating the number of lots by conventional zoning, then reducing the buildable land and reducing lot sizes accordingly. The remaining undeveloped land may be set aside as a permanent conservation easement or for non-commercial use. 
    The city wishes to focus upon the compatibility of forms, scale, massing and materials such that new structures will conform to neighboring community features and standards, and more closely reflect the rural character and historic elements of the community. New structures should be reasonably harmonious with existing traditional buildings in Social Circle and its rural surroundings. Height, mass and roof shape are important elements. More specifically, see the corridor guidelines herein. 
2.  Corridor commission. 
A.  The commission. The city planning commission shall function as the "Social Circle Corridor Commission." 
B.  Commission position within the city government. The Social Circle Corridor Commission shall be considered a part of the zoning and planning functions of the city. It is a recommending body, subject to final action by the mayor and council. 
C.  Statement of the commission's powers. The Social Circle Corridor Commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare an inventory of all property within the North Cherokee Road and South Cherokee Road Corridor and Social Circle Parkway and North Cherokee Road and South Cherokee Road and Social Circle Parkway Corridor. 
(2)  Recommend to mayor and council specific actions to preserve and improve the integrity, aesthetics and safety of the corridors. 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and make recommendations on same to the mayor and council in accordance with this section and the procedures related thereto. 
(4)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to corridor design as the mayor and council may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purpose of improving the corridors in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(5)  Seek out state and federal funds and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired. 
(6)  On behalf of and for the mayor and council, the commission may receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of property. The commission shall not obligate the mayor and council without prior consent. 
D.  Rules of procedure. The rules for the transaction of business and consideration of applications, time and place of regular meetings, and the calling of special meetings shall all be per normal planning commission procedures. 
E.  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations on behalf of the city and shall insure that their funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
3.  Designation of the corridors. The corridors shall be the areas shown on the corridor map approved by the mayor and council in 2008, as amended, after public hearings before the planning commission and the mayor and council. 
4.  Application to corridor commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
A.  Approval of alterations or new construction. If a property is within the corridors, no building permit shall be issued and no material change in the appearance of such property, or of a structure, site, or work of art within the corridors, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until application for a certificate of appropriateness ("COA") has been submitted to and approved by the commission. Any approved changes shall conform to all the requirements specified in the COA and this section. Provided, however, that any residential structure that is in the historic district and subject to historic preservation commission COA is exempt from corridor commission COA review. 
B.  Approval of new construction within designated districts. The commission may issue a COA for new projects and structures constructed within the corridors. These structures shall conform in design, scale and setback, to the requirements specified in the commission's corridor guidelines. 
C.  Application process. 
(1)  An application for a COA shall be accompanied by such relevant drawings, photographs, or plans reasonably required by the commission per this section and shall be submitted to the zoning and planning official at least 30 days prior to the commission's regularly scheduled meeting. 
(2)  For new developments and/or new buildings and significant changes to existing development and/or buildings, both preliminary review and final review are required. The commission shall review the application and preliminary plans no less than 30 days prior to final review and may suggest revisions that enable the preliminary plan to conform to the commission's criteria. 
(3)  For minor changes to existing development and/or buildings, only one review is required and applications for such minor changes shall be submitted to the zoning and planning official not less than 15 days prior to the commission's regularly scheduled meeting. Minor changes are: changes in type of roofing material, installation of awnings or signs, removal of nonconforming signs or structures and installation of irrigation, and alterations involving less than $5,000.00 to existing elevations or site plans. 
D.  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for COA. 
(1)  The commission shall, after the public hearing described below, recommend approval of the application and recommend the issuance of a COA if it finds that the proposed change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the corridors. In making this determination, the commission shall consider impervious surface, parking, parking islands, greenspace, signage, trees, landscaping, buffers, lighting, the architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and appurtenant features of other development and structures in the corridor, all of these considered in the context of the standards set forth below. 
(2)  The commission shall recommend denial of a COA, if it finds based on the corridor guidelines that the proposed change(s) would have substantial adverse effects on the corridors or any structure therein. 
(3)  The recommendation shall be transmitted to the mayor and council for public hearing and action as described below. 
E.  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices. Fifteen to 45 days prior to review of a COA by the commission and the mayor and council, the commission shall inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. Said notice shall be via newspaper advertisement and signage in the same manner as for zoning hearings. Commission and mayor and council notice, hearings and actions shall be conducted the same as planning commission and mayor and council hearings and actions, respectively, per chapter 16. 
F.  Reserved. 
G.  Interior alterations. In its review of all applications for COA, the commission and mayor and council shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior features, safety or utility. 
H.  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for COA. 
(1)  The commission shall act on an application for a COA within not more than 45 days after the filing thereof by the applicant. 
(2)  Failure of commission to act within 45 days shall constitute a recommendation to the mayor and council of approval. 
I.  Report; actions by mayor and council; building permits. 
(1)  The commission shall report its reasons for its recommendation, and shall transmit a report of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant and the mayor and council. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it recommends disapproval of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  The mayor and council may approve the recommendation, or modify or reject the recommendation made by the commission if the mayor and council find that the commission abused its discretion by acting arbitrarily and/or in violation of constitutional rights in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city may be taken to the Superior Court of Walton County, Georgia, via certiorari. 
(3)  In cases where the application covers a change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a COA by the mayor and council shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such case, no building permit shall be issued. 
J.  Requirement of conformance with COA. Work not in accordance with an issued COA is expressly prohibited. 
K.  COA void if construction not commenced. A COA shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for 18 months, at which time they shall expire. A new application must be made and a new COA obtained for any construction or other modification after 18 months from the original COA. 
L.  Recording of applications for COA. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for COA, and of minutes of the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
M.  Acquisition of property. The commission may, when authorized by the mayor and council, and when reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, of the property or any interest therein to the city. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of sections 706A and 706B, the requirements of subsection 4. shall only apply to retail, office and other commercial construction and structures and shall not apply residential alterations in the corridors. 
5.  Demolition or relocation applications. 
A.  Demolition permit applications. The mayor and council shall, after review and hearing before the commission, have the authority over any request for a permit to demolish or relocate a structure within the corridors. Provided, however, that any residential structure that is in the historic district and subject to historic preservation commission COA is exempt from corridor commission COA review. 
B.  Actions on application for demolition or relocation permit. The mayor and council shall have the authority to grant or deny demolition or relocation permits within the corridors. Public hearings shall be scheduled before the commission and mayor and council for each application for demolition or relocation. The hearings shall be scheduled, noticed and conducted in the same manner as hearings on applications for COA. 
C.  Consideration of post-demolition plans. The mayor and council shall not approve a demolition request without the commission and mayor and council reviewing at the same time the plans for the building that would replace the structure. 
D.  Demolition or relocation criteria. 
(1)  If after hearings as described above the mayor and council fail to issue a COA for a demolition permit, if a property owner shows via a certified appraisal by a licensed appraiser that a building is incapable of earning an economic return on its value, as appraised, such building may be demolished. Provided, however, that before a demolition permit is issued, 60[-day] notice of proposed demolition shall be given. 
(2)  Notice shall be placed in the newspaper and posted on the premises of the building or structure proposed for demolition in a location clearly visible from the street. The purpose of this section is to further the purposes of this ordinance by preserving buildings which are important to the education, culture, traditions, or the economic values of the city and to give the city's interested persons, societies, or organizations the opportunity to acquire or to arrange for the preservation of such buildings. The mayor and council after said 60-day stay and said notice shall approve a COA for a demolition permit, in which event a permit shall be issued without further delay. 
6.  Maintenance of property. 
A.  Ordinary repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a property, that does not involve change in design, is excluded from review. 
B.  Conformity to existing building codes. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing applicable city codes, or other statutes, ordinances, and regulations. 
7.  Appeals. Appeals from decisions of the city may be taken to the Superior Court of Walton County (or Newton if the property lies in Newton County), Georgia, via certiorari. 
8.  Penalty provisions. Violations of any provisions of this section shall be punished in the same manner as provided by charter or local law for punishment of violations of other validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
9.  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms are defined as set forth below: 
    Appurtenance: In general, appurtenances include without limitation appendages to the original structure such as: additions, mechanical systems, covered walkways, satellite dishes and antennae, storage buildings, attached parking decks, etc. In site planning, the term appurtenance may be applied to access roads and parking areas as well. 
    Buffer: Landscape area which forms a linear stretch abutting a property line, pavement or structures. 
    Build line: The line indicating structural improvement on the property (building, parking, etc.) closest to the property line. The Build line shall be drawn parallel to the property line. 
    COA: A document approving a proposal to make a material change in the appearance of a property or of a structure, site, or work of art located within the corridors, which document must be obtained from the mayor and council before such material change may be undertaken. 
    Commission: Social Circle Corridor Commission. 
    Exterior architectural features: The architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including, but not limited to, the kind of texture of the building material; the type and style of all windows, doors, and signs; and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details, or elements relative to the foregoing. 
    Fenestration: The spatial definition of the walls of a building. The facade of a building establishes a wall surface or plane. The degree to which that plane is visually segmented by bays and punctured by entrances and windows is fenestration. For example, historic commercial buildings have a high degree of fenestration and large, modern "big-box" sprawl stores have an extremely low degree of fenestration. Social Circle's architectural history is one of moderate to high fenestration. 
    Interior: Landscaping areas within or partially within pavement areas for breaking up large expanses of pavement. Interior landscape areas include islands, peninsulas, or combinations thereof. 
    Island: An interior landscaping area surrounded by pavement or structures. 
    Landscape, frontage: Landscape areas between the front of the principal building(s) and adjacent street(s). 
    Landscape, perimeter: Landscape area located between the side(s) and rear of the primary building(s) and adjacent property line(s). 
    Material change in appearance: A change that will affect only the exterior features of a property or of any structure, site, or work of art within the corridors and may include any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; 
(2)  Demolition of a property; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public way on the property; 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structures within the Corridors, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features; or 
(6)  The relocation of a structure within the corridor or from a location outside the Corridor to a location within the corridor. 
    Ornamentation: Decorative elements applied to a structure. 
    Orientation: The direction a building's primary elevation (also known as facade) faces. 
    Outparcels: A lot within a planned center or portion of a larger parcel that is reserved during development for sale and/or future development. In commercial areas, these lots are generally reserved along the frontage road for smaller business development. 
    Person: Any natural person, corporation, LLC, unincorporated association, partnership or other entity. 
    Setback: The distance from the property line to the building (this includes roof overhangs, porches, foundations, etc.). The front setback may encompass landscape areas, paved areas, building appurtenances, etc. 
    Spacing: The distance between buildings located on adjoining parcels (thus including both side setbacks). 
    Zoning and planning official: The individual designated by the city manager as responsible for implementation and enforcement of the applicable provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-19, §§ 3, 4, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 706B. - Corridor standards. 
1.  Site planning. 
A.  General criteria for conceptual planning. 
(1)  Creative site planning alternatives, such as cluster development, reclamation, mixed-use enterprises, planned centers and open space zoning, should be utilized to offer alternatives to linear strip development. 
(2)  Significant cultural, historic, natural, and scenic features should be identified for preservation during the site planning process. 
(3)  Architectural design should not be developed independent of context. Buildings should be integrated with, not isolated from, their surroundings. All design elements, including without limitation buildings and appurtenances, landscape design and vegetation, parking, driveways, walkways, signage and lighting, should be coordinated to create a continuous and harmonious streetscape. Where possible, building appurtenances should be shared. 
(4)  Landscape design shall be an integral component. Retention of existing vegetation is encouraged. Adequate provision of new landscaping areas at the frontage, along the property perimeters, and within pavement areas is essential. Landscape plans should utilize preferred plant materials, establish planting sizes, and include irrigation and screened utilities. 
B.  Area specific criteria. 
(1)  Commercial corridors shall have an integrated streetscape of a scale and character consistent with city's traditional development pattern. Architectural design should be heavily influenced by city's historic and traditional commercial, industrial, and institutional properties. Landscape design shall accommodate pedestrian areas, with canopy street trees and ornamental plantings, limited frontage parking with adequate shade, reduced signage, and walkways connecting buildings with the public sidewalk network. 
(2)  Industrial corridors shall have an interconnected "corporate campus" appearance so roadways, while serving a functional and vital industrial community, remain attractive travel corridors for residents and visitors. Architectural design is less important than landscape design in these areas. However, facades should have some degree of ornamentation consistent with city's traditional structures. Landscape design should retain some of city's rural heritage through the conservation of greenspace frontage and perimeters, minimal frontage parking, limited signage, and adequate screening of loading/docking, storage, and refuse areas. 
2.  Architecture. 
A.  General criteria for conceptual planning. 
(1)  Architecture should reflect city's traditional and/or historic built environment, specifically in terms of scale, mass, form, materials, fenestration, and ornamentation (see definitions). 
(2)  Appropriate building orientation and setback are integral aspects of site planning, and should also be incorporated during architectural design. 
(3)  In areas where new structures are adjacent to and visible from roadways, architecture shall adhere to the standards set forth below. 
(a)  General. In general, new structures shall be designed consistent with traditional and historic features associated with the building type. 
(b)  Orientation. Most city buildings face the street. New construction should reflect this pattern. In instances of the use of an access road, the commission may consider alternative orientation proposals for buildings not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(c)  Setback. Historic commercial and institutional properties have very defined setbacks, and few properties deviate from this established facade line. Properties that deviate detract from the streetscape. New construction and redevelopment shall closely adhere to the established facade line. Although the setback may not be the same as in historic areas, similar setbacks create the desired harmonious streetscape such as that found in the historic district. 
(d)  Scale. One-story buildings are typical in most corridor areas, and these are preferred. The scale of the structure should be proportional to setback. 
(e)  Mass. A building's proportions will be compared with other buildings in the vicinity, and with the size of the lot. If a proposed building is over 10,000 square feet, or has a facade greater than 100 feet in length, then setbacks, fenestration, and other techniques shall be used to minimize the visual impact of the building. 
(f)  Form. New structures should be rectilinear forms generally. Post-modern, mall-like towers are inappropriate. Parapet roof forms are preferred, as large expanses of flat roofs should not be visible, and coverage of large expanses of roof with gable or hip forms makes the roof too prominent. 
(g)  Materials. Brick and wood siding are the most common traditional building materials in the city. Brick is the preferred exterior material. Materials having a wood siding appearance, such as hardiboard and hardiplank, are compatible substitutions provided that the proposed reveal is similar to that of existing historic examples. Aluminum and vinyl siding are not permitted. Stucco, not including E.I.F.S., is acceptable in limited areas (e.g. parapets) or as full exterior surface for architectural styles and forms reflecting city's historic architecture that traditionally utilized stucco (e.g. religious architecture, Art Moderne and Art Deco buildings). 
(h)  Fenestration. The spacing and placement of architectural bays and openings, and the solid-to-void ratio (wall-to-window), should conform to the general proportions characteristic of traditional buildings. Facades greater than 100 feet in length must incorporate wall plane projections or recesses thereby creating bays, said bays forming a different plane by at least one foot. No uninterrupted length of facade shall exceed 100 feet. The facade of a main building facing a public street shall feature at least one public entrance. Where a main building faces more than two public streets, an entrance for each side may be proposed. To avoid box-like buildings, windows and other features are important to obtain the traditional solid to void ratio. Facades that face public streets shall have arcades, display windows, entry areas, awnings, or other similar features along no less than 60 percent of their length. The ground floor facade must be transparent between the height of three feet and eight feet above the walkway grade for no less than 60 percent of the horizontal length of the building facade. Where additional establishments will be located within or adjacent to the principal building, the solid to void criteria set forth above apply to each individual facade. All windows shall be recessed and shall include visually prominent framing features. 
(i)  Ornamentation. Detailing found upon local buildings should serve as a model for new design elements, including but not limited to decorative masonry work, accent masonry, brackets, knee braces, etc. Limited use of glass block, alternative masonry blocks, stucco, and synthetic stucco may be considered for the creation of building details. Building facades should include a repeating pattern that shall include no less than three of the following elements: 1) color change, 2) texture change, 3) material module change (shape), or 4) expression of architectural or structural bay through a change in plane no less than one foot in width, such as an offset, reveal, or projecting rib. At least one of these elements shall repeat horizontally. All elements should repeat at intervals of not more than 30 feet, either horizontally or vertically. Recessed panels (also referred to as traditional signboard areas) should be incorporated into the fenestration and ornamentation if attached wall signs are proposed. 
B.  Area specific criteria. 
(1)  Commercial zoned. Properties less than three acres shall follow a frontage setback of 75 feet. Properties greater than three acres should reserve two or more outparcels for future development to insert buildings closer to the roadway. Where additional stores will be located within the main building, each such store shall have a least one exterior public entrance. 
(2)  Industrial zoned. Properties less than three acres shall have a frontage setback of 80 feet. Properties greater than three acres shall have a frontage setback of at least 120 feet. Buildings in this area may propose alternative building forms provided that all landscaping requirements are fully met. Alternative materials for elevations not visible from public areas may be presented. Only one public entrance is required, specifically on the elevation facing the primary road. Transparency of 60 percent of the horizontal length of the facade and recessed windows is imperative. 
3.  Pavement. 
A.  General criteria. 
(1)  A large area of asphalt parking without landscaping, adjacent to the roadway, is not permitted. The required alternative is side or rear parking and interspersed landscaping amid front parking spaces. 
(2)  Shared parking areas utilized by more than one building or business are encouraged to minimize large areas of pavement. 
(3)  Frontage pavement is to be limited, and screened by evergreen frontage vegetation. 
(4)  Developments along pedestrian corridors are required to construct public sidewalk, to be connected to any existing sidewalk. 
B.  Area specific criteria. 
(1)  Commercial zoned. Properties are limited to 42 feet of pavement, permitting one row of parking spaces and a passing lane, between the frontage landscape strip and the primary structure. Parking in the front yard shall not extend more than two spaces beyond either wall of the primary structure. Additional frontage parking for planned centers may be considered if the center has a front setback of at least 200 feet, all landscaping criteria are met, and the center features two or more frontage outparcels. A five-foot sidewalk must be installed six inches from the property line along the public road and along other sides of the lot that abut public streets. Generally the sidewalk should not be closer than three feet from the edge of pavement or curbing. 
(2)  Industrial zoned. Properties less than three acres are limited to 42 feet of pavement, permitting one row of parking spaces and a passing lane, between the frontage landscaping strip and the primary structure. Properties greater than three acres are limited to 60 feet of pavement between the frontage landscaping strip and the primary structure. Parking in the front yard shall not extend more than two spaces beyond either wall of the primary structure. Parking and loading areas for trucks and heavy equipment do not require interior landscaping if located entirely behind the primary structure and screened from the public road by an evergreen buffer at least 12 feet in height at maturity. 
4.  Landscape. 
A.  General criteria. 
(1)  Landscape planning shall be integrated with the overall planning concept for any project. Therefore, the commission shall evaluate landscape plans as to relationship to the existing landscape. The commission shall also consider landscapes on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and the existing and proposed building(s). 
(2)  Outparcels must meet all landscaping requirements in addition to those met by the larger development. 
(3)  In addition to the tree regulations and other applicable regulations, the following standards apply. 
(a)  Existing landscape. Existing tree cover and natural vegetation shall be preserved, whenever possible, or replaced with suitable vegetation. All existing, healthy deciduous and hardwood trees with a caliper of five or more inches at a point three feet above ground shall be retained, whenever feasible. If not feasible the tree shall be replaced with the same or similar type of tree, unless otherwise approved by the commission. 
(b)  Required screening, buffering, and landscaping. Landscaping shall divide and break up the expanse of paving. Screening and buffering of objectionable views or nuisances, such as service areas, refuse containers, air conditioning units, transformers, etc., is required. Seventy-five percent of frontage landscaping must be evergreen or perennial plant materials. Frontage strips adjacent to pavement deeper than 42 feet must be screened by 100 percent evergreen shrubbery and the use of berms, where appropriate. 
(c)  Irrigation. Irrigation shall be installed and maintained as per approved irrigation plan. In industrial corridors, waiver of irrigation requirements may be considered by the commission for existing enterprises and developments located on parcels over three acres provided that any bond that may be required by the zoning ordinance is provided. 
(d)  Vegetation and coverage. All vegetation shall be proposed, installed, and maintained in accordance with the zoning ordinance. The minimum landscape buffer coverage is the sum of the areas required to meet all landscaping buffer requirements set forth below. In addition to landscape buffer coverage, the minimum quantity of trees must meet the requirements of the tree ordinance. 
(i)  Frontage. A landscape buffer is required along all public rights-of-way, permitting only the encroachment of driveways necessary to serve the property. Trees within the frontage area must meet the requirements of the tree ordinance, and be overstory, deciduous and/or hardwood trees. Trees may be grouped or established in a jagged line. 
(ii)  Perimeter. A landscape buffer is required alongside and rear abutting property that is not public right-of-way. 
(iii)  Interior. Interior landscape buffer areas are required for all parking lots with six or more spaces. Not less than ten percent of the interior of the parking lot must be landscaped. Islands must meet the requirements of the tree ordinance. No portion of an island less than three feet in width may be counted in the area. Landscape areas must meet the requirements of the tree ordinance back-to-back parking bays, separated by landscape areas, are encouraged. One in four parking rows should be divided by a landscape area at least 15 feet in width. At least 75 percent of the trees located within interior landscape areas must be overstory, deciduous and/or hardwood trees. 
(iv)  Corner. Corner landscape areas are required for those properties located on the corners formed by the North (and future South) intersection(s) of North Cherokee Road and South Cherokee Road Corridor and Social Circle Parkway and the North Cherokee Road and South Cherokee Road and Social Circle Parkway Corridor, and the intersection of the North Cherokee Road and South Cherokee Road and Social Circle Parkway and East Hightower Trail. These corners form unique entries or "gateways" leading to the heart of the city. Owners of said properties shall install and maintain the corner landscape areas utilizing the established gateway requirements, or the city may accept a planting and maintenance easement provided that the owner extends and maintains the irrigation system. The easement shall be within the established setback. In consideration for said easement, the commission may offer mitigation of site plan and landscape planning for said corner properties, provided that the corner landscape areas meet the gateway requirements. 
B.  Specific criteria. 
(1)  Commercial zoned. Frontage landscape buffers must be at least 20 feet in depth. The other perimeter landscape buffers must be at least ten feet in depth. Sod is required for front yard grass areas of all properties. 
(2)  Industrial zoned. For properties less than three acres, frontage landscape buffers must be at least 25 feet in depth; perimeter landscape buffers must be at least 12.5 feet in depth. Sod is required for front yard grass areas of all properties. For properties greater than three acres, frontage landscape buffers must be at least 100 feet in depth; perimeter landscape buffers must be at least 50 feet in depth. Sod is not required for properties above three acres, provided that primary areas are sprigged or seeded. 
5.  Reserved. 
6.  Illumination. 
A.  General criteria. 
(1)  Control. Lighting must be controlled in height, direction, and intensity for traffic safety and to maintain city's rural character. 
(2)  Awnings. No illumination of awnings is permitted. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Direction. Luminaries shall be shielded to prevent glare onto adjacent property. 
(5)  Intensity. A maximum light level of PL = 0.2 foot candles measured at ground level is permitted. Entrances to developments may be lighted exceeding 0.2 foot candles for traffic safety only. High intensity sodium vapor lights are prohibited. 
(Amd. of 1-17-2017; Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-19, § 3, 9-19-2017) 
ARTICLE VIII. - NONCONFORMING USES 

Sec. 800. - Continuance of nonconforming uses. 
    The lawful, constitutional elimination of existing nonconforming structures and uses is as important a subject of health, safety and general welfare as is prevention of new uses that would violate the provisions of this ordinance. The lawful use of any structure or land at the time of the enactment or amendment of this ordinance may be continued, except the nonconforming use shall not be: 
1.  Extended to occupy a greater area of land. 
2.  Extended to occupy a greater area of a structure unless such additional area existed at the time of the passage of this ordinance and was clearly designed to house the same use as the nonconforming use occupying the other portion of the structure. 
3.  Re-established after discontinuance for one year. 
4.  Changed to another or different nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 801. - Continuance of a nonconforming building. 
    Nothing in this article shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any building or part thereof declared unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety or health. However, the same 50 percent provision of subsection 2. shall apply. A nonconforming building existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance may be retained except as follows: 
1.  No building other than a single-family detached dwelling may be enlarged or altered except in conformance with this ordinance, but it may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe sanitary condition. Interior remodeling, including changing of interior partitions, is permitted for nonconforming buildings. 
2.  No building, other than a single-family detached dwelling, shall be rebuilt, altered or repaired after damage exceeding 50 percent of the replacement cost of the above-ground structure at the time of destruction, except in conformity with this ordinance, provided that such damage occurred as a result of fire or natural disaster. 
3.  Should a nonconforming building be voluntarily moved any distance, the nonconforming building and all nonconforming structures and personalty on the lot shall be eliminated within 60 days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 802. - Amortization and discontinuance. 
    Notwithstanding other provisions of this ordinance, certain nonconforming land uses, after this ordinance is enacted into law, shall be discontinued, and/or shall be torn down, altered, or otherwise made to conform with this ordinance within the time set forth below. The mayor and council, upon findings in the specific case, may permit not more than one extension for not more than the time indicated. The date that a nonconforming use must either comply or cease to exist shall be measured from the date of enactment of this ordinance. 
Nonconformity To Be
Discontinued
In Maximum
Extension Wrecking, junk, scrap, vehicle repair or salvage yards and other open uses of land, signs, outdoor advertising structures, automotive storage and sales lots, outdoor storage yards for lumber, building materials, contractor's equipment 1 Year 6 Months Nonconforming fences, walls, and hedges impeding vision at intersections 60 Days 30 Days  
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 803. - Validity of previously issued permits and approvals. 
    No provision of this zoning ordinance shall affect the validity of 1) any building or grading permit lawfully issued prior to this ordinance, provided that all time constraints for such permit shall be observed, or 2) any development permit lawfully authorized prior to this ordinance, upon approval of relevant construction drawings; and such development may proceed to record provided that all time constraints and conditions relating to the approval are observed, and that the lot size relating to the approval are observed, and that the lot size and construction of buildings shall be in accordance with the area and dimensional requirements existing on the date of such approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE IX. - USE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 900. - AG Agricultural district. 
    To provide for areas of very low density, detached, single-family residential development and conditional agricultural uses in combination therewith; to recognize and protect the rural character of the area; to permit compatible accessory and conditional use of institutional and public buildings and uses requiring large amounts of open space which normally complement a balanced and attractive residential area; to protect the open and/or sparsely developed areas of the city from premature, scattered, and inefficient growth patterns; and to ensure the transition of these rural areas occurs in a coordinated and orderly manner so that they reflect the traditional residential development pattern already established within the original city limits. 
A.  Area yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
(sq. ft.) Min.
Dwelling
Unit Size
(sq. ft.) Minimum
Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Density
(Units)
Per Acre Major
Road Interior
Street AG 5 acres --- 2,000 200 60 50 25 25 3 .2 Subdivisions shall have a minimum size of no less than five acres per lot.  
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in AG: 
1.  Accessory buildings and uses. 
2.  Cemetery, provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  The cemetery may front only on a collector or arterial road, and the entrance and exits to it shall be only from the road on which it fronts. 
b)  The cemetery shall be bordered by a ten-foot wide buffer strip along all of its exterior property lines not bordering the frontage street. The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
3.  Churches, temples and synagogues provided: 
a)  They are located on a site of not less than three acres with not less than 250 feet of road frontage. 
b)  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 
c)  If adjacent to residentially-zoned property, a buffer of at least 20 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning, provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than ten feet in width adjacent to the sanctuary building or "Sunday School" educational building and parking related to these buildings. 
4.  Community center. 
5.  Customary home occupations. 
6.  Kennel, provided that no animal quarters are located closer than 400 feet to any property line and are bordered by a ten-foot wide buffer strip along all of its exterior property lines not bordering the frontage street. The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
7.  Landscape business, provided that it is bordered by a ten-foot wide buffer strip along all of its exterior property lines not bordering the frontage street. The buffer strip shall be planted with evergreen trees or shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
8.  Parks and other similar public and semi-public buildings and land uses. 
9.  Public/governmental buildings or uses. 
10.  Subdivisions of land with lots with a minimum lot size of five acres. 
11.  The raising and keeping of household pets. 
12.  Utility structures. 
13.  Barns as a principal building, provided that the barn is located no closer than 100 feet from the road. 
14.  Site built residential dwellings. 
15.  Livestock corridors and enclosures. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within AG District the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Animal hospital. 
2.  Athletic field. 
3.  Campground, private-public. 
4.  Carpenter shop. 
5.  Day care facility. 
6.  Country club. 
7.  Farming. 
8.  Golf course. 
9.  Group day care homes. 
10.  Nursing home. 
11.  Telephone, tower, substation. 
12.  Tree service. 
13.  Veterinary clinic or hospital provided that no portion of a building, structure, outdoor run or pen used to house or exercise animals is located closer than 200 feet to an property line. 
14.  Agritourism, provided that: 
a.  The specific agritourism uses planned shall be indicated on the conditional use permit application. 
b.  The agritourism uses shall not require the extension of urban services that are not already in place. 
c.  The frequency of activities, maximum attendance, hours of operation, and traffic and parking provisions shall be included in the conditional use permit application. 
d.  Special event uses require a minimum parcel size of 10 acres. 
e.  All agritourism uses or facilities shall be in compliance with all state regulations as required for a particular use. All agritourism operations are required to have a business license. 
f.  The agritourism application for conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a scaled site plan or aerial photograph which indicates property boundaries, adjacent uses, all existing and proposed buildings, access location and parking areas, existing and proposed screening and buffer plantings, and setback dimensions of all buildings and spaces to be subject to special events use from the property lines. 
g.  Provisions for management of traffic, noise, litter, erosion or flooding, and other potential adverse impacts of the proposed use shall be included in the application. 
h.  No agritourism conditional use will be approved that changes the character of the area from rural or agricultural to commercial. 
15.  Pet grooming, either as an accessory on property containing a residence, or as a primary use. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-16, §§ 2-4, 9-19-2017; Ord. No. 2017-23, § 2, 11-21-2017; Ord. No. 2018-3, § 1, 8-21-2018; Ord. No. 2018-6, § 3, 10-16-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-6, § 3, adopted October 16, 2018, enacted provisions intended for use as subsection C.14. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsection C.15. 
Sec. 901. - AG-2 Agricultural district 2. 
A.  This district is composed of relatively large acreage, low density developments of single-family dwellings. This district is to provide protection for larger lot subdivisions against the encroachment of high density residential, commercial or industrial developments. 
B.  Permitted uses and structures allowed. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in AG-2 Agricultural district and no structures shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged for any use other than a use permitted hereunder with the exception of uses lawfully established prior to the effective date of this amendment as provided for in article VIII of this ordinance. 
1.  Accessory agricultural buildings. 
2.  Amateur radio antenna. 
3.  Antenna, satellite TV. 
4.  Assisted living facility. 
5.  Cabin, seasonal-recreational. 
6.  Farming, also known as "customary agricultural uses", including forestry, plant nurseries, livestock and crop farming, farm ponds, fishing lakes and employee houses. 
7.  Garden, private. 
8.  Employee dwelling, caretaker's dwelling. 
9.  Home occupation. 
10.  Industrialized home. 
11.  Livestock corridors and enclosures. 
12.  Manufactured home, Class A. 
13.  Personal care home under six residents. 
14.  Site built residential dwelling. 
15.  Subdivision, residential. 
C.  Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted as follows: 
1.  Garages for the parking of automobiles, decks, garbage pads, and storage buildings subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Maximum height of two stories or 35 feet, whichever is less. 
b.  On a corner lot, no accessory building, structure, use or deck shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal building. 
c.  No garage or other accessory building, structure, or use shall be located closer than five feet to a side or rear lot line or the nearest point along any required buffers, whichever is greater. 
d.  When an accessory building, with the exception of a deck, is attached to the principal building by a breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal building to which it is accessory. 
2.  Swimming pools in compliance with building codes. 
3.  Tennis courts, swing sets, trampolines and other play and recreation areas. 
4.  Antennae not over 50 feet tall and satellite dishes behind or on the back side of the principal structure and not over three feet diameter nor over 35 feet tall. All codes must be met. 
5.  Doghouses, runs, pens, rabbit hutches, cages, and other similar structures for the housing of commonly accepted pets, but not including kennels. 
6.  Fallout shelter. 
D.  Area yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
(sq. ft.) Minimum Dwelling Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum
Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max
Height
(ft.) Max.
Imperv.
Area (%) Arterial or Collector Other
Street AG-2 60,000 --- 2,000 150 60 40 15 40 40 20 Lots may be 43,560 square feet where public water is used.  
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 902. - R-25 Low density single-family residential district. 
    To provide for areas of low density, detached, single-family residential uses; to reinforce and encourage the traditional residential development pattern predominant within the original city limits along local streets characteristic of the city's earliest platting of streets and regular blocks; to recognize and protect regular city blocks with large lots, street grid based, and highly pedestrian character of the historic areas of the city; to permit compatible accessory and conditional use of institutional and public buildings and uses which normally complement a balanced and attractive residential area; to protect low-density, single-family residential areas from encroachment of higher density residential and non-residential uses; and to stabilize and protect owner-occupied housing and encourage a suitable environment for family life. 
A.  Area yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
(sq. ft.) Min.
Dwelling Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum
Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Gross
Density
(Units)
Per Acre Major
Road Interior
Street R-25 25,000 34,850 2,400 125 45 35 15 20 2 1.25 All subdivision lots shall contain the greater of 50 percent of the minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district or 6,000 square feet. All of said required square footage must be contiguous, not surrounded by any flood area, and must be above flood elevation. The above gross density figure is the acreage for all lots within a subdivision. This average maximum density per acre includes right-of-way and open spaces. All dwelling units must have located on the subject property a garage containing no less than 420 square feet and designed to contain no less than two automobiles.  
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in R-25. 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Customary accessory structures and uses. 
3.  Customary home occupations. 
4.  Single-family subdivisions. 
5.  Public and semipublic playgrounds, parks, lakes, and buildings, operated on a nonprofit basis for recreational and public community purposes only. 
6.  Utility structures. 
7.  The raising and keeping of household pets. 
8.  Churches, temples and synagogues provided: 
a.  They are located on a site of not less than three acres with not less than 250 feet of road frontage. 
b.  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 
c.  If adjacent to residentially-zoned property, a buffer of at least 20 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning, provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than ten feet in width adjacent to the sanctuary building or "Sunday School" educational building and parking related to these buildings. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within R-25, the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Churches, temples and synagogues not meeting the minimum requirements for a permitted church, temple or synagogue within the district. 
2.  Schools. 
3.  Day care facility. 
4.  Private not-for-profit recreation facilities; provided, however, that a conditional use permit shall not be required for such facilities if they are to be located on an area reserved or dedicated for such use on a final recorded subdivision plat. 
5.  Golf course or country club. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 903. - R-15 Medium density single-family residential district (also applies to former R12 zoned land). 
    To provide for areas of medium density, detached, single-family residential uses; to recognize and protect the moderate lot size, street grid based and pedestrian character of the city's older neighborhoods and subdivisions; to reinforce and encourage the traditional residential development pattern characteristic of the historic areas of the city; to permit compatible accessory uses which normally complement balanced and attractive residential uses; to stabilize and protect owner-occupied housing and encourage a suitable environment for family life; and, to protect moderate density, single-family residential areas from encroachment of higher density residential and non-residential uses. 
A.  Area yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
(sq. ft.) Min.
Dwelling Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum
Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Gross
Density
(Units)
Per Acre Major
Road Interior
Street R-15 15,000 21,780 1,800 100 45 35 15 20 2 2 All subdivision lots shall contain the greater of 50 percent of the minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district or 6,000 square feet, All of said required square footage must be contiguous, not surrounded by any flood area, and must be above flood elevation. The above gross density figure is the acreage for all lots within a subdivision. This average maximum density per acre includes right-of-way and open spaces. All dwelling units must have located on the subject property a garage containing no less than 420 square feet and designed to contain no less than two automobiles.  
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in R-15: 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Customary accessory structures and uses. 
3.  Customary home occupations. 
4.  Single-family subdivisions. 
5.  Public and semipublic playgrounds, parks, lakes, and buildings, operated on a nonprofit basis for recreational and public community purposes only. 
6.  Utility structures. 
7.  The raising and keeping of household pets. 
8.  Churches, temples and synagogues provided: 
a.  They are on a site of not less than three acres with not less than 250 feet of road frontage. 
b.  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 
c.  If adjacent to residentially-zoned property, a buffer of at least 20 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning, provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than ten feet in width adjacent to the sanctuary building or "Sunday School" educational building and parking related to these buildings. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within R-15, the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Churches, temples and synagogues not meeting the minimum requirements for a permitted church, temple or synagogue within the district. 
2.  Schools. 
3.  Group day care homes. 
4.  Day care facility. 
5.  Private not-for-profit recreation facilities; provided, however, that a conditional use permit shall not be required for such facilities if they are to be located on an area reserved or dedicated for such use on a final recorded subdivision plat. 
6.  Golf course or country club. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 904. - RMD Residential medium-high density one- and two-family district. 
    RMD One- and Two-Family District includes area of duplex residential development, attached single-family homes, and detached single-family homes. RMD reinforces and encourages the traditional residential development pattern characteristic of the city's modern neighborhoods and subdivisions; allows quality duplex development, and provides an alternative to detached single-family development. It allows more dense residential development designed to take advantage of the economy and convenience afforded by condensed development patterns through the reduction of lot size, congregation of site amenities (open space, recreational facilities, community center, etc.), and non site-built residential uses. It permits compatible accessory uses which normally complement a balanced and attractive residential area, fosters shared amenities, ensures ample provision of open space and access to light and air, and establishes a transitional area to buffer low and medium density residential areas from non-residential areas. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
(sq. ft.) Minimum Dwelling Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum
Width (ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Minimum Side Yard (ft.) Minimum Rear Yard (ft.) Max. Height (stories) Max. Density Units Per Acre Road Street Duplex 
12,000 (2) 
S/F 6,000 8,700 (3) 1,600 Duplex: 100 
S/F: Attached 50 
S/F: Detached 60 50 30 Duplex: 15 
S/F: 10 15 3 3  
(1) Maximum number of dwelling units per acre of the gross project acreage. 
(2) All subdivision lots shall contain the greater of 50 percent of the minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district or 6,000 square feet. All of said required square footage must be contiguous, not surrounded by any flood area, and must be above flood elevation. 
(3) The above figure is the average for all lots within a subdivision. This average maximum density per acre includes right-of-way and open spaces. 
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in RMD: 
1.  Two-family and single-family dwellings. 
2.  Customary accessory buildings and uses. 
3.  Customary home occupations. 
4.  Manufactured homes, Type A. 
5.  Industrialized homes. 
6.  Single-family subdivisions. 
7.  Public and semipublic playgrounds, parks, lakes, and buildings, operated on a nonprofit basis for recreational and public community purposes only. 
8.  Utility structures. 
9.  The raising and keeping of household pets. 
10.  Churches, temples and synagogues provided: 
a.  They are located on a site of not less than three acres with not less than 250 feet of road frontage. 
b.  The buildings are located not less than 50 feet from any street and not less than 30 feet from any side or rear property line. 
c.  If adjacent to residentially-zoned property, a buffer of at least 20 feet wide shall be provided along the property lines adjacent to said zoning, provided, however, that this buffer may be reduced to no less than ten feet in width adjacent to the sanctuary building or "Sunday School" educational building and parking related to these buildings. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within RMD, the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Churches, temples and synagogues not meeting the minimum requirements for a permitted church, temple or synagogue within the district. 
2.  Schools. 
3.  Day care facilities. 
4.  Private not-for-profit recreation facilities; provided, however, that a conditional use permit shall not be required for such facilities if they are to be located on an area reserved or dedicated for such use on a final recorded subdivision plat. 
5.  Nursery schools, day care facilities, and kindergartens, provided that at least 100 square feet of play area shall be available for each child occupying the outside play area at any one time. Groups of children may be rotated if necessary so that 100 square feet per child is provided at all times. Play area shall be surrounded by a permanent solid wall or woven wire fence having a height of at least four feet. 
6.  Recreation center. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 905. - PUD Planned unit development district. 
    The purpose of planned unit developments is to encourage the best possible site plans and buildings arrangement under a unified plan of development and a signed, written development agreement, rather than under lot-by-lot regulation. Planned unit developments include attached and detached dwelling units, which may include patio houses and cluster developments, with common open space. The public benefits from better land utilization, economy in the provision of roads and utilities, flexibility in design, variety in building types, compatibility of uses and optimum community development. Review of the development plan by the city planning commission and mayor and council provides an opportunity to assure that the development will be in harmony with the character of the area in which the development is located. Planned unit developments are not for greater density of development, but rather to encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning. The planned unit development is, furthermore, not intended to enhance the value of the property for speculative purposes. Approval of the planned unit development is therefore conditional, and if construction is not commenced within one year, and pursued in an orderly manner toward completion, the planning commission and mayor and council may, upon written notice to the property owner, initiate the rezoning process to change the zoning classification or reduce the size of the tract to fit the scope of actual development. 
A.  Ownership control. All of the land in a PUD shall be owned initially by an individual or by some legal entity. Individual properties within these developments may be sold after a plat has been recorded, with the properties subject to private deed covenants that assure the continuance of the planned unit development as originally approved and developed. 
B.  Standards applying to all planned unit developments. All PUDs shall meet the following standards and such other requirements as are set forth with respect to each proposed rezoning application. 
1.  Density shall not exceed eight units per gross acre. Density shall be reviewed in relation to density of developed property on nearby parcels, and the density for development of the immediate area as proposed within the land use element of the city comprehensive plan. 
2.  The development shall be compatible with topography of the land and preserve any unusual topographic or natural features. 
3.  The development shall not adversely affect developed or undeveloped neighboring properties. 
4.  The development shall utilize design and development features that would not be possible by the application of lot-by-lot zoning district regulations. 
5.  Preservation of existing forest land and open space shall provide for protection of water and wildlife resources. 
6.  Water, sewerage, and street facilities shall be adequate for the proposed development. 
7.  Yards. Yard requirements of the district shall be established by the approved site plan. Buffer zone requirements shall be met. 
8.  Height. The height limitation shall be established during the approval process and shall be established prior to any approval of a rezoning application. 
9.  Off-street parking and loading and unloading requirements: The off-street parking and loading and unloading requirements of this zoning ordinance shall be met. 
C.  Required exhibits for review of planned unit developments. To assure quality developments, to establish an optimum living environment between indoor and outdoor living, and to provide for good design and use of proper materials in the structures and landscape design, the professional talents of qualified architects, urban or regional planners and/or landscape architects shall be utilized to design the plans. The plans shall be completed and submitted to the city manager. No application shall be accepted for processing without these required exhibits. 
1.  A location map indicating existing zoning on the site and the adjacent areas. 
2.  A concept plan drawn no smaller than one inch equals 100 feet, including the following information: 
a.  Lot lines and setbacks; 
b.  Location, shape, size and height of existing and proposed buildings, decorative walls and elements and entrance features; 
c.  Topography with contour intervals no greater than ten feet; 
d.  Lakes, ponds and floodplains and the sources of floodplain data; 
e.  Stormwater detention areas; 
f.  Existing and proposed landscaping; 
g.  Recreation facilities (if applicable); 
h.  Stages of development, if any; 
i.  Location of off-street parking. 
3.  Floor plans and elevations of all typical units and any other structures such as recreation buildings. 
4.  Information indicating the following: 
a.  Gross and net acreage (see definition of net density); 
b.  Lot sizes (dimensions and square footage); 
c.  Building heights and stories; 
d.  Building coverage for each lot; 
e.  Amount of common open space in square feet (if applicable); 
f.  All tree areas to be retained or added; 
g.  Parking facilities; 
h.  Such other architectural and engineering data as may be required to evaluate the project. 
D.  Uses in a PUD. Any use allowable in a conventional zoning district may be proposed for inclusion in a PUD. Each proposed use must meet all requirements of the zoning districts in which it is allowed. Only the specific uses approved shall be allowed in the PUD. Any addition of uses, change of plans, or increase in size or density shall require a separate application for amendment to the original approved PUD and shall follow the same process as any other zoning ordinance amendment. Initial approval of a PUD does not grant a vested right to subsequently proposed amendments. Unless otherwise stated in this section, approved development standards and land uses shall become the standards for the subject property and, as such, shall become a part of these zoning regulations. A PUD must have protective covenants for all property within the PUD. The protective covenants must be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. Said protective covenants must be effective for a period not less than 20 years, with an automatic 20-year renewal after the first and each subsequent 20-year period, and must provide for the following: 
(i)  Creation of a property owners association with mandatory membership for each property owner; 
(ii)  Development, management, and maintenance of privately owned open space, community parking facilities, community meeting halls, and other common areas; 
(iii)  Maintenance of landscaping within the streetscape and common areas; 
(iv)  Approval by the zoning enforcement officer prior to any amendments. 
E.  Streets. An interconnected network of streets and alleys must be provided. Streets and alleys shall terminate at other streets within the neighborhood. Dead-end street and cul-de-sacs are prohibited unless the council determines that topography, adequate circulation, or other good cause exists to allow such. Streets shall be aligned with existing streets on adjoining property, unless the council determines that topography or requirements of traffic circulation require deviation from such alignment. 
F.  Off-street parking. All off-street parking and parking lots shall be located in side or rear yards. No parking shall be allowed in the front setback. If parking is located in the side yard, it shall be screened by low walls, fences or hedges, three to five feet in height. Parking is prohibited in alleys. In a neighborhood center area on or off site community parking facilities are encouraged. In a mixed residential area, the required parking must be provided on site. 
G.  Special site requirements. The site proposed for PUD district classification must contain an area of ten acres or more, unless a smaller area is specifically approved by the planning commission and council due to special and unusual circumstances. In no case shall the lot size be less than five acres. The site must abut a public street for a distance of at least 100 feet. 
H.  Required report and plans. 
(1)  Written report. This shall describe the land uses proposed and the type, nature, size, intent, and characteristics of the proposed development. This report shall include: 
(a)  A description of the proposal including proposed uses and location; 
(b)  The proposed standards for development, including restrictions on use of the property, density, setback requirements, and any proposed restrictive covenants; 
(c)  An explanation of why the proposed development standards are necessary, if the proposed standards vary from existing standards in this ordinance; 
(d)  Plans for utilities, including water, sewer, and drainage; 
(e)  Plans for protection of abutting properties, including buffers, screening, and landscaping; 
(f)  Data stating the total number of acres (or square feet) proposed for every proposed use; 
(g)  Proposed development timetable; 
(h)  For any PUD or portion thereof within an overlay district, a certificate of appropriateness or a letter of support from the design review board (i.e. historic preservation commission, corridor design commission) for the district; 
(i)  Any streets and common open spaces not proposed for dedication to the city shall have the proposed maintenance and ownership agreements explained in detail; 
(j)  The architectural style and proposed site of all structures shall be indicated; 
(k)  Limited commercial uses may be included within the planned residential development. However, these uses shall be only of a convenience neighborhood retail nature intended to serve the needs of the residents of the development. Similar land uses should face across streets, and dissimilar land uses should abut at rear lot lines or across alleys. A commercial use may not be open from 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Residential uses in commercial buildings are permitted only above the first floor. Drive through facilities that permit people to remain in their vehicles while receiving services or products are prohibited, with the exception of fueling facilities of a service station. The retail uses shall be specified as a part of the proposal and shall be limited to a total of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area. Such uses may be proposed only on developments of five acres or more. Construction of any approved commercial portion must occur at the same time as the construction of the residential development; and 
(l)  Additional data required by the zoning and planning official. 
(2)  Required detailed site plans. These shall be prepared by a registered engineer, architect, land surveyor, or landscape architect. The site plan shall bear the official registration seal of the professional(s) who prepared the plan, and shall include as a minimum: 
(a)  Survey of the property indicating all property dimensions, property size, adjoining owners, scale, north arrow, and tie-in point to a known location (road intersection, land lot corner, etc.), 
(b)  Proposed platting (subdivision), streets, setbacks, building sites, type of use for each building site, access to the site, internal access and circulation, off-street parking areas, proposed public facilities and open areas, name of the development, and any special drainage features, and 
(c)  If the proposal includes the subdivision of land for any purpose or for the provision of new public or private streets, any additional information required under the city subdivision regulations. The rezoning request and the proposed subdivision of the property shall be processed simultaneously. Any requested variance from the subdivision regulations shall be listed on the site plan and explained in the written report. 
(d)  The proposed size, location, number of units and number of bedrooms of all residential structures shall be noted. 
(e)  The development controls for the subject property shall be shown (lot coverage, setbacks, building heights, lot sizes, and all other dimensions). 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 906. - RHD Residential high density multi-family district. 
    The RHD includes areas where higher density and/or multifamily development are appropriate. RHD provides for areas of very high density, attached single-family uses with the allowance of a mixture of two-family dwellings and multi-family residential dwellings and allows more dense residential development designed to take advantage of the economy and convenience afforded by condensed development patterns through the reduction of lot size and the congregation of site amenities (open space, recreational facilities, community center, etc.). It reinforces the residential development pattern of the city's modern neighborhoods and subdivisions, permits compatible accessory uses which normally complement a balanced and attractive residential area, and encourages and protects quality multi-family development and provides an alternative to detached single-family development. It ensures ample provision of open space and access to light and air, establishes a transitional area to buffer low and medium density residential areas from non-residential areas, and protects residential areas from encroachment of non-residential uses. RHD is to be located where public water supply and waste water treatment facilities are available and where there is convenient access to collector and arterial roads. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum Area Unit (sq. ft.) Area Per
Dwelling
Size
(sq. ft.) Minimum Dwelling Unit (ft.) Minimum Width (ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way Minimum Side Yard (ft.) Minimum Rear Yard (1) Max.
Height
(stories) Max. Density Units/
Acre Road Street RHD 5 acres 4,350 (2) 800 100 50 30 20 30 3 10  
(1) Maximum number of dwelling units per acre of the gross project acreage. 
(2) All subdivision lots shall contain the greater of 50 percent of the minimum lot area required by the applicable zoning district or 6,000 square feet. All of said required square footage must be contiguous, not surrounded by any flood area, and must be above flood elevation. 
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in RHD: 
1.  All permitted uses in RMD. 
2.  Apartment, condominiums, attached city houses, and other multi-family dwelling units at a density not to exceed ten units per net acre and five units per acre for areas on the site that include right-of-way dedications, power line easements or flood plain. 
3.  Foster homes, orphanages, and institutional houses for the handicapped. 
4.  Boarding and rooming houses. 
5.  Industrialized homes and manufactured homes, Type A. 
6.  Retirement communities, which may include a nursing home, cafeteria and care facilities and accessory uses. 
7.  Residential and community shelters. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within RHD, the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Day care facilities. 
2.  Recreation center. 
3.  Schools. 
4.  Private non-profit recreation facilities; provided, that a conditional use permit shall not be required for such facilities if they are to be located on an area reserved or dedicated for such use on a final recorded subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 907. - OI Office-Institutional district. 
    OI is established to provide a location outside of downtown for offices, institutions and limited related retail business and service activities and limited upstairs residential lofts in buildings of high character in attractive surroundings. Distributive functions such as loading, unloading, storage, packaging and unpacking shall be limited to ten percent of the total building area and five percent of the total lot area. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Structure
(sq. ft.) Minimum
Structure
Size
(sq. ft.) Minimum
Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (1)
(ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Percent
of Lot
Coverage Road Street OI None 1,200 (2) 1,000 60 50 25 10 15 2 40%  
(1) Includes principal and accessory buildings but not pavement areas. 
(2) No portion of any lot which is flooded by a 100-year recurrence interval storm event may be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
Buffer zones are required along the side and rear yard where an office-institutional, business, or manufacturing use abuts a residential district and where a multi-family use abuts a single-family residential district. 
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in the OI Office-Institutional district: 
1.  Accessory parking garages and parking lots. 
2.  Accessory retail business and accessory service establishments. In addition to the limitations on "accessory use" imposed under article III, definitions, such permitted accessory-uses specifically exclude retail business and service establishments that could be construed as principal uses, and include only those uses that are primarily intended for and used by patrons or occupants of the principal use to which the accessory use is accessory. 
3.  Athletic club. 
4.  Banks and other financial institutions. 
5.  Church, synagogue. 
6.  Community center. 
7.  Dwellings, single-family, limited to upstairs loft-type units. 
8.  Funeral homes. 
9.  Hospitals. 
10.  Museum. 
11.  Nursing homes. 
12.  Offices providing professional services. 
13.  Professional and business offices. 
14.  Schools. 
15.  Small retail stores or office providing professional services with Residential (not to exceed five units per acre) loft or condominium above. 
16.  Utility structures. 
17.  Veterinary clinic. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within OI, the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Curio and souvenir shops. 
2.  Group or congregate personal care homes. 
3.  Hotels. 
4.  Printing, photo-engraving. 
5.  Restaurants. 
6.  Tourist home (bed and breakfast). 
7.  Condominium. A conditional use for condominium shall only be granted if the following conditions are satisfied: 
a.  All the documents necessary for compliance with the Georgia Condominium Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq. have been submitted by the applicant and approved as to form as subdivision of property under the subdivision regulations of the city. 
b.  The applicant can demonstrate that it has fee simple title to the property or the ability to secure fee simple title by the consent of the current owners to dedicate the common area to the owner's association. 
c.  The applicant has complied with or can demonstrate the ability to comply with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 44-3-70 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2018-4, § 2, 10-16-2018) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 2018-4, § 2, adopted October 16, 2018, enacted provisions intended for use as subsection C.5. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as subsection C.7. 
Sec. 908. - NC Neighborhood commercial district. 
    NC provides a location outside of downtown for convenience goods and services instructions less than 10,000 square feet, with limited hours of operation for people in nearby residential neighborhoods. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Business
Unit
(sq. ft.) Min.
Dwelling Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum
Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Gross
Density
(Units)
Per Acre Major
Road Interior
Street NC 6,000 12,000 (2) 1,000 50 50 25 10 15 2 45% (1)  
(1) Includes principal and accessory buildings but not pavement areas. 
(2) No portion of any lot which is flooded by a 100-year recurrence interval storm event may be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
Buffer zones are required along the side and rear yard where a NC use abuts a residential district and where a multi-family use abuts a single-family residential district. 
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in the NC District: 
1.  Athletic club. 
2.  Baked goods. 
3.  Beauty parlors and barber shops. 
4.  Church, synagogue. 
5.  Drug stores and pharmacies. 
6.  Dry cleaning and laundry, pick-up station. 
7.  Florist gift shops. 
8.  Neighborhood grocery store. 
9.  Museum. 
10.  Offices providing professional services. 
11.  Parking lots and parking garages. 
12.  Park. 
13.  Professional and business offices. 
14.  Retail businesses selling convenience goods and services which serve the local neighborhood, but not including drive-in or drive-through service windows; fuel pumps; or coin or token-operated services. 
15.  Utility structures. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within NC District, the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Carpet, rug sales and/or service. 
2.  Funeral homes. 
3.  Gasoline service station. 
4.  Hotels. 
5.  Printing, photo-engraving. 
6.  Radio or TV transmitting station or studio. 
7.  Restaurants. 
8.  Tourist home (bed and breakfast). 
9.  Tire, repairing and/or supplies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 909. - CBD Central business district. 
    CBD is for downtown businesses and professions under 10,000 square feet, including retailing of goods and services, general office facilities and public functions that would serve the community. This district is located in the center of the city and is the initial historical commercial area that has served the citizens of the city and the surrounding area for many years. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
(sq. ft.) Min.
Dwelling Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum
Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Percent
of Lot
Coverage Road Street CBD - - - - - - (2) - (2) 3 100%  
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in CBD: 
1.  Antique shops. 
2.  Appliance stores and repair shops. 
3.  Art gallery. 
4.  Athletic club. 
5.  Automatic teller machine (freestanding). 
6.  Bakery. 
7.  Banks and other financial institutions. 
8.  Barber and beauty shops. 
9.  Book or stationery stores. 
10.  Business boutiques. 
11.  Candy shop. 
12.  Carpet and rug sales. 
13.  Cellular and electronics store. 
14.  Churches, temples and synagogues. 
15.  Clothing stores. 
16.  Collection agency. 
17.  Computer stores. 
18.  Curio and souvenir shops. 
19.  Dance studios. 
20.  Department stores. 
21.  Drug stores. 
22.  Dry cleaning and laundry pick-up stations. 
23.  Electronic sales and service. 
24.  Farmers market. 
25.  Fitness center, health club. 
26.  Florist. 
27.  Furniture store. 
28.  Gift shops. 
29.  Grocery store. 
30.  Gymnastics studio. 
31.  Hardware stores. 
32.  Hobby shops. 
33.  Hotel. 
34.  Ice cream shops. 
35.  Imported goods. 
36.  Insurance agency. 
37.  Interior decorating shops. 
38.  Jewelry stores. 
39.  Liquor, beer and wine. 
40.  Martial arts studio. 
41.  Museum. 
42.  Music stores and/or studios. 
43.  Office supply store. 
44.  Photo studio. 
45.  Printing, photo-engraving. 
46.  Parking, accessory. 
47.  Professional and business offices. 
48.  Real estate offices. 
49.  Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through restaurants. 
50.  Retail store. 
51.  Shoe stores. 
52.  Sporting goods store. 
53.  Surveyor offices. 
54.  Tanning salon. 
55.  Taxi/limousine service. 
56.  Toy store. 
57.  Travel agency. 
58.  Theaters and other indoor places of entertainment. 
59.  Utility offices. 
60.  Utility structures. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within CBD the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Building materials sales with outdoor storage. 
2.  Contractor's offices. 
3.  Convenience stores, including gasoline sales. 
4.  Dwelling, loft apartments. 
5.  Tourist home (bed and breakfast). 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 910. - GC General commercial district. 
    The GC District is for adequate space in appropriate locations outside of downtown, along roads and at intersections, for various businesses. These include the retailing of a wide range of goods and services, general office facilities and public functions that would serve a community area of several neighborhoods. Orientation and expansion of this district should occur as an increase in depth at major intersections rather than as a strip-like extension along the roadway. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Business
Unit
(sq. ft.) Minimum
Business
Size
(sq. ft.) Minimum Width
(ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Percent
of Lot
Coverage
(1) Road Street GC None None 1,000 50 50 25 - 15 3 45%  
(1) Includes principal and accessory buildings but not pavement areas. 
Buffer zones are required along the side and rear yard where a GC use abuts a residential district. 
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in GC: 
1.  Animal hospital or veterinary clinic. 
2.  Appliance repair shop. 
3.  Art gallery. 
4.  Association (clubs and lodges). 
5.  Athletic club. 
6.  Auditorium, assembly hall. 
7.  Automatic teller machine (freestanding). 
8.  Auto repair shops or tire stores including lubrication or tune-up centers (full service and self service). 
9.  Auto-truck sales, repair-Parts. 
10.  Bait sales. 
11.  Bakery. 
12.  Banks and other financial institutions. 
13.  Barber and beauty shops. 
14.  Book or stationery stores. 
15.  Bottle gas, storage and distribution. 
16.  Broadcasting/transmitting studio/station (radio, TV). 
17.  Building, electrical or plumbing contractors (provided no equipment or materials stored outside). 
18.  Building supply stores. 
19.  Business college or business schools operated as a business enterprise. 
20.  Campground. 
21.  Carpet and rug sales. 
22.  Churches, temples and synagogues. 
23.  Clinic. 
24.  Community center. 
25.  Convenience store. 
26.  Curio and souvenir shops. 
27.  Dance studios. 
28.  Day care facilities provided they comply with all state day care and health department requirements. 
29.  Department stores. 
30.  Drug stores. 
31.  Dry cleaning plant and pick-up stations. 
32.  Electronic sales and service establishments. 
33.  Equipment rental (excluding heavy equipment, bulldozers, backhoes, tractors, forklifts, cranes, etc., and provided there is no outside storage associated with the use). 
34.  Fitness center, health club, spa. 
35.  Fish - meat, wholesale-retail store. 
36.  Florist, greenhouse, or nursery. 
37.  Frozen food, cold storage locker. 
38.  Funeral homes and mausoleums. 
39.  Furniture rental or sales establishments. 
40.  Garden supply centers and greenhouses (including accessory outdoor storage). 
41.  Gasoline stations, service stations, and car washes. 
42.  Gift shops. 
43.  Grocery store. 
44.  Hardware stores. 
45.  Historic sites. 
46.  Hobby shops. 
47.  Hotel. 
48.  Ice cream shops. 
49.  Ice, manufacturing, sales. 
50.  Imported goods. 
51.  Indoor play centers. 
52.  Interior decorating shops. 
53.  Jewelry stores. 
54.  Kennel. 
55.  Landscape business. 
56.  Laundry, self-serve, pick-up. 
57.  Lodges, fraternal, and social organizations. 
58.  Mobile buildings (temporary, while any of the permitted or conditional uses are under construction, not to exceed six months). 
59.  Museum, historical display. 
60.  Mortuaries, except crematories. 
61.  Motels. 
62.  Music stores and/or studios. 
63.  Newspaper and printing facilities. 
64.  Nurseries providing lawn and garden supplies and plants. 
65.  Offices. 
66.  Parking lots and parking garages. 
67.  Mini-warehouse storage facilities. 
68.  Photography shops and studios. 
69.  Plumbing, electrical, pool and home building supply showrooms and sales centers (provided there is no outdoor storage associated with the use). 
70.  Printing, photo-engraving. 
71.  Professional and business offices. 
72.  Public buildings and land uses. 
73.  Public offices or buildings. 
74.  Radio-TV Transmit, station-studio. 
75.  Radio and television repair shops. 
76.  Real estate offices. 
77.  Research and testing facilities. 
78.  Restaurants, excluding drive-in or drive-through restaurants. 
79.  Retail store. 
80.  Schools. 
81.  Shoe stores and shoe repair shops. 
82.  Skating rink, roller and ice. 
83.  Small appliance repair shops. 
84.  Storage warehouse. 
85.  Taxi/limousine service. 
86.  Tire, auto repair - supplies. 
87.  Theaters and other indoor places of entertainment. 
88.  Transportation terminals for passengers. 
89.  Tourist home (bed and breakfast). 
90.  Travel trailer park. 
91.  Utility offices. 
92.  Utility structures. 
C.  Temporary uses. 
1.  Within the GC District only the following temporary uses are permitted, by written permit from the mayor and council after a public hearing, for a period not to exceed 20 days per year: 
a.  The sale of fruits or vegetables. 
b.  Charitable or non-profit events not to exceed four days. 
c.  Christmas tree sales between December 4 and December 24. 
d.  The sale of any items in association with an existing business located on the premises as a principal use (i.e., parking lot or tent sales). 
e.  Carnival rides not to exceed seven days provided no structure or equipment is located within 500 feet of any residential property line. 
2.  Requirements for approval of a temporary use permit. 
a.  Written permission of the property owner is provided; 
b.  These uses are not located within 50 feet of any public right-of-way; 
c.  A sign (not portable) may be erected on the property provided it does not exceed a total of 16 square feet or ten feet in height and is not placed within 20 feet of any public right-of-way; 
d.  Adequate parking, ingress and egress are provided on site or written permission is obtained ii provided on an adjoining property; 
e.  Written preliminary approval; 
f.  All other requirements for licenses and regulations of the city shall be met; and 
g.  A permit for any temporary use on the same property may not be applied for or renewed until 6 months from the date of any prior approval of a temporary use. 
D.  Conditional uses. Within GC District the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Adult entertainment facilities provided all standards of the adult entertainment regulations are met. 
2.  Boarding house. 
3.  Caretaker or watchman quarters as an accessory use. 
4.  Carpenter shop, woodworking. 
5.  Drive-in or drive-through window restaurant. 
6.  Gasoline bulk storage tank. 
7.  Golf, miniature, driving range. 
8.  Group and congregate personal care homes. 
9.  Home, nursing. 
10.  Machine shop, metal fabrication. 
11.  Manufactured home leasing or sale lots (new only). 
12.  Recreation facilities (commercial outdoor, water slides or drive-in theaters). 
13.  Oil, fuel storage. 
14.  Shopping center. 
15.  Utility plant. 
16.  Welding shop. 
17.  Outdoor storage areas, other than junkyards (see section 615 for definition of junkyards) shall be allowed provided the applicant strictly meets the following requirements: (1) the outdoor storage area shall be surrounded by a fence on all sides; (2) only an eight-foot high black chain link fence or an eight-foot high opaque fence may be used; (3) if the fence surrounding the outdoor storage yard is a black chain link fence, the fence shall be located at least 25 feet from any side yard or rear yard property lines and completely screened by a landscaped strip at least three feet high surrounding the entire exterior fence line of the outdoor storage area; (4) if the fence screening the outdoor storage area is opaque, there is no setback or screening requirement; (5) all fencing shall be kept in good repair and maintained for the conditional use permit to remain valid. 
E.  Other provisions. 
1.  No outdoor storage except as otherwise provided herein or unless as a conditional use permit is granted under subsection D. 
2.  Within the GC General commercial district, fuel pumps are permitted within the front yard setback provided they are located: 
a.  No closer than 15 feet to the road right-of-way; and 
b.  Not closer than the existing setback of any residential structure on abutting lots on either the frontage or a side street; 
c.  Canopies are allowed over fuel pumps and are not to extend over 15 feet from the edge of the pump island toward the street. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-17, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 911. - I-1 Light industrial district. 
    I-1 District is for land located on arterial or collector roads that is well adapted to industrial and heavy commercial development, but whose proximity to residential or commercial zoning district makes it desirable to limit industrial operations and processes to those that are not objectionable by reason of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors, or radiation and that do not create fire or explosion hazards or other objectionable conditions. This district limits industrial, manufacturing and warehousing uses to those which are wholly conducted indoors, with the exception of outdoor storage which is screened and situated in a required side or rear yard. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per
Unit
(sq. ft.) Minimum Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum Width (ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Percent
of Lot
Coverage
(1) Major
Street Interior
Street I-1 9,000 (2) - - 100 50 30 12 (3) 15 (3) 3 35%  
(1) Includes principal and accessory buildings but not pavement areas. 
(2) No portion of any lot which is flooded by a 100-year recurrence interval storm event may be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
(3) Buffer zones are required along the side and rear yard where an office-institutional, business, or manufacturing use abuts a residential district and where a multi-family use abuts a single-family residential district. 
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in I-1. 
1.  Animal hospital or vet clinic. 
2.  Appliance repair shop. 
3.  Assembly plant. 
4.  Automobile/truck rental agency. 
5.  Automotive machine shop, automotive metal fabrication. 
6.  Baking plants. 
7.  Bottle gas, storage and distribution. 
8.  Broadcasting studio (radio, TV). 
9.  Building, electrical or plumbing contractors. 
10.  Building supply stores. 
11.  Building materials wholesaler. 
12.  Cabinet shops and furniture manufacturing. 
13.  Carpenter shops, woodworking. 
14.  Caretaker or watchman quarters as an accessory use. 
15.  Cold storage plant or commercial cold storage. 
16.  Contractors offices. 
17.  Depot/passenger terminal (bus, rail). 
18.  Distribution center. 
19.  Dog kennels. 
20.  Farm equipment sales and service. 
21.  HVAC Equipment dealers. 
22.  Ice manufacturing/packing plant. 
23.  Laboratory, research and testing. 
24.  Landscape business. 
25.  Maintenance shop (fleet vehicles). 
26.  Meat processing or packaging; except slaughtering, poultry killing, packing and dressing. 
27.  Medical/dental laboratory. 
28.  Mini-warehouses/personal storage warehouses. 
29.  Movie studio. 
30.  Newspaper and printing plants. 
31.  Outdoor storage yards, other than junkyards (see section 615 for definition of junkyards), shall be allowed provided they strictly meet the following requirements: (1) the outdoor storage area shall be surrounded by a fence on all sides; (2) an eight-foot high black chain link fence or an eight-foot high opaque fence may be used; (3) if the fence surrounding the outdoor storage yard is a black chain link fence, the fence shall be located at least 25 feet from any side yard or rear yard property lines and completely screened by a three-foot high landscaped strip surrounding the entire outdoor exterior fence line of the outdoor storage yard; (4) if the fence screening the outdoor storage yard is opaque, there is no setback or screening requirement; (5) all fencing shall be kept in good repair and maintained for the conditional use permit to remain valid. 
32.  Parking garage. 
33.  Pest control/extermination business. 
34.  Photo processing plant. 
35.  Plant nursery (wholesale or retail). 
36.  Plastics extrusion, injection or blow molding plant (and the reprocessing of same). 
37.  Plumbing equipment dealers. 
38.  Printing/bookbinding/publishing plant. 
39.  Radio/television station and transmitter. 
40.  Railroad sidings. 
41.  Recording/rehearsal studio. 
42.  Rubber tire re-treading plant. 
43.  Soft drink bottling and distributing plants. 
44.  Taxi/limousine service. 
45.  Taxidermist. 
46.  Telephone exchange building. 
47.  Tire, auto and truck, repair and supplies. 
48.  Trade/vocational school. 
49.  Transportation terminals for freight. 
50.  Truck and bus sales/leasing/repair (heavy truck/tractor trailer). 
51.  Truck terminal. 
52.  Upholstery shop. 
53.  Utility plant. 
54.  Weather station. 
55.  Welding shop. 
56.  Wholesaling and warehousing with offices. 
57.  Utility structures. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within the I-1 District the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  Crematories. 
2.  Dry cleaning/laundry. 
3.  Oil, fuel storage. 
4.  Recreation facilities/training center, indoor (gymnastics schools, baseball academies, etc.). 
5.  Sawmill, lumber yard. 
6.  Tree service. 
7.  Warehouse stores. 
8.  Recovered materials processing facility, or recycling station, provided the following standards are met: 
a.  Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compacting and shipping. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
c.  The facility shall not be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used for or zoned for single-family residential use. 
d.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed in such a fashion as to be directed away from any nearby residential areas. 
e.  Materials collected shall not be visible and shall be deposited in a bin or bunker. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 
f.  No outdoor storage of un-containerized materials shall be allowed. 
9.  Wood chipping/shredding, and yard trimmings composting facility provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, provide a three-foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2017-18, §§ 1, 2, 9-19-2017) 
Sec. 912. - I-2 Industrial district. 
    The I-2 District provides a location on arterial or collector roads for those industrial operations and processes that are not public nuisances and are not dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the inhabitants of the city, but are more intensive uses than light industrial. 
A.  Area, yard and height requirements. 
Dist. Minimum
Area
(sq. ft.) Area Per Unit (sq. ft.) Minimum Unit Size (sq. ft.) Minimum Width (ft.) Setback From Right-of-Way (ft.) Min. Side Yard (ft.) Min. Rear Yard (ft.) Max.
Height
(stories) Max.
Percent
of Lot
Coverage(1) Major
Street Interior
Street I-2 12,000 (2) - - 100 50 35 15 (3) 15 (3) 3 25%  
(1) Includes principal and accessory buildings but not pavement areas. 
(2) No portion of any lot which is flooded by a 100-year recurrence interval storm event may be counted as part of the required minimum lot area. 
(3) The minimum setback adjoining a residential zoning district is 120 feet. 
B.  Permitted uses. Only the following permitted uses shall be allowed in I-2: 
1.  All uses allowed in the I-1 Light industrial district as permitted uses. 
2.  Aircraft factory. 
3.  Alcoholic beverage plant/distillery. 
4.  Assembly plant. 
5.  Concrete or masonry plant. 
6.  Chemical plant. 
7.  Crematory. 
8.  Dye casting works. 
9.  Fat and bone rendering plant. 
10.  Feed processing facility. 
11.  Fertilizer plant. 
12.  Landscape business. 
13.  Manufacturing. 
14.  Metal smelting/forging works. 
15.  Railroad sidings, maintenance and terminal facilities which provides maintenance for more than two cars. 
16.  Railroad repair/storage yard which provides maintenance for more than two cars. 
17.  Slaughter house. 
18.  Sugar refinery. 
19.  Tannery-Leather processing. 
20.  Wood chipping/shredding, and yard trimmings composting facility provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, and grass clippings or similar putrescence vegetative materials, not including animal products, inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals, or similar materials. 
b.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), and along the side and rear property lines, provide a three-foot high landscape earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot high, 100 percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
C.  Conditional uses. Within I-2, the following uses require a conditional use permit: 
1.  All conditional uses listed in the I-1 Light industrial district. 
2.  Asphalt plant, permanent. 
3.  Bulk storage tanks including natural gas or fuel storage stations. No above ground storage facilities may be located closer than 500 feet to a residential district. All storage is to be subject to approval of the fire department. 
4.  Composting facility, municipal solid waste. 
5.  Explosives plant/storage. 
6.  Landfills, C&D and inert. 
7.  Quarry for the removal of minerals and other natural materials, together with necessary buildings, machinery and appurtenances thereto, provided that: 
a.  Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence located at least ten feet back from the edge of any excavation and of such constructions and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. 
b.  The operators and owners of the quarry present to the mayor and council an acceptable comprehensive plan for the reuse of the property at the cessation of the quarry operations. 
c.  In the case of an existing quarry, an extension of the quarry operations beyond the areas being quarried or approved for quarrying at the effective date of this zoning ordinance of the city, shall be permitted and shall not be considered a new operation provided that said extension does not extend to within 1,000 feet of a residential or commercial zoning district boundary line. 
8.  Scrap tire processing plant. 
9.  Waste transfer stations. 
10.  Tree service. 
11.  Waste incineration facility. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 913. - MUBP Mixed use business park. 
    The Mixed Use Business Park (MUBP) is intended to provide large tracts of land suitable for the planned development of a mixed-use business park that provides new jobs and increases the tax base. It shall provide an attractive environment well suited to residential, light manufacturing, research, development, professional offices and related commercial uses. Other types of heavy industrial or large-scale distribution uses that would be objectionable by reasons of dust, odor, air pollution, water pollution, noise, or heavy truck traffic and congestion are not permitted. The mixed use business park district is permitted under the following conditions: 
1.  It is a part of a large-scale development of 100 acres or more; 
2.  It is developed under a single, unified entity or group providing control of property development; 
3.  It contains a mixture of uses; 
4.  It is developed in conformity with a master plan for future uses that is prepared by the applicant and approved by the mayor and council; and 
5.  It provides adequate infrastructure for current and future transportation, water resource management and community services. 
A.  Principal uses and structures. Principal uses and structures in the MUBP district shall be those allowed as permitted uses in GC and I-1. 
B.  Accessory uses and structures. Accessory uses and structures shall be permitted in the MUBP district per GC and I-1, with the exception of storage, sales and distribution, which may be permitted as accessory uses related to the principal uses allowed in the MUBP district. 
C.  Conditional uses. Conditional uses in the MUBP district shall those allowed in GC and I-1 as conditional uses therein. 
1.  Certain authorized, accessory or conditional uses must meet standards peculiar to the use per this ordinance. 
2.  Conditional uses shall be approved per article XV. 
D.  Property development standards. 
1.  Density. 
a.  Average density shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross building area per gross acre of entire property. 
b.  Maximum density of any lot shall not exceed 20,000 square feet of gross building area per gross acre of site. 
2.  Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet on a public street. 
3.  Minimum building setback requirements. 
a.  Front: 15 feet. 
b.  Side: Ten feet from property line, but no less than 20 feet between buildings over 35 feet in height. 
c.  Rear: 25 feet. 
4.  Impervious surface. 
a.  The maximum impervious surface is 60 percent of the lot. 
b.  The average impervious surface of the entire district shall not exceed 50 percent. 
5.  Maximum Height of buildings: 75 feet or five stories, whichever is greater. 
6.  Parking requirements: Off-street parking and loading space shall be provided to city standards in article XI of this ordinance with the following exceptions: 
Land Use Number of Parking Spaces Required for Each Residential 1.5 Dwelling Unit Professional Offices 3 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area Banks 3 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area Wholesale, Office-Warehouse 1 200 sq. ft. of office space, plus 2,000 sq. ft. of storage area  
7.  Streets and rights-of-way. All streets shall be dedicated public streets, except as may be permitted in a district, and shall conform to city standards, with exceptions described below. 
a.  Streets that are not state or federal highways shall be constructed with a design speed not less than 35 miles per hour in commercial and industrial areas and not less than 25 miles per hour in residential areas, except as follows: 
b.  Streets primarily serving industrial, commercial, and office buildings shall provide vehicle travel lanes not to exceed 12 feet in width, including curb and gutter, but not including on-street parking and bicycle lanes. 
c.  Streets primarily serving residential buildings shall provide vehicle travel lanes not to exceed 11 feet in width, including curb and gutter, but not including on-street parking and bicycle lanes. 
d.  Intersection radii shall not be greater than 35 feet. 
e.  Streets containing four or more travel lanes shall provide landscaped medians of at least 14 feet in width. 
f.  All intersections shall provide pedestrian crosswalks. 
g.  Where intersections are signalized, they shall provide signal phases and indicators for pedestrians in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
h.  Landscape plans shall be prepared as a component of the final engineering plans for each public street. Street trees shall be permitted in accordance with approval landscape plans. 
i.  Right-of-way widths shall generally be in accordance with city standards and shall provide adequate space for shoulders on both sides of travel lanes containing a minimum of ten feet measured from the outside edge of pavement for the placement of underground utilities, sidewalks, bike lanes, and landscaping as required by the approved site development plans of the applicable districts. 
j.  Alternative right-of-way widths and shoulder widths shall be permitted in a district in accordance with approved preliminary plans. 
8.  Sidewalks shall provide safe, continuous pathways for pedestrians and shall be located on all public streets. 
9.  Landscape strips adjacent to public rights-of-way. 
a.  Landscape strips not less than five feet in width shall be provided on both sides of all public streets. The landscape strip shall be planted with row of native trees of two-inch minimum caliper planted not less than 40 feet on center. 
b.  No such tree shall be planted closer than two feet from the street or sidewalks, and no closer than five feet from a fire hydrant, signpost, streetlight standard, utility pole, or similar structure. No such tree shall be placed closer than ten feet from the face of a building or the edge of a driveway. 
c.  When the landscape strip is between the street and a parking lot, it shall be increased in width to at least ten feet, and in additional to such trees, it shall provide screening of that portion of the parking lot immediately adjacent to the street. This can be accomplished through a raised berm, evergreen hedge, or through other means approved by the city. 
10.  Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground except for major electric transmission lines and sub-stations. Public water and sewer service shall be provided for all occupied buildings required to provide toilets. Streetlights shall be provided along all public streets. 
11.  Signage. 
a.  Signs for the approved development and for individual establishments used for commercial, office, institutional and other non-residential uses shall be permitted in accordance with article XIII of this ordinance. 
b.  The entity providing unified control of the development of the mixed use business park shall have the right to develop an alternative sign program for the property with standards that meet or exceed the requirements of article XIII of this ordinance. Upon approval of the mayor and council, all project signage shall be permitted only in accordance with the approved alternative signage program. 
c.  Billboards are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE X. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 1000. - Re-authorization. 
    The existing municipal planning commission (sometimes referred to as the planning commission) is re-authorized. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1001. - Membership. 
    The planning commission shall have seven members, who shall be residents of Social Circle, appointed by the mayor and council. The terms shall be two years and any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the remainder of the term by the mayor and council, which shall also have the authority to remove any member with or without cause at any time upon ten days written notice. None of the members shall hold any other public office or position in the city. If the mayor and council are unable to seat a planning commission, the city will utilize the Walton County Planning Commission in its administration of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1002. - Officers. 
    The mayor and council shall appoint two members of the planning commission as chair and vice chair. The terms shall be one year with eligibility for re-appointment. The mayor and council shall appoint a secretary who may be a city employee. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1003. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of this ordinance and Georgia law. 
    All meetings shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be public record. 
    The specific duties of the planning commission shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  Receiving from the zoning administrator and reviewing and making recommendations on all requests for amendments to the comprehensive plan and the short term work program, zoning ordinance amendments (including map and text amendments), conditional uses, site plans, preliminary and final plats for proposed subdivisions, or any other matters relating to planning and zoning; 
2.  Conducting public hearings for soliciting public comments prior to acting on business that comes before them. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE XI. - OFF-STREET AUTOMOBILE PARKING AND LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACES 

Sec. 1100. - Applicability. 
    Off-street parking and loading and unloading spaces shall be provided, per this ordinance, including for uses and structures hereafter established, or subsequently enlarged, except in the CBD Central Business District. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1101. - Plan and design standards. 
1.  No more than 25 percent of the required parking spaces may be located between the street right-of-way and the front building line for the entire width of the lot or parcel along said street. Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet wide and 19 feet deep. Adequate interior driveways shall connect each parking space with a public road or street. A maximum of one foot six inches of the required 19 feet may overhang a grassed area. This overhang cannot be over a sidewalk or right-of-way and must be arranged to allow adequate front-to-front parking. 
2.  Interior driveways. Interior driveways, when used with 90 degree angle parking, shall be at least 24 feet wide; when used with a 60 degree angle parking and the drive is one-way, shall be at least 12 feet wide. When used with parallel parking or when there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten feet wide for one-way traffic and at least 20 feet wide for two-way traffic. 
3.  Improvement of off-street parking lots. All off-street parking lots, whether public or private, for more than five vehicles shall meet the following standards: 
a.  They shall be graded to insure proper drainage, surfaced with concrete or asphalt or approved durable pervious surface, at least two inches thick, installed on an approved base, and maintained in good condition free of weeds, dust, trash and debris. 
b.  High intensity lighting facilities shall be so arranged that the source of any light is concealed from public view and from adjacent residential properties and does not interfere with traffic. 
c.  They shall not be used for the sale, repair, dismantling or servicing or storing of any vehicle, equipment, materials or supplies. 
d.  Each parking space shall be clearly demarcated by a painted stripe no less than three inches wide running the length of each of the longer sides of the space. 
e.  Landscaped areas shall be provided per section 1102. 
4.  If the required automobile off-street parking spaces cannot reasonably be provided on the same lot as the principal use, such spaces may be provided on other off-street property not more than 500 feet from the main entrance to the principal use. Applicant shall submit, with his application for a building permit or occupancy permit, signed written permission certifying the permanent availability of such off-street parking facilities for the principal use. 
5.  One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
6.  Off-street loading and unloading spaces shall have access from a public alley or, if there is no alley, from a public street. The space shall not interfere with the free movement of vehicles and pedestrians. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1102. - Landscape requirements. 
    Whenever parking, loading and unloading areas are provided, including off-street parking lots for more than five vehicles (but excepting areas serving single-family or duplex developments) they shall conform to the requirements below: 
1.  Landscape requirements. All vehicular use areas subject to these regulations shall be required to have the following maintained perimeter and interior landscaped areas: 
a.  Perimeter landscape requirements. All exterior perimeters of all vehicular use areas shall have a perimeter landscaped area with no horizontal dimension less than five feet. A decorative masonry wall, earth berm, natural landscaping screen and/or combinations of the above shall be installed in such a manner as to screen the vehicular use area from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way. Screening areas shall be a minimum height of three feet and a maximum height of ten feet, except that trees may be a maximum height of 40 feet. All required perimeter landscaped areas shall have at least one tree for every 250 square feet or fraction thereof. 
1)  Landscaped areas abutting a public street right-of-way shall have a minimum average dimension of ten feet from the right-of-way line to the vehicular use area. Landscaping adjacent to driveway entrances/exits and at corners adjacent to public street intersections shall not obscure vision clearance for motorists. 
2)  Required perimeter landscaped areas which would abut adjacent, existing nonresidential properties may, with the approval of the mayor and council, be substituted with additional interior or other perimeter landscaping. 
b.  Interior landscape requirements. An area or combination of areas equal to ten percent of the total vehicular use area shall be devoted to interior landscaping area. Each separate interior landscaped area shall contain a minimum dimension of at least five feet and shall include at least one tree having a clear trunk (i.e., no foliage) of at least five feet in height, with the remaining area adequately landscaped with shrubs, ground cover or other authorized landscaping material not to exceed three feet in height. 
Interior landscaped areas shall be separated by driveway and/or parking areas from perimeter landscaped areas. 
c.  Permitted modification to the landscaping requirements. When the landscaped area requirements of subsections (a) and (b) may exceed 20 percent of the vehicular use area, the applicant may reduce dimensions of landscaped areas to 20 percent of the vehicular use area. However, vegetative and/or masonry screening approved by the city shall be maintained abutting residential uses and zones. 
Healthy existing plant material shall count towards the requirements in subsections a. and b. above. 
d.  All landscaping shall be installed per accepted good planting procedures. All new living plant materials shall satisfy the requirements of "No. 1" or better as defined in the most current edition of "American Standards for Nursery Stock." 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1103. - Extension of parking space into a residential district. 
    Required parking space may extend up to 300 feet into an adjoining residential district if: 
1.  The parking lot has access to the same street as the property for which it provides parking; and 
2.  The parking lot is separated from abutting properties in the residential district by a ten-foot-wide buffer strip, screened and maintained by a fence, wall, or evergreen plants. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1104. - Number of off-street parking spaces. 
    Following are the number of off-street parking spaces required. For uses not specifically listed, the off-street parking requirements shall be those of the most similar use: 
1.  Adult entertainment facilities. One space for each 25 square feet of gross building area or for every three customer seats, whichever results in the greater number of parking spaces. 
2.  Automobile sales and service. One space for 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
3.  Banks and professional offices. One space per 200 square feet of floor area. 
4.  Beauty parlors and barber shops. Two spaces for each operator. 
5.  Churches. One space per four seats in the main sanctuary. 
6.  Funeral parlors. One space for each three fixed seats plus one space for each 25 square feet of floor area available for movable seats in the largest assembly room. 
7.  Furniture and appliance stores. One space per 500 square feet of showroom. 
8.  Garage, repair. Three spaces for each service bay, plus one space for each attendant. 
9.  Grocery stores. One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
10.  Hospitals, nursing homes and similar institutions. One space for each two beds. 
11.  Hotels/motels. One space per room, plus one space for each two employees on the day shift. 
12.  Industries. One space for each employee on the largest shift, plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. 
13.  Libraries. One space for each 400 square feet of gross floor space to which the public has access. 
14.  Lodges and clubs. One space for each 100 square feet of gross floor area. 
15.  Medical offices. Five spaces for each doctor, dentist, or optician. 
16.  Offices. One space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area. 
17.  Places of public assembly without fixed seating. One space per 25 square feet of floor area available for movable seats in the largest assembly room. 
18.  Places of public assembly with fixed seating. One space for each three seats. 
19.  Recreation centers. Private. One space per five members, but no less than 20 spaces, except golf courses shall require a minimum of 20 spaces per nine holes. 
20.  Recreation centers, public. A minimum of 20 spaces except that golf courses shall require a minimum of 20 spaces per nine holes. 
21.  Residences. Two spaces for each dwelling unit. 
22.  Residential recreational areas (developed). One space per five lots as shown on the approved concept plan for the subdivision. 
23.  Restaurants. One space for each 75 square feet of gross floor area. 
24.  Restaurants, drive-in. One space per 50 square feet of gross floor area, but not less than 25. 
25.  Retail business, including general business, commercial or personal service establishments and shopping centers catering to retail trade, but not including offices or food stores. Five spaces for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
26.  Rooming and boarding houses. One space for each bedroom. 
27.  Schools, public or private, and day care facilities. One space for each employee, including teachers and staff members, plus ten visitor spaces, plus off-street space for the safe and convenient loading and unloading of students, plus additional facilities for student parking taking into consideration the total number of students, the percentage of students driving automobiles and the parking requirements for stadium, gymnasium and auditorium use. 
28.  Schools, college, trade and vocational. Ten spaces per classroom. 
29.  Wholesale and warehousing. One space per 200 square feet of gross floor area devoted to office or display plus one space per 2,000 square feet of gross storage area. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1105. - Off-street loading and unloading spaces. 
    On every lot on which a non-residential use is established, space shall be provided for loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley. Such spaces shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. Requirements are: 
1.  Retail business. One space at least 10 x 30 feet for each 3,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
2.  Wholesale business and industry. One space of at least 10 x 50 feet for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or fraction thereof. 
3.  Bus and truck terminals. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1106. - Commercial vehicle parking. 
    Commercial vehicle parking shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Except as provided herein no commercial vehicle shall be allowed to park in any AG, AG-2, R-25, R-15, R-12 or PUD district either on property so zoned or on the streets abutting such property on Monday through Friday between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or on Saturdays or Sundays. 
2.  Any commercial vehicle under one and one-half tons in cargo capacity shall be allowed to be parked in a carport or within a side yard or rear yard in accordance with other sections of this ordinance. 
3.  This section shall not apply to any vehicle in an enclosed building or not visible from any public place or from any surrounding private property. 
4.  This section shall not apply to vehicles on school property and on property of not-for-profit organizations. 
5.  As used in this section, commercial vehicles specifically include the following: 
a.  Any vehicle designed to carry more than one and one-half tons. 
b.  Any vehicle, other than a motor home, having more than two axles. 
c.  Any motorized construction equipment, except on private property for construction in progress. 
d.  Any bus designed to carry more than 20 passengers. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1107. - Parking, storage or use of boats and recreational vehicles. 
    No recreational boats, vehicles or other recreational equipment, such as travel trailers, campers or travel buses of any kind, shall be parked more than 24 hours in a residential district unless one of the following conditions is satisfied: (1) the boat, vehicle or other recreational equipment is in the side-yard or rear yard of the zoning lot behind a compliant building or structure; (2) the boat, vehicle, or other recreational equipment is under a carport; (3) if there is no principal zoning compliant structure on the zoning lot, the boat, vehicle or other recreational equipment parking is only allowed if the boat, vehicle or equipment is completely out of public view. Boats, travel trailers, and recreational vehicles shall not be parked in the front of a residential lot in any residential district. No recreational boats, vehicles or equipment may be used for living, sleeping or house-keeping purposes in a residential district. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2018-2, §§ 1, 2, 2-20-2018) 
ARTICLE XII. - BUFFERS AND SCREENING 

Sec. 1200. - Buffer between dissimilar districts and construction buffers. 
1.  Where nonresidential districts are contiguous with residential districts, or where multifamily or mobile home districts are contiguous with single-family residential districts, the parcel of land shall have a buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting a residential district. 
2.  All residentially zoned property to be developed as single-family detached subdivisions shall have a minimum 20 foot construction buffer along any rear and side property lines abutting an existing single-family residential zoned parcel. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1201. - Plan requirements. 
    All buffers shall be designated on permit application(s) and indicated on the required site plan or final subdivision plat. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1202. - Buffer and screening standards. 
    All buffer areas and screening shall be per the following requirements: 
1.  Buffers shall meet the width requirements for dissimilar districts per the "minimum buffer requirements" table (section 1204). 
2.  Screening shall be established within any buffer along the entire side and rear lot lines. This screening requirement may be adjusted by the city manager for required sight distance. 
3.  Screening may be required where a non-residential use abuts a public street across from a residential district. This screening requirement may be adjusted by the city manager for required sight distance. 
4.  Structures, including driveways, parking facilities, or retaining walls, shall be located a minimum of five feet from any buffer. 
5.  Buffers shall be established and maintained per the following standards and any additional specifications per the mayor and council. If the buffer includes a utility or pipeline casement, a buffer of no less than 20 feet in width will be required outside the easement. 
a.  Standards for permanent buffers. 
1)  Width of buffers. Buffers shall meet the width requirements in this ordinance, except as authorized to be reduced by the applicable buffer reduction process, as follows: 
a)  As specified in the "minimum buffer requirements" table; or 
b)  As specified in a residential zoning district for a permitted nonresidential use; or 
c)  As required by a condition of zoning, conditional use, or variance approval. 
2)  Screening requirements. 
a)  Buffers shall be natural, undisturbed, and free of encroachments except as authorized by a condition of zoning or variance approval, or as authorized herein, and contain the existing tree cover and vegetation as well as any supplemental plantings as may be required. 
b)  Buffers shall visually screen activities, structures and uses on the property from view from the normal level of a first story window on an abutting lot, year-round. 
c)  Buffers along side property lines shall extend to a street right-of-way line unless otherwise required by the city manager for sight distance requirements. 
d)  Where the required buffer is partially or completely within an existing easement, the screening requirements shall be met outside of the easement area. 
3)  Supplemental plantings. 
a)  Buffers in which vegetation is inadequate to meet the screening requirements shall be planted with supplemental plantings to provide a year-round visual screen. 
b)  Supplemental plantings shall be evergreen trees, shrubs, or combination thereof, native or adaptable to the region. All trees shall be a minimum of six feet at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least 20 feet at maturity. All shrubs planted shall be a minimum of three feet at time of planting and shall be a species which will achieve a height of at least ten feet at maturity. 
c)  All plantings shall be installed to allow for proper plant growth and maintenance. 
4)  Non-vegetative screening. 
a)  Non-vegetative materials utilized to satisfy the screening requirements, in addition to existing vegetation and/or supplemental plantings, may consist of walls, fences, earthen berms or any combination. 
b)  If walls or fences are utilized, their installation shall cause minimal disturbance of existing vegetation, and provide an effective visual screen. 
5)  Disturbance or encroachments. 
a)  Ditches, swales, stormwater conveyance facilities, stormwater detention ponds, sanitary sewer conveyance facilities, similar facilities and associated easements shall not encroach into a buffer except that necessary access and utility crossings (e.g. stormwater or sanitary sewer pipes) may encroach into the buffer as near to perpendicular as practical. 
b)  Supplemental plantings or replanting of vegetation, or authorized non-vegetative screening devices, may encroach into a buffer, provided there is minimal disturbance of existing vegetation. 
c)  Land disturbance is authorized in areas of a buffer devoid of vegetation, if the final grade and replanting of vegetation meet the screening requirements herein. 
d)  Dying, diseased or dead vegetation shall be removed from a buffer, but with minimal disturbance. Vegetation thus removed shall be replaced to meet screening requirements. 
6)  Protection during land disturbing activities. 
a)  During authorized land disturbing activities, buffers shall be clearly demarcated and protected prior to and during construction. 
b)  The method of demarcation and protection shall be per best management practices and as required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1203. - Other screening requirements. 
    Screening and/or buffers shall be required for obscuring features such as dumpsters, rear entrances, utility and maintenance structures, and loading facilities. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1204. - Location and width of transitional buffers. 
    Transitional buffers shall be required between dissimilar districts or uses in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance or as a condition of approval by the planning commission and or the mayor and council. 
(a)  A transitional buffer shall be required along any side and rear property line, unless required as a condition of approval by the planning commission and or the mayor and council. 
(b)  All transitional buffer areas and screening shall be established in accordance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Transitional buffers shall meet the minimum width requirements for dissimilar districts as shown in the "table of minimum transitional buffer requirements" unless otherwise authorized. 
(2)  In situations where the required transitional buffer width is partially or completely contained within an existing easement, the screening requirements of this ordinance shall be met outside of the easement area. 
(c)  Transitional buffer widths may be reduced by 50 percent or ten feet (whichever is less) by the addition of a solid (opaque) fence or wall at least six feet in height. 
(d)  The width of required transitional buffers may be reduced by variance by no more than 50 percent, as appropriate, if and only if: 
(1)  It is clearly demonstrated that existing topography and/or vegetation within the reduced area achieve the purpose and intent of this section. 
(2)  It is clearly demonstrated that, for topographic reasons, a fence, wall and/or other screening device required herein could not possibly screen activities conducted on ground level from view from the normal level of a first-story window on any lot in a residential district abutting the use. 
(e)  Structures, including driveways, parking or retaining walls, shall be located at least five feet from any buffer. 
(f)  When a transitional buffer is required on a non-residential tract and the buffer is of greater depth than the minimum required setback, the minimum setback shall be increased to include five feet in addition to the width of the required transitional buffer. 
(g)  All transitional buffers shall be so designated on the site construction plan and final plat. 
(h)  The final plat shall contain the follow note, "Property owner shall be responsible for maintaining the vegetation and non-vegetation screen materials within the transitional buffers and outdoor screening required in conformity of the zoning and development ordinance and all conditions of rezoning approval applicable to this property." 
Table of Minimum Transitional Buffer Requirements-Width of Buffer in Feet(a) 
Buffer
District AG AG-2 R-25 R-15 R-12 RMD PUD RHD O-I NC CBD GC I-1 I-2 R-25 20 20 - - - - - - - - - - - - R-15 20 20 20 - - - - - - - - - - - R-12 20 20 20 20 - - - - - - - - - - RMD 50 50 50 50 50 - - - - - - - - - PUD 50 50 50 50 50 50 - - - - - - - - RHD 75 75 75 75 75 75 75 - - - - - - - O-I 75 75 75 75 75 75 50 50 - - - - - - NC 75 75 75 75 75 75 50 50 50 - - - - - CBD 100 100 100 100 100 75 75 75 50 50 - - - - GC 125 125 125 125 125 100 75 75 50 50 20 - - - I-1 125 125 150 150 150 150 150 150 125 100 50 50 - - I-2 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 150 150 150 100 50 - MUBP 125 125 150 150 150 150 150 150 75 75 75 50 50 25  
(a) Transitional buffer widths may be reduced by 50 percent or ten feet (whichever is less) by the addition of a solid (opaque) fence or wall at least six feet in height, as provided in subsection (c). 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE XIII. - SIGNS 

Sec. 1300. - Purpose. 
    Regulation of the location, size, placement, and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities in the city without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the community, to take advantage of the beauty of the community's environment, and to protect property values. The goal of this article is to avoid being an impermissible content-based regulation, and instead to be a permissible time, place and manner restriction. More communication is desirable during the election cycle, so that all citizens may freely express their viewpoints during the election campaigns, and therefore this ordinance allows increased opportunities for signs during these periods, without limiting content. At all times, any sign permitted under this regulation can carry any legal message, political or non-political, commercial or non-commercial. However, it is not the intent of this article that all signs are built to the maximum size. The city encourages use of the minimum signage necessary to meet the purposes required. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city to establish regulations governing signs which will: 
1.  Promote and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
2.  Protect the character of the city's historic commercial district and residential neighborhoods; 
3.  Enhance the economy of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs; 
4.  Restrict signs and lights which increase clutter or which increase the probability of traffic accidents by obstructing vision; 
5.  Promote signs compatible with their surroundings. 
    Further, recognizing that the aesthetic, cultural, and historic qualities of the city are unique and, therefore, vital to the community's interest, it is the objective of this article to protect these and to ensure that these are not compromised. It is an objective of this article to protect and preserve the aesthetic qualities of the community by regulating the number, size, placement, installation and maintenance of signs. The fact that such signs are intended to command visual contact, grants to signs a proportionally greater role than other structures in determining the overall aesthetic quality of the community. 
    The aesthetic impact of signs has an economic factor that can bear heavily upon the enjoyment and value of property; therefore, the regulation of signs is validly justified on the basis of conserving the value of property and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the community. It is both rational and important for a community's citizens to plan their physical surroundings so unsightliness is minimized. Signs can detract from the beauty of a neighborhood and lower property values. 
    In seeking to comply with federal and Georgia law, the city council has determined the following: large billboards are, as the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized, an aesthetic harm; the Georgia Supreme Court has upheld sign regulations on the basis of aesthetics and preserving the beauty of environment; and, judicial decisions of the Eleventh Circuit have recognized that portable signs are visual clutter and a potential traffic hazard. These holdings support the constitutionality of this chapter, as intended by the city. 
    With these purposes in mind, it is the intention of this article to authorize the use of signs that: 
1.  Are compatible with their surroundings. 
2.  Are appropriate to the type of activity to which they pertain. 
3.  Are expressive of the identity of the individual properties or of the community as a whole. 
4.  Are legible. 
    To avoid illegal signage, anyone contemplating a sign should contact the city and a private firm or individual engaged in sign/graphic design for advice. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1301. - Boundaries. 
    These sign regulations shall be valid throughout the city limits. Sign placement and size regulations shall vary between districts. To determine which district a proposed sign will be located in, see the official zoning map in city hall. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1302. - Scope of regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, alter, or convert any sign or cause the same to be done except per this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit display of any message which is obscene, illegal or speech which is otherwise unprotected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a prosecution for violation of a criminal statute by the city or other duly constituted government authority or a civil action by the city or other private person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1303. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, the following definitions shall apply. Words used in the singular shall include the plural; and the plural the singular; and the words used in the present tense shall include the future tense. Words not defined here shall be construed to have their common dictionary definition unless defined in the zoning ordinance of the city or the State of Georgia Codes. 
    The word "shall" is mandatory, not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. The word "lot" include the words "piece," "plot," and "parcel." The words "zone," "zoning district" and "district" have the same meaning. The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," and "occupied for." The word "structure" shall include the words "building" and "sign." The word "he" shall include the word "she." 
    Awning means a structure projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of rigid or non-rigid materials such as cloth, plastic or metal. 
    Banner means any temporary sign intended to be hung either with or without frames, possessing characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentations applies to paper, plastic or fabric of any kind. National flags, flags of political subdivisions and symbolic flags of any institution or business shall not be considered banners for the purpose of these regulations. 
    Building facade means the portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of a parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes. 
    Building front means the length of an outside building wall facing a street. 
    Campaign poster means a sign which expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identifying candidate. 
    Canopy means a non-retractable structure, other than an awning, made of cloth, metal or other material, with frames attached to the building and/or carried by a frame supported by the ground. 
    Canopy sign means a sign imposed upon or painted on any roof-like structure either permanently or temporarily extended over a sidewalk or walkway. Such sign may be mounted flush or suspended. 
    Flag means a piece of cloth varying in size, color, and/or design and used as a symbol, standard, signal, or emblem. 
    Ground sign means a sign securely affixed to an independent support structure that is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
    Height as applied to a sign means the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and a level plane going through the nearest point of the vehicular traffic surface of the adjacent improved public right-of-way, other than an alley. In the event a sign is equal distance from more than one improved public right-of-way, none of which are alleys, the highest point shall be used. Where the elevation of the ground at the right-of-way line nearest the sign is equal to or greater than five feet below the vehicular traffic surface, the permitted height of the sign may be established as a variance to this chapter, limited, however, to the least variation required to place the applicant's signage in a similar position to other allowable signage. 
    Light emitting diode (LED) means a two-lead semiconductor light source which emits light when activated. An LED display is a flat panel display, which uses an array of light emitting diodes as pixels for the purposes of displaying a message. 
    Monument-style sign means a ground sign mounted directly upon the ground and not attached to or a part of or supported by a building and designed in such a manner that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting solid base which is flush with the ground. The base shall be at least as wide as the sign. 
    Municipal banner means a sign printed on cloth using words and illustrations designed to promote the community at large and purchased by the city government for that specific purpose. Such banners shall be hung from the city light poles and shall be maintained by the city in good order. 
    Official sign means any sign posted by or at the direction of a governmental entity. 
    Parapet means the extension of a false front or wall above a roof line. 
    Pennant means pieces of cloth or plastic joined together, uniform or varying in size, color and/or design, suspended from a structure to the ground or additional structure and designed to move in the wind. 
    Permit means a certificate issued by the city allowing the erection, construction or placement of a sign. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    Planned center means a group of stores, offices or businesses, occupying distinct and separate spaces that are open to the public and combined into one building complex on one lot with dedicated access to each such space through a common lobby or directly from the exterior of the complex. 
    Prohibited sign means any sign prohibited in section 1304. 
    Right-of-way means a strip of land over which the city has a right by ownership or easement, to construct a public street, sidewalk or location for public utilities. 
    Rotating sign means a sign which is designed to revolve by means of electrical power. 
    Sail sign means a piece of cloth, varying in size, shape, color, and design, attached at one edge to a staff or cord for the entire vertical length of the cloth, and used as a means of conveying a message. 
    Sandwich sign means a freestanding portable sign, also referred to as an "A-frame sign" that has two sides, hinged or otherwise fastened together at the top and supported by opening the sides from one another at the base, similar to a ladder, so that the sign, when opened, becomes self-supporting. 
    Setback means the distance from a property line to the nearest part of a building structure or sign, as measured perpendicularly to the property. 
    Sign means any surface, fabric, device, or display which bears lettered, pictorial, or sculptured matter designed to convey information visually and which is exposed for public view on the exterior of a building or on surrounding property. For purposes of this article, the term "sign" shall include all structural members. A sign shall be construed to be a display surface or device containing organized and related elements composed to form a single unit. In cases where matter is displayed in a random or unconnected manner without an organized relationship of components, each component shall be considered to be a single sign. 
    Sign face means the surface or plane of the sign upon, against, or through which a message is displayed or illustrated, including the advertising surface and any framing, trim or molding. (See Figures 19-22) 
    Sign, light emitting diode (LED) means any electronically controlled sign utilizing light emitting diode technology to form some or all of the sign message, whether that message is moving or stationary. This type of sign include any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymers (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. 
    Sign, neon means an illuminated sign containing a glass tube filled with neon or phosphorous, which is bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes and which tubing forms all of a portion of the visible element of the message. Neon tubes hidden behind opaque sign faces and utilized for internal illumination of the sign face do not constitute neon signs. 
    Sign owner means a person recorded as such on official records. For the purposes of this article, the owner of the property on which a sign is located is presumed to be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the attention of the administrator; e.g., a sign leased from a sign company. 
    Sign structure means any aboveground portion on a freestanding base, support or braces the purpose of which is to support a sign or signs and excluding those portions of any such structure the primary purpose of which is to serve an architectural function (i.e., building wall, freestanding wall, entrance wall, fence, gate, etc.) (see Figure 23). 
    Sign, wall means a sign attached to the exterior wall of the building and erected parallel to the building face. For purposes of computing sign area, the total lettering or other representation on one facade of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign, provided that where multiple premises share one building facade, the signage utilized for each separate premises shall be computed on the total building facade attributable to those premises. 
    Standard informational sign means a sign not greater than three square feet, for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags or projections, at a height not greater than three feet, mounted on a wire metal frame. 
    Streamers. See definition of Pennant. 
    Street frontage means the length of a property line along the street on which it borders. 
    Temporary sign means a display, informational sign or banner with or without a structural frame, not permanently attached to the ground, structure or a building, and intended for a limited period of display. No temporary sign shall project into or over the public right-of-way. 
    Tenant space frontage means the horizontal distance in feet between the left side wall and right side wall or building end of a tenant space fronting a street or common parking area. 
    Wall sign means a single-faced sign which is in any manner attached or fixed flat to an exterior wall of a building or structure and which projects no more than 18 inches from the exterior wall of a building. Individual letters in addition to the "box type" (i.e., letters and symbols on an attached backing) sign may also be installed and constitute a wall sign. Such a sign may be constructed without constituting an encroachment into a required side or front yard setback line. For the purposes of this section, this term includes fascia signs. 
    Window sign means any sign painted on, attached to or placed in a window so that it is readable to vehicular traffic and pedestrians passing by on the exterior of the building. 
    Zoning district means any geographic area defined by the official zoning map for the purpose of regulating use. 
    Zoning ordinance means the official zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1304. - Signs regulated by zoning district. 
    Types of signs and regulatory aspects of those signs, allowed per zoning district shall be as follows: 
A.  Signs permitted in the AG, AG-2 zoning districts. 
1.  Parcels may contain standard informational signs, supported by wire metal frame inserted directly into the ground, subject to the aggregate sign area allowance, without a permit fee. 
2.  The aggregate sign area shall not exceed six square feet; except from opening of qualifying for elections until the final determination of all contests and issues resolved by that election. 
3.  No sign shall be erected to a height of greater than five feet. 
4.  Ground signs are allowed subject to the limitation of one per road frontage. Illumination is prohibited. 
5.  Window signs are not allowed. 
B.  Signs permitted in the OI and NC zoning districts. 
1.  Ground signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot of up to 32 square feet per sign face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed 64 square feet and with a maximum height of eight feet and a minimum setback of ten feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
2.  Window signs. Total signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing the road frontage, not to exceed 64 square feet. 
3.  Wall signs. One wall sign per road frontage for each tenant no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space frontage shall be permitted, not to exceed 64 square feet. 
4.  Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
5.  Banner signs up to 16 square feet in sign area may be displayed for 30 days per location. There shall be 45 days between the time a banner is removed and another permit is issued. No banner shall be attached to a utility pole or light pole. 
C.  Signs permitted in the CBD zoning district. 
1.  Ground signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot of up to 32 square feet per sign face with an aggregate total of each sign face not to exceed 64 square feet with a maximum height of six feet and a minimum setback of ten feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated with external lighting fixtures provide that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
Static message displays of any ground sign may be comprised of a light emitting diode (LED) board provided the following: 
A.  The location of which is not within the designated historic district; 
B.  At no time shall LED illumination exceed that of the surrounding ambient light; 
C.  Shall contain a default setting that shall display a dark, blank screen should a malfunction occur; and 
D.  Shall not be animated, flash, blink or vary in light intensity. 
2.  Window signs. Total signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing the road frontage, not to exceed 64 square feet. 
3.  Wall signs. One wall sign per road frontage for each tenant no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space frontage shall be permitted. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property, not to exceed 64 square feet. 
4.  Canopy signs. One per establishment not to exceed eight square feet made onto the canopy material. 
5.  Projecting signs. One per building, not to exceed six square feet. Minimum clearance of seven feet six inches (7'6"), measured from the bottom of the sign, is required above any pedestrian way. 
6.  Sidewalk, sandwich or A-frame signs. One per establishment not to exceed four square feet per sign face and three feet in height. Sandwich signs may be placed directly in front of the building, and may not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic. Such signs must be removed between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
7.  Banner signs up to 12 square feet in sign area may be displayed for a period of 30 days per location. There shall be 45 days between the time a banner is removed and another permit is issued. No banner shall be attached to a utility pole or light pole. 
D.  Signs permitted in the PUD, GC and MUBP zoning districts. 
1.  Ground signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot of up to 100 square feet per sign face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed 200 square feet and with a maximum height of ten feet and a minimum setback of ten feet. If the lot contains a principal building or planned center of over 50,000 square feet, the maximum area per sign shall be 120 square feet per face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed 240 square feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
Static message displays of any ground sign may be comprised of a LED board provided the following: 
A.  The location of which is not within the designated historic district; 
B.  At no time shall LED illumination exceed that of the surrounding ambient light; 
C.  Shall contain a default setting that shall display a dark, blank screen should a malfunction occur; and 
D.  Shall not be animated, flash, blink or vary in light intensity. 
2.  Window signs. Total signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing the road frontage, not to exceed 100 square feet. 
3.  Wall signs. Each tenant shall have no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space per elevation. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property, not to exceed 100 square feet. 
4.  Banner signs up to 16 square feet in sign area may be displayed for a period of 30 days per location. There shall be 45 days between the time a banner is removed and another permit is issued. No banner shall be attached to a utility pole or light pole. 
5.  One freestanding sail sign up to 16 square feet in sign area may be displayed per tenant for 30 days. There shall be 45 days between the time a sail sign is removed and another permit is issued. No sail sign shall exceed 16 feet in height measured from ground level at the point where it's based is mounted. 
E.  Signs permitted in the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts. 
1.  Ground signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot up to 100 square feet per sign face with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed 200 square feet, with a maximum height of ten feet and a minimum setback of ten feet. If the lot contains a principal building of at least 65,000 square feet, the maximum area per sign face shall be 150 square feet, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed 300 square feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
2.  Window signs. Total signage shall not exceed 25 percent of the area of windows facing the road frontage, not to exceed 100 square feet. 
3.  Wall signs. Each tenant shall have no greater than one-fourth square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space per elevation. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property, not to exceed 100 square feet. 
4.  Banner signs up to 16 square feet in sign area may be displayed for a period of 30 days per location. There shall be 45 days between the time a banner is removed and another permit is issued. No banner shall be attached to a utility pole or light pole. 
5.  One freestanding sail sign up to 16 square feet in sign area may be displayed per tenant for a period of 30 days. There shall be 45 days between the time a sail sign is removed and another permit is issued. No sail sign shall exceed 16 feet in height measured from ground level at the point where it's based is mounted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1305. - Additional allowable signs. 
A.  The following signs are subject to a permit: 
1.  Subdivision entrance signs. Two, single-faced monument-style signs or one, double-faced monument-style sign shall be permitted at every entrance to any residential subdivision, apartment complex, or other residential development. Such signs shall not exceed eight feet in height and 24 square feet per face. All sign structures shall be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete masonry units or equivalent architectural material. Internal illumination is prohibited. 
2.  Commercial/office/industrial entrance signs. Two single-faced, monument-style signs or one double-faced monument-style sign shall be permitted at every entrance to any commercial, office or industrial planned development. Such signs shall not exceed eight feet in height and 32 square feet per face. All sign structures shall be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete masonry units or equivalent architectural material. Internal illumination is prohibited. 
B.  The following signs are allowed but require no permit: 
1.  Official signs meeting the standards of this article or the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
2.  Any sign not visible from the outside of a structure or to passing members of the public. 
3.  Directional signs, for example; exit/entrance, shipping/receiving or other directional information, not to exceed six square feet per sign face in area and four feet in height. The aggregate square footage of such signs on a single parcel shall not exceed 48 square feet. 
4.  Signs on courtesy benches and trash cans on private property are only permissible in the GC zoning district, and such signs shall not extend beyond nor be larger than the bench or trash can to which they are affixed. 
5.  The aggregate of standard informational signs on property zoned R-15, R-25, RMD and RHD shall not exceed six square feet. 
6.  The aggregate of standard informational signs on property zoned OI, NC, CBD, GC, I-1 and I-2 shall not exceed 20 square feet; except commencing with opening and qualifying for elections until with the final determination of all contests and issues resolved by such elections. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1306. - General standards. 
A.  All signs must be in compliance with the provisions of the Standard Building Code, the zoning ordinance, and the National Electric Codes as adopted. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate within the city historic district any sign, as defined in this article, without first obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the city. 
C.  All signs must be placed on private property, except signs erected on public property by an authorized governmental unit. No sign shall be located closer than ten feet from the back of the curb of a public roadway, nor be located closer than ten feet from the public right-of-way. 
D.  No sign shall be attached to or painted on a telephone pole or power pole, or any tree, rock or other natural object. 
E.  Any sign allowed under this article may contain any commercial or noncommercial message, except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80, nor can they depict sexual conduct or sexually explicit nudity, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-60-3, nor advertise any activity illegal under the laws of Georgia or the U.S., since prohibition of the foregoing is narrowly tailored to serve compelling government interests. 
F.  For the purposes of determining the number of signs, ground signs shall be equal to the number of sign structures. All other non-ground signs shall be considered to be single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in random manner without organized relationship of elements, each such element shall be considered to be a single sign. 
G.  No sign or sign structure (above a height of three feet) shall be maintained within 15 feet of the intersection of the extended right-of-way lines of two streets, of an intersection of a street right-of-way with a railroad right-of-way, or otherwise placed in a location that limits sight distance as determined by the city manager and/or designee. 
H.  No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, window, ventilation, door or hydrant; nor shall any sign or sign structure be attached to a fire escape. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1307. - Prohibited signs. 
    Any sign not expressly permitted is prohibited. The following types of signs, without limitation, are prohibited: 
A.  Signs imitating traffic or emergency signals, or contains words or symbols which might mislead or confuse drivers, or which displays intermittent lights resembling the color, size, shapes, or order of lights customarily used in traffic signals or on emergency vehicles or on law enforcement vehicles. 
B.  Signs or devices employing confusing, distracting or intense illumination when visible from the public right-of-way, intense flashing (strobe type) lights, spot lights, floodlights, flashing or blinking lights, or any type of pulsating or moving light which may foreseeably impair vision, cause glare, or distract a driver. 
C.  Any sign which contains flashing or intermittent red, green, blue, or amber illumination or white flashing strobe lights. (Nothing herein is to be confused with seasonal Christmas lighting). 
D.  Signs that cast direct light onto any residential premises which by intensity, duration, location, or other characteristic is incompatible with the residential use. 
E.  Any sign tacked, posted, marked, painted or otherwise affixed on a roof, fire escape or utility pole. 
F.  Signs which obscure or disfigure any significant architectural element of the building to which it is attached. 
G.  Projecting signs that project above the roofline. 
H.  Signs on a vehicle or trailer and parked with the primary purpose of providing a sign not otherwise allowed. 
I.  Signs that require removal of any trees from the public right-of-way. 
J.  Cold-air/helium-filled devices exceeding five feet at any measurement. 
K.  Pennants and streamers. 
L.  Neon signs. 
M.  Projecting signs. 
N.  Rotating signs. 
O.  Signs not in good repair, including without limitation any sign which is in a state of disassembly or any sign which has its internal lighting exposed to view for more than one week. 
P.  Portable signs of any size moved in and out on a daily basis except as permitted in section 1303. 
Q.  Signs emitting any sound, smoke or vapor. 
R.  Large billboards as referenced in section 1300. 
    In addition, it shall be unlawful to place a sign: in the right-of-way of any public street, road or highway; on any public property or building; on any private property unless the owner has given permission to place such sign on such property; or if the placement of such conflicts with any zoning laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1308. - Procedures. 
A.  Permit. 
1.  A permit is required before a sign may be erected, an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or improvements costing 60 percent or more of the sign's total replacement value are made. All signs using electrical wiring and connections require an electrical permit. 
2.  A sign permit shall be issued by the city when the plans and specifications for the proposed sign or part thereof conform in all respects to this chapter and the building code. Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by all the information required hereunder and such other information as the city may require in the exercise of sound discretion to determine compliance with this chapter. Standardized sign plans may be filed with the city in fulfillment of this requirement, although site plans shall be filed with each application. 
3.  Each sign application shall contain an agreement to indemnify, defend and save the city harmless from all damages, demands or expenses which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
4.  Every sign for which a permit is required shall be plainly marked with the name of the permittee and shall have the number of the permit issued for said sign by the city affixed on the framework of the sign so the information therein shall be readily accessible, legible and durable. 
B.  Application. Applications for permits shall be filed with the city, on city forms. The application shall describe and set forth the following and any additional information pertinent to the application as may be requested by the city to determine compliance: 
1.  The type of the sign; 
2.  A scaled site plan showing the location, and plan describing the construction; 
3.  Scaled elevation drawing showing height and sign face dimensions; 
4.  Square footage, height and use of existing signage; 
5.  The name(s) and address(es) of the sign owner(s); 
6.  Written consent of the property owner or agent, granting permission for the sign; 
7.  The name, address, and phone number of the sign contractor. 
C.  Expiration date. A sign permit shall expire if the sign has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance; provided, however, that one six-month extension of the permit shall be granted if an additional permit fee has been paid prior to the expiration. 
D.  Processing. Upon receipt of a properly completed application, the city shall commence review no later than ten working days after the date of its submission. A copy of any application within the CBD zoning district shall be transmitted to the main street manager for comment and review, who shall have ten days from receipt of the application to submit comments. Review by all city officers shall be completed and the permit shall be issued or denied by the thirtieth day after submission. A permit shall be denied for any noncompliance with this chapter. All applications meeting the standards shall be granted. 
E.  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the fees, as adopted by the city council, have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1309. - Construction and maintenance. 
A.  All signs, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in constant good repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or non-corroding metal, shall periodically be given an appropriate protective coating. The area immediately in front of all signs shall be maintained free of high weeds and debris. 
B.  The city may periodically inspect signs to determine compliance. 
C.  The permittee shall remove discarded or unusable paper, sign faces, parts and debris from the sign or sign structure. 
D.  No permittee shall allow sign(s) to fall into disrepair. On first class mail written notice from the city to the sign owner and property owner, any sign which is in disrepair or vandalized shall be repaired or removed. The city may include a time limit for compliance, of up to 30 consecutive days. An aggrieved party may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk as provided in section 1700, provided that the final determination shall be made within 60 days from the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1310. - Enforcement. 
A.  [Enforcement.] This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city manager and/or designee. 
B.  Removal. 
1.  The city may order the removal of any sign in violation of this chapter. Notice shall be given by first class mail to the permittee and owner of the sign, allowing up to 30 days to comply. 
2.  An aggrieved party may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk as provided in section 1700, provided that the final determination shall be made within 60 days from the notice of appeal. If the sign is not removed within 30 days after the order of removal (or 30 days after the date of decision on any appeal), the city may cause the sign to be removed. 
C.  Removal without notice. The city may cause the removal of any sign in violation, without notice to any party, if: 
1.  The sign is on the public property; or 
2.  The sign poses an immediate threat to life, health or safety. 
D.  Costs of removal. 
1.  Any sign in violation of this chapter is declared a nuisance and the costs of removal shall be at the sign owner's expense. 
2.  Removal without notice shall be without liability to the city, its officials, officers, agents, servants or employees. The permittee and property owner shall be jointly and severally responsible for the costs of removal. If payment for such removal is not made within 60 days after the receipt of a statement, the city may certify the amount thereof for collection to the city attorney. If a sign remains unclaimed for more than 120 days from removal, it may be disposed of per O.C.G.A. §§ 44-14-411 et seq. 
E.  Invalid permit or non-compliant sign. The city may issue a removal order following the procedures of subsection B. above when a permit was improperly issued, issued on the basis of misstatement of fact or fraud, a sign has not been constructed per this chapter or the application or site plans, a sign permit has expired or a sign is otherwise not in compliance with this chapter. If a sign is not removed within ten days following receipt of a removal order the city may institute such legal proceedings hereunder against the property owner, sign owner, permittee, lessee, sign erector or a combination of the above as may be required to effect removal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1311. - Fines and penalties. 
A.  Citations. Any responsible parties may be cited to appear in city court for the violation of this chapter. 
B.  Penalties. Any person or entity convicted of violation may be punished as provided in the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1312. - Inspections. 
    Inspection and enforcement personnel are empowered to enter into or inspect any building, structure, or premises upon which a sign subject to this chapter is located for inspecting the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1313. - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Signs which do not comply with this chapter and were legally placed before the effective date of this chapter shall become nonconforming. However, signs which were illegally erected, established or maintained with respect to the applicable requirements of prior ordinances shall be removed or brought into compliance within 30 days from the effective date of this chapter. Upon failure to comply with this chapter, the city may cause the removal of any nonconforming sign at the expense of the owner, per section 1310. 
B.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. Provided, however, if a nonconforming sign is damaged by an act of God, the owner may repair the sign but shall make the sign conforming if physically possible. If not, the sign may be repaired if the repair does not extend the natural life of the sign as it existed before the damage occurred. 
C.  Minor maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs and neon tubing shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with this chapter. 
D.  Each sign which exists at the effective date of this chapter shall be registered by its owner with the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1314. - Appeals and variances. 
A.  Procedure upon denial. The applicant shall be given written notice stating the reasons. An applicant may appeal per section 1700, provided that a final decision on any such appeal shall be made, put in writing with reasons stated, and served by first class mail on the appellant within 60 days of the notice of appeal. 
B.  Height or setback variances. 
1.  Height or setback variances may be granted by the procedures in article XV, provided that any final decision on a variance application shall be reached no later than 60 days after application for variance was received, and provided further that the variance decision shall be reduced to writing. Variances must meet all criteria and standards in article XV, and shall be limited to the following: 
a.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the street would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
i.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; 
ii.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
iii.  The variance would not create a safety hazard. 
2.  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater size or number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. No variance shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the property. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1315. - Temporary residential subdivision signs. 
    Residential lot developers and residential lot development companies may apply for a permit to put up a temporary sign at the entrance of residential subdivisions if there are currently lots for sale in the subdivision. The temporary sign must be displayed within 100 feet of the entrance of the subdivision on private property or common area of the subdivision. Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property. The temporary signs are limited to one per public road entrance to the subdivision and shall only be allowed for a maximum of three years or until lots are sold, whichever is less. The temporary sign may be in the form of a simple pole sign as shown in Exhibit "A" to Ord. No. 2017-20, with the maximum dimensions of four feet by six feet and a maximum height of eight feet from the ground. 
(Ord. No. 2017-20, § 1, 9-19-2017) 
ARTICLE XIV. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES AND REMEDIES 

Sec. 1400. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
    The city manager is directed, on behalf of the mayor and council, to administer and enforce this ordinance. Such shall include the right to order, in writing, the remedy of any condition found in violation of this ordinance, and the right to bring legal action in all courts of competent jurisdiction to ensure compliance with its provisions, including injunction, mandamus, abatement or other appropriate action or proceeding. 
    The powers and duties of the city manager (and designee(s)) include: 
1.  Examining applications pertaining to the use of land, or structures and approving the application when they conform to this ordinance. 
2.  Authorizing issuance of all building permits and certificates of occupancy, and keeping permanent records thereof. 
3.  Conducting inspections of structures and uses to determine compliance with this ordinance. 
4.  Maintaining permanent and current records of the zoning ordinance including maps and amendments. 
5.  If the city manager shall find this ordinance is being violated, he shall notify in writing the violator, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal uses; removal of illegal structures or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1401. - Building permit. 
    No structure shall be erected, moved, added to or structurally altered at a cost exceeding $500.00, without a building permit issued by the city manager. No building permit shall be issued except per this ordinance, and adopted building codes. All applications for land disturbance permits, and building permits for uses other than one-family and duplex dwellings, shall be accompanied by plans, drawn to scale, showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the sizes and the locations on the lot of any existing buildings or structures, the shape, size, height, use and the location on the lot of the building or structure and such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance. These applications and plans shall conform to the requirements of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1402. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
    A certificate of occupancy is required prior to the use or occupancy of: 
1.  Any lot or change in the use thereof. 
2.  A structure hereafter erected or a change in the use of an existing structure. 
3.  A change in any lawful nonconforming use. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the lot or structure complies with this ordinance. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file at city hall and a copy shall be furnished, on request, to any person having an interest in the structure or land involved. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1403. - Fees. 
    The mayor and council shall establish a schedule of fees and a collection procedure for building permits, certificates of occupancy, appeals, and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. The schedule shall be available in city hall and may be amended by the mayor and council, from time to time, to cover the costs of administration of this ordinance. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid in full, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1404. - Construction progress. 
    If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of issuance of the building permit, the permit becomes invalid. The permit may be reissued only upon completion of the application procedure outlined in sections 1401 and 1402. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1405. - Penalties for violation. 
    Any person or entity convicted of violating this ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, and/or by confinement not to exceed 60 days, for each violation of this ordinance. Every day that a violation continues is a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE XV. - VARIANCES AND CONDITIONAL USES 

Sec. 1500. - Procedure. 
1.  Hearings by the planning commission shall be scheduled on receipt of an application for variance or conditional use. 
2.  A planning commission member or a secretary provided by the mayor and council shall keep minutes of the proceedings, showing the action taken on each question, which shall be filed in city hall. 
3.  All applications under this article XV, including all required fees, attachments and supplemental information, must be submitted in complete and proper form at least 30 days prior to the next planning commission meeting before the hearing can occur. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1501. - Hearings. 
    The planning commission shall have the following powers: 
1.  To recommend variances as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the zoning ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial justice done. Such variances may be granted only upon a finding by the mayor and council that: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions of the property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of the ordinance to this property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to this property; 
d.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; 
e.  A variance, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this ordinance; 
f.  The zoning proposal is consistent with construction and design standards and criteria adopted by the city; 
g.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings, or structures which is not permitted by right or by conditional use in the district; 
h.  The variance is the minimum variance that will make possible an economically viable use of the land, building, or structure; and 
i.  The variance is not for a use of land or buildings or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance or to change the density of a use allowed by the zoning ordinance or to grant a development right or standard in conflict with a condition of zoning imposed by the mayor and council. 
2.  To recommend, in specific cases, conditional uses after a public hearing and determining the conditional use will not be contrary to the public interest and determining that the conditional use: 
a.  Will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of the environment or other property in the vicinity nor diminish and impair property values within the surrounding neighborhood; 
b.  Will not increase expenditures in relation to cost of serving neighboring properties or maintaining infrastructure; 
c.  Will not impede the normal and orderly development of surrounding property for uses predominant in the area; and 
d.  Has a location and character consistent with a desirable pattern of development. 
3.  The following evidence must be satisfactorily demonstrated before the four determinations discussed above can be made: 
a.  Evidence of reduction of adverse environmental impacts to acceptable levels; 
b.  Evidence that traffic will not be substantially hindered or endangered; 
c.  Evidence that parking and loading will be adequate; 
d.  Evidence that public facilities and utilities are capable of serving the proposed use; 
e.  Evidence that the use will not cause a damaging volume of commercial use in a stable neighborhood which would lead to decreasing property values, and/or that this use would not lead to additional requests that would expand these problems; 
f.  Evidence that the proposed use would not lead to congestion, noise or traffic hazards; 
g.  Evidence that the use conforms to the comprehensive land use plan; 
h.  Evidence that the use would not have a domino effect creating a "wedge" for further rapid growth beyond that contemplated by the comprehensive land use plan. 
4.  Additional conditional use permit criteria. No application for a conditional use permit shall be granted by the mayor and council unless it is determined that in addition to meeting the requirements contained within applicable use standards and the zoning district in which the conditional use permit is located, satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following factors, all of which are applicable to each application: 
a.  Adequacy of the size of the site for the use contemplated and whether adequate land area is available for the proposed conditional use; 
b.  Compatibility with adjacent properties and with other properties in the same zoning district; 
c.  Adequacy of the public street on which the use is proposed to be located and whether or not there is sufficient traffic-carrying capacity for the use proposed; 
d.  Ingress and egress to the subject property and to all proposed buildings, structures, and uses thereon, with particular reference to pedestrian and automotive safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, and access in the event of fire or other emergency; 
e.  Whether the proposed use will create unreasonable adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration generated by the proposed use; 
f.  Whether the proposed use will create unreasonable adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the hours of operation of the proposed conditional use; 
g.  Whether the proposed use will create unreasonable adverse impacts upon any adjoining land use by reason of the manner of operation of the proposed use; 
h.  Whether there is adequate provision of refuse and service areas; 
i.  Whether the length of time for which the conditional use permit is granted should be limited in duration; 
j.  Whether the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings are appropriate in relation to the size of the subject property and in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings; 
k.  Whether the proposed plan will adversely affect historic buildings, sites, districts, or archaeological resources; and 
l.  Whether the proposed plan will have an unreasonable adverse impact on natural resources or environmentally sensitive areas, including floodplains, wetlands, prime plant or animal habitat, or other similar features of unique value to the character of the city. 
5.  In approving a conditional use or variance, the mayor and council may designate such conditions in connection therewith as will, in its opinion, assure that the proposed use will conform to the requirements and spirit of this ordinance. 
6.  If at any time after a conditional use or variance has been issued, the mayor and council finds that the conditions imposed and agreements made have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder, the variance or conditional use shall be terminated and such use discontinued. If a variance or conditional use permit is terminated for any reason, it may be reinstated only after a public hearing for a new application, and approval thereof. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1502. - Variances not allowed. 
    No variance may be granted for a condition of zoning required by the mayor and council in approving a rezoning application; a use of land or building or structure that is prohibited by this ordinance; or permit a use which would result in a greater density of development on a property than would otherwise be allowed without a variance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1503. - Required public hearings in hearing variances and conditional uses. 
a.  Before the planning commission or the mayor and council acts upon an application for a variance or conditional use, they shall each hold a public hearing thereon. 
b.  The notice of the date, time and place of such hearing shall be published between 15 and 45 days prior to the hearings in the official organ of the county or counties where the subject property is located. 
c.  In addition, the city shall between 15 and 45 days prior to the hearings cause to be erected in a conspicuous place on the property involved, a sign, which shall contain information about the variance or conditional use applied for and the date, time and place of hearings. 
d.  At the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. 
e.  All public hearings may be continued to another meeting date and for additional meeting dates by an announcement at the regularly scheduled hearing. 
f.  That the aforementioned sign be of such dimensions (preferably 24" x 36" or larger) and type size so as to promote visibility, and that the sign be two-faced and perpendicular to the roadway, if practical, to promote visibility. The sign shall be placed at the property line. 
g.  The city shall, at least seven days before the hearing, attempt in good faith to complete notification of all neighboring (including parcels separated by a roadway) property owners of the nature of the application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The letter shall set forth the specific change requested, tracking the language of the legal advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1504. - Applications and reapplications. 
    Request for conditional use or variance shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Initiation of amendments. A proposed conditional use or variance may be initiated by the mayor and council, or by application filed by the owner(s) of the property, provided, however, that action shall not be initiated for a conditional use or variance affecting the same parcel or parcels of property or any part thereof, and requesting any conditional use or variance, by a property owner or owners more than once every 12 months. 
2.  Application procedure. Application forms for conditional use or variance requests shall be obtained from the city manager. Completed forms, together with an application fee plus any additional information the applicant feels to be pertinent, will be filed with the city manager. Any communication purporting to be an application for a conditional use or variance shall be regarded as a mere notice to seek relief until it is made in the form required. 
3.  Applications, including all required fees, attachments and supplemental information, must be submitted in proper form at least 30 days prior to a planning commission hearing to be heard at that hearing. 
4.  The application form provided by the city manager shall require that the applicant set forth a written justification for the requested conditional use or variance and address all items set forth in section 1501. 
5.  The application form shall require that the applicant state the details of the exact conditional use or variance requested. 
6.  Applications for a conditional use or variance shall include: 
A.  A written legal description of the property which is the subject of the request, including the current tax parcel number. 
B.  Three copies of a plat of the subject property drawn to scale, prepared and sealed by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid, showing the following information: 
1.  North arrow, land lot and district. 
2.  Property lines with dimensions and angles of turns. 
3.  Adjoining streets with present right-of-way and pavement widths. 
4.  Location of existing structures. 
5.  Proposed conditional use or variance. 
C.  An application for conditional use or variance shall be accompanied by such other plans, elevations or additional information as the city manager and this ordinance may require, showing the proposed conditional use or variance and its impact on natural and built systems. Additional information may include without limitation traffic studies, utility studies, and drainage studies. At a minimum the following shall be submitted: 
1.  Residential zoning district conditional use or variance. 
a)  Show how the proposed property is to be subdivided including proposed streets. 
b)  List how utilities are to be provided including but not limited to water, sewer, well, septic tank. 
c)  State minimum lot size and total number of lots proposed. 
d)  State minimum house size proposed. 
2.  Commercial or non-residential and multi-family zoning district conditional use or variance. 
a)  Show proposed layout of building locations with driveway and parking lots. 
b)  Show proposed curb cuts or existing driveway/roadways. 
c)  Show all required buffers and building set back lines. 
d)  List how utilities are to be provided including but not limited to water, sewer, well, septic tank. 
e)  State the density per acre and the square feet per acre area of total buildings. 
7.  All applications shall include the notarized signature of the applicant and, if the applicant is not the current property owner, such application shall include the notarized authorization from the property owner for the requested conditional use or variance. 
8.  Any taxes, utilities and fees outstanding known to the city shall be paid prior acceptance of an application for processing. 
    If an application for a conditional use or variance is denied by the mayor and council, a reapplication for such conditional use or variance may not be made earlier than 12 months from the date of the original application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1505. - Conflict of interest. 
    The application form for a variance or conditional use shall require the applicant to list all individuals or business entities which have any ownership interest in the property affected by the proposal. In addition, the application shall require the applicant to list any of the mayor and council members and/or planning commission members, if any, to whom the applicant has made a campaign contribution or gift aggregating $250.00 or more within two years prior to the date of filing the subject application. This form shall require the applicant to list the name(s) of the recipient of the gift or campaign contribution, if any, the dollar amount of each gift or campaign contribution, the date of the contribution or gift, and a description of any gifts which fall within the disclosure requirements. 
    The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the application materials to each member of the mayor and council and the planning commission, with the requirement that each member of the mayor and council and the planning commission review the information presented, provide supplemental information in writing as required below, and return same to the city clerk for filing in the city's records prior to the time that any consideration is given to the subject request. 
    The said transmittal by the city clerk shall require that each member of the mayor and council and the planning commission state whether he or any member of his family (spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter) has an ownership interest in the property affected by the proposal, or a financial interest of ten percent or more in any business entity which has an ownership interest in the property to be considered. In the event such an interest exists, the transmittal from the city clerk shall require explicit detail from the member of the mayor and council or the planning commission about the nature and the extent of that interest. No member of the planning commission or mayor and council with such an interest shall participate or vote in a matter in which he had any pecuniary or special interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1506. - Public hearing procedure and policies. 
    Public hearings, whether conducted by mayor and council or planning commission, shall be conducted per the following procedures: 
1.  Minutes of the meeting will be taken by the secretary of the mayor and council or planning commission. Should a complete transcript of the meeting be requested, it will be provided at the expense of the person making the request. 
2.  The public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer. The presiding officer shall explain the meeting procedures. Speakers shall speak only from the podium, shall address only the merits of the pending application, and shall address remarks only to the planning commission or mayor and council. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker, any discussion irrelevant to the pending application, or any other inappropriate behavior. No debate or argument between speakers or with commission or council members will be allowed. Speakers shall not repeat previous comments, as repetition deprives other speakers of valuable time to provide new information. The presiding officer or his/her designee shall refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after once being cautioned, continues to violate any section of this ordinance. Speakers should provide supporting documentation prior to the date of the hearing. Speakers shall sign the speaker list prior to the hearing 
3.  Staff shall then present the application and its supporting documents, along with an analysis of the applicable standards and criteria. 
4.  If the subject of the hearing is a proposal initiated by a petitioner other than the mayor and council, the petitioner or the petitioner's agent shall be recognized first and shall at least have ten minutes but no more than 15 minutes to present the request. Thereafter, all individuals who so desire shall be permitted to speak in favor of the proposal. Persons other than the applicant who support the application are allowed to speak in support of the pending application for no more than two minutes each, and are also subject to the 15-minute combined total time limit. 
5.  After the proponents speak in accordance with the above paragraph, opponents who wish to speak shall have an equal opportunity of at least ten minutes but no more than 15 minutes. It is suggested that supporters and opponents each obtain 1 spokesperson to present their views. No individual except the applicant, or an attorney, or a designated representative of a group, shall speak longer than two minutes or more than one time. 
6.  When any person wishes to speak at a public hearing, he shall raise his hand and, after being recognized by the presiding officer, shall stand and give his name and address and make any comment appropriate to the proposal. 
7.  All speakers are urged to make their comments brief and to avoid repeating others' comments. 
8.  The applicant shall, using any reserved time, have an opportunity, after all comments in opposition have been made, to make summary remarks concerning the proposal. 
9.  Thereafter, the presiding officer shall announce that the public hearing for the proposal is closed. The planning commission shall then consider the proposal. At the close of the public hearing before the mayor and council, that body shall consider the proposal. Each body shall review the record, consider the criteria, and vote on the application. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1507. - Planning commission public hearing and action. 
1.  The planning commission shall consider a recommendation to the mayor and council with respect to each application. 
2.  The planning commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may recommend approval, denial, referral, withdrawal, reduction of the land area for which the application is made, or approval with the imposition of conditions. 
3.  The planning commission shall submit its recommendation or report of no recommendation on an application for a proposal to the mayor and council prior to the scheduled public hearing in which the mayor and council will consider the application. 
4.  If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation or report within 45 days of its public hearing, the planning commission's recommendation shall be deemed to be one of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1508. - Mayor and council public hearing and action. 
1.  Before taking action on the variance or conditional use proposal and after receipt of the planning commission's recommendations or reports thereon, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing. 
2.  So that the purpose of this ordinance will be served and so that health, public safety and general welfare will be secured, the mayor and council in its decision on the application may, in its legislative discretion, approve or deny the application as submitted, defer a decision until a specified meeting date, require the applicant to file a site plan or other plans regarding the application and defer action to a later meeting date, or allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, if requested. 
3.  The withdrawal shall not be subject to the 12-month prohibition on re-filing. 
4.  The mayor and council may also require that the land area for such application be reduced, or that conditions be added or deleted, as the mayor and council deems appropriate. 
5.  It is the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof regarding his application under this article. 
6.  In approving a variance or conditional use request, the mayor and council may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the purposes of the zoning district(s) involved and to further the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. Such conditions include but are not limited to: setback requirements from any lot line; specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; driveway curb cut restrictions; restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted; maximum building size; special drainage or erosion provisions; landscaping or planted area which may include the location, type and maintenance of plant materials; fences, walls, berms, or other buffer provisions or protective measures; preservation of existing trees or other vegetation; special measures to alleviate undesirable views, glare, noise, dust or odor; permitted hours of operation; architectural style; a requirement that the existing building(s) be retained; a requirement that the applicant must build according to the site plans as adopted; a limitation on exterior modifications of existing buildings; or any other requirement that the mayor and council may deem appropriate and necessary as a condition of the conditional use permit or variance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE XVI. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 1600. - Authority. 
    This ordinance, including the zoning map of the city, may be amended from time to time by the mayor and council as herein specified, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning commission for public hearing review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 45 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 45-day period, it shall be deemed to have recommended the proposed amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1601. - Requirements for change. 
    When the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or good zoning practice justify such action, and after the required review and report by the planning commission, the mayor and council may undertake the necessary steps to amend the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1602. - Application for amendments. 
    Request to amend the zoning ordinance shall be processed in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Initiation of amendments. A proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance may be initiated by the mayor and council, or by application filed by the owner(s) of the property proposed to be changed, provided, however, that action shall not be initiated for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel or parcels of property or any part thereof, and requesting any change in zoning district classification, by a property owner or owners more than once every 12 months. 
2.  Application procedure. Application forms for amendment requests shall be obtained from the city manager. Completed forms, together with an application fee plus any additional information the applicant feels to be pertinent, will be filed with the city manager. Any communication purporting to be an application for an amendment shall be regarded as a mere notice to seek relief until it is made in the form required. 
3.  Applications for amendments, including all required fees, attachments and supplemental information, must be submitted in proper form at least 30 days prior to a planning commission hearing to be heard at that hearing. 
4.  The amendment application form provided by the city manager shall require that the applicant set forth a written justification for the requested zoning amendment. 
5.  The application form shall require that the applicant state the exact language of any zoning ordinance text amendment requested, and/or the specific zoning ordinance map amendment being requested. 
6.  Applications for a zoning ordinance map amendment shall include: 
A.  A written legal description of the property which is the subject of the rezoning request, including the current tax parcel number. 
B.  Three copies of a plat of the subject property drawn to scale, prepared and sealed by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid, showing the following information: 
1.  North arrow, land lot and district. 
2.  Property lines with dimensions and angles of turns. 
3.  Adjoining streets with present right-of-way and pavement widths. 
4.  Location of existing structures. 
5.  Present and proposed zoning. 
C.  An application for an amendment to rezone shall be accompanied by such other plans, elevations or additional information as the city manager and this ordinance may require, showing the proposed development and its impact on natural and built systems. Additional information may include without limitation traffic studies, utility studies, and drainage studies. At a minimum the following shall be submitted: 
1.  Residential zoning district proposals. 
a)  Show how the proposed property is to be subdivided including proposed streets. 
b)  List how utilities are to be provided including but not limited to water, sewer, well, septic tank. 
c)  State minimum lot size and total number of lots proposed. 
d)  State minimum house size proposed. 
2.  Commercial or non-residential and multi-family zoning district proposals. 
a)  Show proposed layout of building locations with driveway and parking lots. 
b)  Show proposed curb cuts or existing driveway/roadways. 
c)  Show all required buffers and building set back lines. 
d)  List how utilities are to be provided including but not limited to water, sewer, well, septic tank. 
e)  State the density per acre and the square feet per acre area of total buildings. 
7.  All applications shall include the notarized signature of the applicant and, in the case of a requested zoning map amendment, if the applicant is not the current property owner, such application shall include the notarized authorization from the property owner for the requested rezoning. 
8.  Any taxes, utilities and fees outstanding known to the city shall be paid prior acceptance of an application for processing. 
9.  The application for amendment form furnished by the city manager shall require the applicant to list all individuals or business entities which have any ownership interest in the property affected by the proposed rezoning. In addition, the application shall require the applicant to list any of the mayor and council members and/or planning commission member, if any, to whom the applicant has made a campaign contribution or gift aggregating $250.00 or more within two years prior to the date of filing the application for rezoning. This form shall require the applicant to list the name(s) of the recipient of the gill or campaign contribution, if any, the dollar amount of each gift or campaign contribution, the date of the contribution or gift, and a description of any gifts which fall within the disclosure requirements. 
10.  The city clerk shall transmit a copy of the application materials to each member of the mayor and council and the planning commission, with the requirement that each member of the mayor and council and the planning commission review the information presented, provide supplemental information in writing as required below, and return same to the city clerk for filing in the zoning records prior to the time that any consideration is given to the rezoning request. 
11.  The said transmittal by the city clerk shall require that each member of the mayor and council and the planning commission state whether he or any member of his family (including spouse, mother, father, brother, sister, son or daughter) has an ownership interest in the property affected by the proposed rezoning, or a financial interest of ten percent or more in any business entity which has an ownership interest in the property to be considered for rezoning. In the event such an interest exists, the transmittal from the city clerk shall require explicit detail from the member of the mayor and council or the planning commission about the nature an [or] extent of that interest. No member of the planning commission or mayor and council shall participate or vote in a matter in which he has any pecuniary or special interest. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1603. - Notice. 
1.  Before making a recommendation on any proposed amendment to this ordinance, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing, and the mayor and council shall also hold a hearing prior to their decision. 
2.  Official notice shall be given in the legal organ in the county or counties where the subject parcel is located, 15 to 45 days prior to the hearings, which shall include the hour, time, place, and date of the hearing, the location of the property, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification. 
3.  The city shall post a sign 15 to 45 days prior to the hearings in a conspicuous place on the property which shall include the hour, time, place, and date of the hearing, the location of the property, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification. 
4.  That the aforementioned sign be of such dimensions (preferably 24" x 36" or larger) and type size so as to promote visibility, and that the sign be two-faced and perpendicular to the roadway, if practical, to promote visibility. The sign shall be placed at the property line. 
5.  The city shall, at least seven days before the hearing, attempt in good faith to complete notification of all neighboring (including parcels separated by a roadway) property owners of the nature of the application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. The letter shall set forth the specific change requested, tracking the language of the legal advertisement. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1604. - Continuances. 
    All zoning public hearings may be continued to another meeting date and for additional meeting date(s) by an announcement at the originally scheduled hearing date, time and location. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1605. - Public hearing procedures. 
    Whenever a public hearing is required by this ordinance or by state law, such public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures of section 1507, public hearing procedure and policies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1606. - Planning commission recommendation or report. 
1.  The planning commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may make any of the following recommendations with respect to an application: approval, denial, referral, withdrawal, reduction of the land area for which the application is made, change of the zoning district requested, or imposition of conditions. 
2.  If no recommendation is made by the planning commission, then it shall report to the mayor and council that it makes no recommendation on the application. 
3.  The planning commission shall submit its recommendation or report of no recommendation on an application for a proposal to the mayor and council prior to the scheduled public hearing in which the mayor and council will consider the application. 
4.  If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation or report within 45 days of its public hearing, the planning commission's recommendation shall be deemed to be one of approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1607. - Mayor and council action. 
1.  Following the recommendation by the planning commission, all papers and data pertinent to the application, plus the minutes, shall be transmitted to the mayor and council for final action. 
2.  Before taking action on the proposal and after receipt of the planning commission recommendations or reports thereon, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. 
3.  So that the purpose of this ordinance will be served and so that health, public safety and general welfare will be secured, the mayor and council in its decision on the application may, in its legislative discretion, approve or deny the application as submitted, defer a decision until a specified meeting date, require the applicant to file a site plan or other plans regarding the application and defer action to a later meeting date, or allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, if requested. 
4.  Such a permitted withdrawal shall not be subject to the 12-month prohibition on re-filing. 
5.  The mayor and council may also require that the land area for such application be reduced, or that conditions be added or deleted, or a zoning decision other than requested be made, as the mayor and council deem appropriate. 
6.  In adopting an amendment to the zoning map, the mayor and council may impose special conditions which it deems necessary in order to make the requested action acceptable and consistent with the purpose of the zoning district(s) involved and to further the goals and objectives of the comprehensive plan. 
7.  Such conditions include but are not limited to: setback requirements from any lot line; specified or prohibited locations for buildings, parking, loading or storage areas or other land uses; driveway curb cut restrictions; restrictions as to what land uses or activities shall be permitted; maximum building heights or other dimensions; special drainage or erosion provisions; landscaping or planted area which may include the location, type and maintenance of plant materials; fences, walls, berms, or other buffering provisions or protective measures; preservation of existing trees or other vegetation; special measures to alleviate undesirable views, light, glare, noise, dust or odor; permitted hours of operation; architectural style; a requirement that the existing building(s) be retained; a requirement that builders must build according to the site plans as adopted; a limitation on exterior modifications of existing buildings; or any other requirement that the mayor and council may deem appropriate and necessary as a condition of rezoning. Such conditions: 
a.  Shall be included in the motion approving the amendment for adoption; 
b.  Shall be required of the property owner and all subsequent occupants and owners as a condition of their use of the property for the approved rezoning; and 
c.  Shall be enforced by the city manager in the same manner as any other provision of this zoning ordinance. 
d.  Should the conditions cease to be met, the approval may be revoked after a public hearing conducted with the same notice and procedures as the original approval process. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1608. - Standards of review. 
    The following standards governing the exercise of the city's zoning power are to be considered by the mayor and council and the planning commission in balancing the interest of the public health, safety, morality or general welfare against the unrestricted use of property: 
1.  The existing land use pattern; 
2.  The possible creation of an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts; 
3.  The population density pattern and possible increase or over-taxing of the load on public facilities including, but not limited to, school, utilities, and streets; 
4.  The costs to the city and other governmental entities in providing, improving, increasing or maintaining public utilities, schools, streets, law enforcement, fire protection and other public services; 
5.  The possible impact on the environment, including, but not limited to drainage, soil erosion and sedimentation, flooding, air quality and water quality; 
6.  Whether the proposed zoning amendment will allow uses which will be a detriment to the value of adjacent property in accordance with existing regulations; 
7.  Whether there are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used and developed in accordance with the existing regulations; 
8.  The aesthetic effect of the existing and proposed use of the property as it relates to the surrounding area; 
9.  The extent to which the proposed zoning amendment is consistent with the comprehensive land use plan; 
10.  The possible effects of the proposed zoning amendment on the character of the zoning district, a particular piece of property, neighborhood, a particular area or the community as a whole; 
11.  The relationship that the proposed zoning amendment bears to the purpose of the overall zoning scheme, with due consideration given to whether or not the proposed zoning change will carry out the purposes of these zoning regulations; 
12.  Any application for a zoning map amendment which does not contain a specific site plan carries a rebuttable presumption that such rezoning shall adversely affect the zoning scheme; 
13.  The consideration of the preservation of the integrity of residential neighborhoods shall be considered to carry great weight; 
14.  In those instances in which property fronts on a major thoroughfare and also adjoins an established residential neighborhood, the factor of preservation in the residential neighborhood shall be considered to carry great weight; 
15.  Whether the property affected by the zoning decision has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; and 
16.  Whether other conditions exist that affect the use and development of the property in question and support either approval or denial of the zoning action. 
    After receiving the application for amendment, the report and recommendation of the planning commission, and other pertinent information, the mayor and council shall apply the evidence to the standards of review in making its decision. It will not be required that the planning commission or the mayor and council consider criteria contained in the standards of review which are inapplicable. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that the proposed zoning amendment promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. In ruling on any application in which the petitioner has brought a challenge to the existing zoning classification, the mayor and council may impose upon said property any appropriate conditions, which might be consistent with the considerations contained above. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1609. - Changes in the zoning text or zoning map. 
    Following final action by the mayor and council, any necessary changes shall be timely made in the zoning text and/or zoning map. A written record of the type and date of such change shall be maintained by the city clerk. The type and date of change to the map shall be timely marked directly on the map, and initialed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE XVII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1700. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
1.  Appeals to the mayor and council may be taken by any person aggrieved by any employee of the city or by any decision of the city manager when it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by such employee or the city manager in the enforcement of this zoning ordinance. 
2.  Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision or interpretation has been either made in writing or by statements made at a public hearing of which a record will be provided in the minutes of the hearing by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
3.  The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the mayor and council all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
4.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city manager certifies to the mayor and council that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than the mayor and council or by a restraining order granted by a court of record on application, and notice to the city manager for good cause shown. 
5.  Upon making a decision upon the consideration of appeal, the mayor and council may, in conformity with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, reverse decisions or determinations from which the appeal is taken and may issue or revoke or direct the issuance or revocation of a building or other permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1701. - Appeals of actions by the mayor and council. 
    Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the mayor and council may appeal to the superior court via certiorari. Such shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the mayor and council. Upon failure to obtain the writ of certiorari within 30 days, the decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1702. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whenever the regulations of this zoning ordinance require a greater lot width or depth or size of yards, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants, the requirements of this zoning ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute or covenants shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1703. - Severability. 
    In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this zoning ordinance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this zoning ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The mayor and council hereby declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of this zoning ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1704. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this zoning ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1705. - No prejudice to pending applications. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, this zoning ordinance shall not in any way prejudice or affect any pending application for rezoning before the planning commission or the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1706. - No legality to nonconforming uses. 
    Nothing contained in this zoning ordinance shall be considered to approve or give legality to any nonconforming use which has been discontinued more than one year within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1707. - Effective date for Social Circle. 
    This ordinance shall take effect, and shall be in force from and after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1708. - Effective date. 
    This zoning ordinance, the standards, and the policies and procedures, shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption on July 29, 2008, the public welfare demanding it. Read and approved May 19, 2009, after a public hearing before the city planning commission on May 19, 2009 and a public hearing before the mayor and council on May 19, 2009. 
(Ord. No. 2017-11, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Appendix B - SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the subdivision ordinance of the city, Ordinance No. 2017-13, as adopted by the city council on June 20, 2017. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1.1. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall officially be known, cited, and referred to as the Subdivision Ordinance for Social Circle, Georgia (hereinafter "this ordinance"). 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.2. - Policy. 
    It is declared to be the policy of the municipality to consider the subdivision of land and the subsequent development of the subdivided plat as subject to the control of the city (hereafter the "city") pursuant to the comprehensive plan of the city for the orderly, planned, efficient, and economical development of the city. 
    Land to be subdivided shall be of such character that it can be used safely for building purposes without danger to health or peril from fire, flood, or other menace, and land shall not be subdivided until adequate public facilities and improvements exist and proper provision has been made for drainage, water, sewerage, and capital improvements such as schools, parks, recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and improvements. 
    The existing and proposed public improvements shall conform to and be properly shown in the comprehensive plan, official map, and the capital budget and program of the city, and it is intended that this ordinance shall supplement and facilitate the enforcement of the provisions and standards contained in building and housing codes, zoning ordinances, the comprehensive plan, official map and land use plan, and the capital budget and program of the city. 
    Land that has been subdivided prior to the effective date of this ordinance should, whenever possible, be brought within the scope of this ordinance to further the purposes of ordinance(s) identified in section 1.3 of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.3. - Purposes. 
    This ordinance is adopted for the following purposes: 
1.  To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the city. 
2.  To guide the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the comprehensive plan. 
3.  To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to secure safety from fire, flood, and other dangers, and to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue congestion of population. 
4.  To protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the city and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development of the community through appropriate growth management techniques assuring the timing and sequencing of development, promotion of infill development in existing neighborhoods and non-residential areas with adequate public facilities, to assure proper urban form and open space separation of urban areas, and to protect environmentally critical areas and areas premature for urban development. 
5.  To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the city and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land, and to minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings. 
6.  To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide adequate and efficient transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public requirements and facilities. 
7.  To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of traffic throughout the city, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and highways and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to provide for the proposed location and width of streets and building lines. 
8.  To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for subdivisions in order to further the orderly layout and use of land, and to ensure proper legal descriptions and monumenting of subdivided land. 
9.  To ensure that public facilities and services are available concurrent with development and will have a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision and that the city will be required to bear no more than its fair share of the cost of providing the facilities and services through requiring the developer to pay fees, furnish land, or establish mitigation measure to ensure that the development provides its fair share of capital facilities needs generated by the development. 
10.  To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the wise use and management of natural resources throughout the city in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty of the community and the value of the land. 
11.  To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the city and to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural features. 
12.  To provide for open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land; including the use of average density in providing for minimum width and area of lots, while preserving the density of development as established in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
13.  To ensure that land is subdivided only when subdivision is necessary to provide for uses of land for which market demand exists and which are in the public interest. 
14.  To remedy the problems associated with inappropriately subdivided lands, including premature subdivision, excess subdivision, partial or incomplete subdivision, and scattered and low-grade subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.4. - Authority. 
1.  This ordinance is adopted in accordance with, and under the power of, the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia (Article XI, Section II, Paragraphs I and IV). The mayor and council are vested with the authority to review, approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications of the subdivision of land, including sketch, preliminary, and final plats. The mayor and council may grant a variance from this ordinance pursuant to the provisions of section 1.13 of this ordinance. 
2.  By the same authority, the mayor and council are vested with authority to review, approve and disapprove plats of land subdivision prior to the recording of said plats in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Walton County, Georgia, or the office of the clerk of superior court of Newton County; as appropriate, within the incorporated sections of Social Circle, Georgia, which show lots, blocks or building sites with or without new streets. 
3.  By the same authority, the mayor and council are vested with the authority to review, approve or disapprove the development of a platted subdivision of land already recorded in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of Walton County or the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County as appropriate, if said plat was recorded after November 1971, without prior approval of the mayor and council and more than 50 percent of the platted lots have not been sold to individual owners for the purpose of providing residence for the owner, provided that any review, approval or disapproval shall concern only the lots yet to be sold to individual owners. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.5. - Jurisdiction. 
1.  This ordinance applies to all subdivision of land, as defined under subdivision in section 2.2 of this ordinance, located within the corporate limits of the city. 
2.  No land may be subdivided through the use of any legal description other than with reference to a plat approved by the mayor and council in accordance with this ordinance. 
3.  The mayor and council have the authority to review and approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the sale, lease, or development of lands subdivided prior to or following the effective date of this ordinance as follows: 
a.  The plat of the subdivided land was recorded without the prior approval of the city mayor and council whether or not prior approval was required at the time the land was subdivided and the plat contains contiguous lots in common ownership where one or more lots are undeveloped, whether the lots are owned by the original subdivider or an immediate or remote grantee from the original subdivider; 
b.  The plat of the subdivided land has been of record in such appropriate clerk of the superior court office for more than five years, was not approved after the effective date of this ordinance and contains contiguous lots in common ownership where one or more of the contiguous lots are undeveloped, whether the lots are owned by the original subdivider or an immediate or remote grantee from the original subdivider; 
c.  The plat has been of record in such appropriate clerk of superior courts office for more than five years, was approved after the effective date of this ordinance and contains contiguous lots in common ownership where one or more of the contiguous lots is undeveloped and one or more is nonconforming under the zoning ordinance, whether the lots are owned by the original subdivider or an immediate or remote grantee from the original subdivider; 
4.  No land described in this section 1.5 of this ordinance shall be subdivided or sold, leased, transferred or developed until each of the following conditions has occurred in accordance with this ordinance: 
a.  The subdivider or his agent has submitted a conforming sketch plat of the subdivision to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the mayor and council; 
b.  The subdivider or his agent has obtained approval of the sketch plat, a preliminary plat when required, and the final plat from the mayor and council; and 
c.  The subdivider or his agent files the approved plats with the clerk of the Walton County or Newton County superior court, as appropriate. 
5.  No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any parcel or plat of land created by subdivision after the effective date of, and not in substantial conformity with, the provisions of theses subdivision ordinances, and no excavation of land or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place or be commenced except in conformity with this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.6. - Enactment. 
    In order that land may be subdivided in accordance with these purposes and policies, this ordinance is hereby adopted and made effective the date of adoption hereof. All applications for subdivision approval, including final plats, pending on the effective date of adoption of this ordinance shall be reviewed under this ordinance except that this ordinance will not apply if preliminary plat approval was obtained prior to the effective date of this ordinance and the subdivider has constructed subdivision improvements prior to submission of the final plat as required by the city unless the mayor and council determine on the record that application of this ordinance is necessary to avoid a substantial risk of injury to public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.7. - Interpretation and conflict. 
1.  Interpretation. In their interpretation and applications the provisions of this ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This ordinance shall be construed broadly to promote the purposes for which they are adopted. 
a.  Public provisions. This ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule, regulation, statute, or other provision of law except as provided in this ordinance. Where any provision of this ordinance imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other provision of this ordinance or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control. 
b.  Private provisions. This ordinance is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction, provided that where the provisions of this ordinance are more restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such easement covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the requirements of this ordinance shall govern. Where the provisions, of the easement, covenant, or private agreement or restriction impose duties and obligations more restrictive or standards that are higher than the requirements of this ordinance, or the determinations of the mayor and council in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this ordinance, and the private provisions are not inconsistent with this ordinance or the determinations made under this ordinance, then the private provisions shall be operative and supplemental to this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.8. - Saving provision. 
    This ordinance shall not be construed as abating any action now pending under, or by virtue or, prior existing subdivision ordinance, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying, or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm, or corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any section or provision existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance, or as vacating or annulling any rights obtained by any persons, firm, or corporation by lawful action of the city except as shall be expressly provided for in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.9. - Reservations and repeals. 
    Upon the adoption of this ordinance according to law, the subdivision ordinance of Social Circle adopted December 10, 1979, and as amended, is hereby repealed, except as to those sections expressly retained in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.10. - Amendments. 
    For the purpose of protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare, the mayor and council may from time to time propose amendments to this ordinance which shall then be approved or disapproved by the mayor and council at a public meeting following public notice. Before enacting any amendment to this ordinance, the planning commission, shall hold a public hearing thereon. The planning commission shall hold said hearing and make a report of the proceeding to the city within 30 days of the date of the submission of a request for an amendment. Public notice shall be given at least 15 days prior to the public hearing in accordance with Georgia law. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.11. - Resubdivision of land. 
    Whenever a parcel of land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and it is intended that such lots will eventually be resubdivided into small building sites, the city manager shall require that such parcel of land allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of such streets may be made a requirement of the plat. 
1.  Procedure for resubdivision. Whenever a developer desires to resubdivide an already approved final subdivision plat, the developer shall first obtain approval for the resubdivision by the same procedures prescribed for the subdivision of land. 
2.  Resubdivision includes: 
a.  Any change in any street layout or any other public improvement; 
b.  Any change in any lot line; 
c.  Any change in the amount of land reserved for public use or the common use of lot owners; 
d.  Any change in any easements shown on the approved plat. 
3.  Waiver. Whenever the mayor and council, in their sole discretion, make a finding on the record that the purposes of this ordinance may be served by permitting resubdivision by the procedure established in this subsection 1.11(3), the mayor and council may waive the requirement of subsection 1.11(1) after notice and public hearing as provided in section 1.13 of this ordinance. 
Whenever there is a request for recombination and resubdivision of three or less lots to make fewer lots, the applicants shall submit six copies of recordable plats to the city manager for approval or denial. If the city manager approves, he shall obtain the mayor's signature on the plat for recording purposes. If the city manager denies the request, the decision may be appealed to the mayor and council. 
4.  Procedure for subdivisions when future resubdivision is indicated. Whenever land is subdivided and the subdivision plat shows one or more lots containing more than one acre of land and there is reason to believe that such lots eventually will be resubdivided, the mayor and council may require that the applicant allow for the future opening of streets and the ultimate extension of adjacent streets. Easements providing for the future opening and extension of streets may be made a requirement of plat approval. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.12. - Public purpose. 
    Regulation of the subdivision of land and the attachment of reasonable conditions to land subdivision is an exercise of valid police power delegated by the state to this city. The developer has the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions laid down by the mayor and council for design, dedication, improvement, and restrictive use of the land to conform to the physical and economic development of the city and to the health, safety, and general welfare of the future lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.13. - Variance, exceptions, and waiver of conditions. 
1.  General. Where the mayor and council find that extraordinary hardships or practical difficulties may result from strict compliance with this ordinance and/or the purposes of this ordinance may be served to a greater extent by an alternative proposal. They may after a public hearing before the planning commission, approve a variance to this ordinance so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured, provided that such variance shall not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of this ordinance; and further provided the mayor and council shall not approve a variance unless they shall find, based on the evidence presented, that all of the following conditions are met: 
a.  The granting of the variance shall not be detrimental to the public safety, health, or welfare or injurious to other property; 
b.  The conditions upon which the request for a variance is based are unique to the property for which the variance is sought and are not generally applicable to other property; 
c.  Because of the particular physical surroundings, shape, or topography of the specific property, a particular hardship. to the owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict letter of this ordinance was carried out; 
d.  The variance will not in any manner vary the provisions of the following: (a) Code of Ordinances of Social Circle, Georgia; (b) zoning regulations of Social Circle, Georgia; (c) official map of Social Circle, Georgia; (d) future land use plan of Social Circle, Georgia; (e) Long Range Transportation and Thoroughfare Plan of Social Circle, Georgia; (f) the Social Circle soil and sediment control ordinance; all of which shall remain in full force and effect. 
2.  Conditions. In approving variances, the mayor and council may require conditions necessary to achieve the objectives of this ordinance. 
3.  Procedures. Applicants must submit a plat of the survey and a petition with any variance request. The petition shall comprehensively state the grounds for the request and all facts relied upon by the applicant. A $150.00 fee shall be paid at submittal. 
    The applicant shall at his expense erect a sign approved by the building inspector notifying the public of the application. This shall be done no less than 15 days nor more than 45 days before the date of the public hearing in a conspicuous place on the property in question. 
    Between 15 and 45 days before the public hearing, the city clerk shall advise the date, time and purpose of such hearing in the legal organ of Walton or Newton County as applicable. 
    The planning commission shall hold a public hearing and submit findings to the mayor and council. 
    A property owner or his appointed agent may not request a variance for the same parcel of land more than once every 12 months. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.14. - Enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
1.  General. 
a.  It shall be the duty of the building inspector to enforce these requirements and to bring to the attention of the city manager any violations thereof or lack of compliance herewith. 
b.  No owner, or agent of the owner, of any parcel of the land located in a proposed subdivision shall transfer or sell any part of the parcel before a final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the mayor and council in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and filed with the clerk of the superior court of Walton County or Newton County, as appropriate. 
c.  The subdivision of any lot or any parcel of land by the use of metes and bounds description for the purpose of sale, transfer, lease, or development is prohibited. 
d.  No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any building or structure located on a lot or plat subdivided or sold in violation of the provisions of this ordinance, nor shall the city have any obligation to issue certificates of occupancy or to extend utility services to any parcel created in violation of this ordinance. 
2.  Violations and penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or both. Each day a violation continues is a separate offense. 
3.  Civil enforcement. Appropriate actions and proceedings may be taken in law or in equity to prevent any violation of this ordinance, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages, to restrain, correct, or abate a violation and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises. These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties described above. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.15. - Contribution disclosures. 
    When any applicant has made, within two years before filing of an application for variance or a proposed amendment to this ordinance, campaign contributions totaling $250.00 or more, or made gifts having an aggregate value of $250.00 or more to the mayor or a member of the council or to a member of the planning commission, it shall be the duty of the applicant and any attorney representing the applicant to file a disclosure report with the mayor and council showing: 
1.  The name of the official to whom the campaign contribution or gift was made; 
2.  The dollar amount of each campaign contribution made by the applicant to the official within two years before the filling of the application for the variance or amendment and the date of each such contribution; and 
3.  An enumeration and description of each gift having a value of $250.00 or more made by the applicant to the official within two years before the filing of the application for the variance or amendment. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.16. - Public hearing procedures and policies. 
    Whenever a public hearing is required by this ordinance or by state law prior to a hearing on a variance request or a proposed amendment to this ordinance, such public hearing, whether conducted by the mayor and council or the planning commission, shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures, which are adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5)(a), as amended: 
1.  Minutes of the meeting will be taken by the secretary of the planning commission or the city clerk. Should a complete transcript of the meeting be requested, it will be provided at the expense of the person making the request. 
2.  The public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer. 
3.  The presiding officer shall explain the procedure to be followed in the conduct of the public hearing. 
4.  If the subject of the hearing is a proposal initiated by a petitioner other than the city council, the petition or petitioner's agent shall be recognized first and shall be permitted to present and explain the request. If the request is initiated by the mayor and council, all members of the governing authority of the city shall be allowed to speak as they are recognized by the presiding officer, regardless of whether such officials speak in favor of or in opposition to the proposal. Thereafter, all individuals who so desire shall be permitted to speak in favor of the proposal. 
5.  After all individuals have had an opportunity to speak in accordance with subsection 4. above, those individuals present at the public hearing who wish to speak in opposition to the proposal shall have an opportunity to speak. 
6.  Any person who wishes to speak at the public hearing shall raise his/her hand. After being recognized by the presiding officer, he/she shall stand and give his name and address, and make any appropriate comment. 
7.  No time limit shall be imposed upon any person speaking at a public hearing, but all speakers are urged to make their comments brief and avoid repeating other's comments. 
8.  The applicant shall have an opportunity, after all comments in opposition have been made, to make a presentation of data, evidence and opinion. 
9.  The applicant and the opponents shall have an equal time period of no less than ten minutes per side for presentation of data, evidence and opinion. 
10.  Thereafter, the presiding officer shall announce that the public hearing for the proposal is closed. The planning commission shall then convene its business session to consider the proposal and shall, at that time, take action on its recommendation to the mayor and council. At the close of the public hearing before the mayor and council, that body shall immediately convene its business session and consider the recommendation and take action on the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 1.17. - Construction of provisions. 
    This ordinance and all inspections conducted and permits issued hereunder are hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interest and purpose thereof which are public safety, health and general welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which may be referred to as service systems. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this ordinance except as it relates to the purpose stated herein. The inspection or permitting of any building, system or plan, under the requirements of this ordinance shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, system or plan or their adequacy. Neither the mayor and council nor any city official nor city employee shall be liable for damages to any entity for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such building, system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such which may occur. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2.1. - General. 
    When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definitions where not inconsistent with the context. Words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The word "person" includes a "firm," "association," "organization," "trust," "company," or "corporation" as well as an "individual." The word "building" includes the word "structure." Words whether capitalized or not, shall have the meaning defined herein. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 2.2. - Words and terms defined. 
    When used in this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section: 
    Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is some other street. 
    Applicant. See Subdivider herein. 
    Block. A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad right-of-way, shorelines of waterways, or boundary lines of municipalities. 
    Bond. Any form of a surety bond in an amount and form satisfactory to the mayor and council. All bonds shall be approved by the mayor and council whenever a bond is required by this ordinance. 
    Building. Any structure, either permanent or temporary, above or below ground, designed, built or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals or property of any kind which has enclosing walls for 50 percent of its perimeter. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words 'or part thereof.' 
    Building inspector. The authorized building inspector for the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
    Building line. A line, parallel to the street line, beyond which the foundation wall and any roofed porch, vestibule or other such portion of a building, shall not project. 
    Building permit. A written permit issued by the building inspector. 
    Central sewerage system. A private sewerage system including collection and treatment facilities established by the developer to serve a new subdivision in an outlying area. 
    Central water system. A private water system formed by a developer to serve a new subdivision in an outlying area. It includes water treatment and distribution facilities. 
    Certify. Whenever this ordinance requires that an agency or official certify the existence of some fact or circumstance, the city by administrative rule may require that such certification be made in any manner, oral or written, which provides reasonable assurance of the accuracy of the certification. 
    City clerk. The city clerk for Social Circle, Georgia. 
    City manager. The employee so designated by the mayor and council. 
    City attorney. The attorney so designated by the mayor and council. 
    City engineer/consultant. The engineer so designated by the mayor and council. 
    Collector road. As the principal traffic artery within residential or commercial area, the collector carries relatively high volumes and conveys traffic from arterial streets to lower-order streets. Its function is to promote the free flow of traffic; as such, communities should not encourage parking or residences along a collector. The collector's secondary function is to serve abutting land uses. A collector street may also accommodate transit such as busses. 
    Common ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms; partnerships, entitles, or unincorporated associations, in which a stock broker, partner, or associate, or a member of his family owns an interest in each corporation, firm partnership, entity, or unincorporated association. 
    Comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other similar information. The "comprehensive plan" includes component or functional plans for the city, including but not limited to a plan for land use or a plan for transportation facilities. 
    Construction plans. The maps or drawings accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the specific location and design of improvements to be installed in the subdivision in accordance with the requirements of the mayor and council as a condition of the approval of the plat. 
    Contiguous. Lots are contiguous when at least one boundary line of one lot touches a boundary line or lines of another lot. 
    Cul-de-sac. A local street with only one outlet that terminates in a vehicular turnaround and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    County sanitarian. The sanitarian for Walton or Newton County, Georgia. 
    Developer. See Subdivider herein. 
    Drainage easement. An area set aside for the purpose of transporting storm water. Maintenance of the easement is the responsibility of the private property owner unless dedicated to and accepted by the city. 
    Easement. A grant of one or more property rights by the owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person or entity. 
    Engineer. A registered, professional engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. 
    Final plat. The map of a subdivision to be recorded after approval by the mayor and council and any accompanying material as described in this ordinance. 
    Frontage. The distance for which the front boundary line of the lot and the street line are coincident. For the purpose of corner lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. 
    Frontage street. The street coincident to the front boundary line of the parcel. 
    Grade. The slope of a road, street, or other public way specified in percentage terms. 
    Health department. The Walton or Newton County Health Department. 
    Household. Any person or persons who reside or intend to reside in the same housing unit. 
    Landscaping. Acting with the purpose of meeting specific criteria regarding uses of outside space, including ground cover, buffers, and shade trees. 
    Lot. A tract, plot, or portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended as a unit for the purpose, whether immediate or future, or transfer or ownership, or possession, or for building development. A lot must meet the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located and must front on a public street or approved private street. 
    Lot improvement. Any building, structure, place, work of art, or other object situated on a lot. 
    Lot, double frontage. A lot having frontage on two streets as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot, corner. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection where the interior angle of the intersection does not exceed 135 degrees. 
    Major subdivision. All subdivisions not classified as minor subdivisions, including but not limited to subdivisions of five or more lots, or any size subdivision requiring any new street or extension of local government facilities or the creation of any public improvements (see Subdivision ). 
    Master preliminary plat. That portion of a preliminary plat submitted in connection with a multi-phase or phased subdivision application which provides the information and graphics meeting the requirements of this ordinance for the purpose of implementing an integrated development scheme for all phases of the proposed subdivision. 
    Minor subdivision [as amended March 13, 2000]. All subdivisions not classified as major subdivision, including but not limited to subdivision of two lots but not more than four lots provided that: 
1.  Each lot in the proposed subdivision abuts an existing street for the minimum distance required by the zoning ordinance of the city, for the zoning district in which the subject real property is located and the depth shall not exceed three times the width. 
2.  The proposed subdivision shall be directly accessible to existing required improvements that shall be necessary for connection to existing utilities and other existing facilities. 
3.  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots is permitted where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots comply with the standards of this ordinance and all other ordinances and resolutions of Social Circle, Georgia (see Subdivision herein). 
    Model home. A dwelling unit used initially for display purposes which typifies the type of units that will be constructed in the subdivision and which will not be permanently occupied during this use as a model. 
    New development. A project involving the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of land; any of which has the effect of increasing the requirements for capital improvements, measured by number of service units to be generated by such activity, and which requires either the approval of a plat pursuant to this ordinance, the issuance of a building permit, or connection to the city's water or sanitary sewer system. 
    Nonresidential subdivision. A subdivision whose intended use is other than residential, such as commercial or industrial. 
    Official map. "The Official Zoning District Maps for the City of Social Circle, Georgia," adopted November 9, 1998, which is kept on file in the city hall where it is available for public inspection during normal business hours. The official map is further defined in section 401 of the zoning ordinance which document is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. 
    Official submission date. The date of the meeting of the mayor and council at which the public hearing on approval of a sketch, preliminary or final subdivision plat, including any adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submission date of the plat on which the statutory period required for formal approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the sketch, preliminary or final subdivision plat shall commence to run. 
    Open spaces. A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water or a combination of both land and water within the site designated for development and designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of the development or for the general public, not including streets or off-street parking areas. Open space shall be substantially free of structures, but may contain such improvements as are in the plans as finally approved and are appropriate for the benefit of residents of the development. Unless dedicated and accepted by the mayor and council, maintenance shall be the responsibility of all property owners within the subdivision. 
    Owner. See Subdivider herein. 
    Parcel. A general term including all plots of land shown with separate identification on the official tax maps. Parcels may or may not be lots, depending upon whether or not such parcels are created as herein provided. 
    Phased subdivision application. An application for subdivision approval submitted pursuant to a master preliminary plat, or at the option of the subdivider, pursuant to a specific plan in which the applicant proposes to immediately subdivide the property but will develop in one or more individual phase(s) over a period of time. A phased subdivision application may include an application for approval of, or conversion to, horizontal or vertical condominiums, nonresidential development projects, planned unit developments, mixed-use projects, and residential developments. 
    Planning commission. The planning commission of the City of Social Circle, Georgia. 
    Preliminary plat. The preliminary drawing or drawings described in this ordinance indicating the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission or mayor and council for approval. 
    Public hearing. An adjudicatory proceeding held by the mayor and council preceded by published notice and at which certain persons, including the applicant, may speak and introduce evidence for the purpose of demonstrating that plat approval should or should not be granted. 
    Public improvement. Any drainage, ditch, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, tree, lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or other facility for which the city may ultimately assume the responsibility or liability, for maintenance or operation, or which may affect an improvement for which city responsibility and liability is established. 
    Public utilities. An entity engaged in regularly supplying the public with some commodity or service which: 
(1)  Is of public consequence or need, such as electricity, gas, water, transportation, or telephone services; 
(2)  Are regulatory and controlled by a state or federal regulatory commission; and 
(3)  Often have the power of eminent domain. 
    Resubdivision. Any change in a map of an approved or recorded subdivision plat that affects any street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for public use or any lot line, or that affects any map or plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any ordinances controlling subdivisions. 
    Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for any other special use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lot or parcels. Right-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains, shade trees, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
    Road right-of-way width. The distance between property lines measured at right angles to the center line of the street. 
    Security. The letter of credit or cash escrow provided by the applicant to secure its promises in the subdivision improvement agreement. 
    Setback. The distance between a building and the street line nearest to the building. 
    Sketch plat. A sketch preparatory to the preliminary plat (or final plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the subdivider to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the mayor and council as to the form of the plat and the objectives of this ordinance. 
    Street. Streets within the city shall be classified as one of the following: 
1.  Arterial. An arterial is a high-volume street that should have no residences on it. Its function is to conduct traffic between communities and activity centers and to connect communities to major state and interstate highways. 
2.  Collector. As the principal traffic artery within residential or commercial areas, the collector carries relatively high traffic volumes and conveys traffic from arterial streets to lower-order streets. Its function is to promote the free flow of traffic; as such, communities should not encourage parking or residences along a collector. The collector's secondary function is to serve abutting land uses. A collector street may also accommodate public transit such as buses. 
3.  Subcollector. The subcollector provides passage to access streets and conveys traffic to collectors. Like the access street, the subcollector provides frontage and access to residential lots but also carries some through traffic to lower-order (access) streets. The subcollector is a relatively low-volume street. Subcollectors usually serve more dwellings than an access street and carry a small volume of through traffic to one or more access streets. 
4.  Access. Sometimes called a place or land, the access street is designed to conduct traffic between dwelling units and higher order streets. The access street usually carries no through traffic and includes short streets, cul-de-sac, and courts. Access streets are noteworthy for their complete lack of through traffic and for the fact that they serve only a few dwelling units. 
5.  Lane A short street, cul-de-sac, or court. The primary purpose of the lane is to conduct traffic to and from dwelling units to higher classified streets. 
6.  Alley. A public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal frontage is some other street. 
7.  Frontage street. The street coincident to the front boundary line of the parcel. 
    Subdivide. The act or process of creating a subdivision. 
    Subdivider. Any person who (1) having an interest in land, causes it, directly or indirectly, to be divided into a subdivision or who (2) directly or indirectly, sells, leases, or develops, or offers to sell, lease, or develops or advertises to sell, lease, or develop, any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, or, who (3) engages directly or through an agent in the business of selling, leasing, developing, or offering for sale, lease, or development a subdivision or any interest, lot, parcel site, unit, or plat in a subdivision, and who (4) is directly or indirectly controlled by, or under direct or indirect common control with any of the foregoing. 
    Subdivision. Any land, vacant or improved, which is divided or proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, tracts, or interests for the purpose of offer, sale, lease, or development whether immediate or future, either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, teems, and conditions. "Subdivision" includes the division or development of residential and nonresidential zoned land, whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise, intestacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument. "Subdivision" includes resubdivision creation or conversion. The definition of "subdivision" does not include the division of a tract or parcel of land into lots, building sites, or other divisions, all of which contain five acres or more, all accessed by and fronting on an existing paved public street and not requiring an extension of public utilities. There are two classifications of subdivisions, major and minor, as defined separately herein. 
    Subdivision plat. The final map or drawing, described in this ordinance, on which the subdivider's plan of subdivision is presented to the mayor and council for approval and which, if approved, may be submitted to the clerk of the superior court for Walton County or Newton County for filing. 
    Surveyor. A registered, practicing surveyor, licensed by the State of Georgia. 
    Variance. A modification of the terms of this ordinance where such modification will not be contrary to the public health, safety and welfare; where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, not the result of actions of the subdivider or owner, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Vested rights. Right to initiate or continue the establishment of a use which will be contrary to a restriction or ordinance coming into effect when the project associated with the use is completed. 
    Zoning ordinance. The zoning ordinance of Social Circle, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017; Ord. No. 2018-4, § 3, 10-16-2018) 
ARTICLE III. - SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS 

Sec. 3.1. - General procedure. 
1.  Classification of subdivisions. Before any land is subdivided, the owner of the property proposed to be subdivided, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in accordance with the following procedures, which include two principal steps for a minor subdivision and four principal steps for a major subdivision: 
a.  Minor subdivision. 
i.  Sketch plat. 
ii.  Final subdivision plat. 
b.  Major subdivision. 
i.  Sketch plat. 
ii.  Preliminary plat. 
iii.  Soil erosion plan and water/sewer plan. 
iv.  Final subdivision plat and construction drawings. 
    If such use is for commercial or industrial purposes, then such subdivision shall comply with all applicable provisions of this ordinance. If such use is for agricultural purposes, the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply. 
2.  Official submission dates. For the purpose of this ordinance, for both major and minor subdivisions, the date of the meeting of the mayor and council at which the public meeting or hearing on approval of a sketch, preliminary or final subdivision plat, including any adjourned date thereof, is closed, shall constitute the official submission date of the plat on which the statutory period required for formal approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the sketch, preliminary or final subdivision plat shall commence to run. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 3.2. - Sketch plat. 
1.  Discussion of requirements. Before preparing the sketch plat for a subdivision, the applicant shall schedule an appointment and meet with the city manager and city engineer/consultant and/or the building inspector to discuss the procedure for approval of a subdivision plat and the requirements as to general layout of streets and for reservations of land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire protection, and similar matters, as well as the availability of existing services, including schools. The city manager or building inspector may also advise the applicant, when appropriate, to discuss the proposed subdivision with those officials who must eventually approve those aspects of the subdivision plat coming within the jurisdiction. 
2.  Application procedure and requirements. Prior to subdividing land and after meeting with the city manager and city engineer/consultant and/or the building inspector, the owner of the land, or his authorized agent, shall file an application for approval of a sketch plat with the city clerk. The application shall: 
a.  Be made on forms available in the city clerk's office; 
b.  Include all contiguous holdings of the owner including land in "common ownership" as defined in this ordinance, with an indication of the portion which is proposed to be subdivided accompanied by an affidavit of ownership, which shall include the dates the respective holdings or land were acquired, together with the book and page where each conveyance to the present owner is recorded in the appropriate superior court clerk's office. The affidavit shall advise as to the legal owner of the property, the contract owner of the property, the date the contract of sale was executed, and, if any corporations are involved, a complete list of all directors, officers, and stockholders of each corporation owning more than five percent of any class of stock; 
c.  Be accompanied by a minimum of three copies of the sketch plat as described in this ordinance and complying in all respects with this ordinance; 
d.  Be presented to the planning commission for recommendation to the mayor and council; 
e.  Be accompanied by a fee as determined from time to time by the mayor and council; and 
f.  The application shall include an address and telephone number of an agent who shall be authorized to receive all notices required by this ordinance. 
3.  Minor subdivision. If the sketch plat constitutes a minor subdivision, the city clerk shall place the matter on the next available regular meeting agenda of the planning commission for classification, review, and recommendations to the mayor and council. The mayor and council shall review, approve conditionally approve, or disapprove the sketch plat within 60 days from the official submission date. Subsequent to an approval or conditional approval by the mayor and council the applicant may proceed directly to the filing of an application for approval of a final subdivision plat as provided in this ordinance in subsection 3.5.(1). The applicant shall have one year from the date that the sketch plat is approved by the mayor and council to submit a final subdivision plat, after which time a new sketch plat must be submitted for approval. 
    The mayor and council shall provide notice and hold public hearings on the final plat for a minor subdivision in the same manner required for preliminary plats for major subdivisions [in] subsection 3.5(3) of this ordinance. The mayor and council shall generally approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the final plat within 60 days from the official submission date. Subsequent to an approval or conditional approval and signoff of the final plat by the mayor and council, the applicant may proceed to subdivide the land. 
4.  Major subdivision. If the sketch plat constitutes a major subdivision the city clerk shall transmit three copies of the sketch plat for review to appropriate officials or agencies of the city (including the planning commission) and Walton County or Newton County as appropriate and adjoining counties or municipalities, school and special districts, and other official bodies as it deems necessary or as mandated by law, including review by the Northeast Georgia Regional Development Center if the development meets the Developments of Regional Impact (DRI) criteria. The city clerk shall request that all officials and agencies to whom a request for review has been made, submit their report to the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt of the request. The city clerk shall place the matter on the next regular meeting agenda of the Planning commission for classification, review, and recommendations to the mayor and council. The planning commission shall send its recommendation and all reports to the mayor and council. 
    The mayor and council will consider all the reports submitted by the officials and agencies concerning the sketch plat and the recommendation of the planning commission and shall approve, approve with conditions or disapprove the sketch plat. Approval of the sketch plat shall constitute permission to prepare a preliminary plat. 
5.  Sketch plat content. The sketch plat shall represent the entire area which the subdivider contemplates developing, including those units or sections not scheduled for immediate development. Three copies of the sketch plat shall be submitted to the planning commission for review with the subdivider. The sketch plat shall include as a minimum the following information: 
a.  The sketch plat submitted to the planning commission and mayor and council shall be prepared in ink or pencil on a reproducible medium and can be a freehand rendering. The sketch plat shall illustrate the ultimate development of the entire parcel owned by the applicant and shall identify the section for which formal plat approval will initially be requested. It shall be prepared at a scale of not more than one inch equal to 100 feet and shall include site topography at a contour interval of five feet or less. The sketch plat shall include at a minimum the following information: 
i.  Name. 
(1)  Name of subdivision if property is within an existing subdivision. 
(2)  Proposed name if not within a previously platted subdivision. The proposed name generally shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any plat previously recorded. 
(3)  Name of property if no subdivision name has been chosen. (This is commonly the name by which the property is locally known.) 
ii.  Ownership. 
(1)  Name and address, including telephone number, of legal owner. of property. 
(2)  Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or easements affecting the property. 
(3)  Existing covenants on the property, if any. 
(4)  Name and address, including telephone number, of the professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of public improvements, and for surveys. 
iii.  Description. Location of property by government lot, section, city, county, graphic scale, north arrow, and date. 
(1)  Location of property lines, existing easements, burial grounds, railroad rights-of-way, watercourses, and existing wooded areas or significant trees 24 inches or more in diameter, measured four feet above ground level; and the location, width, and names of all existing or platted streets or other public ways within or immediately adjacent to the tract. 
(2)  Location, sizes, elevation, and slopes of existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground structures within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent buildings and utility poles on or immediately adjacent to the site and utility rights-of-way. 
(3)  Approximate topography, at the same scale of the sketch plat. 
(4)  The approximate location and widths of proposed streets. 
(5)  Preliminary proposals for connection with existing water supply and sanitary sewage systems, or alternative means of providing water supply and sanitary waste treatment and disposal; preliminary provisions for collecting arid discharging surface water drainage. 
(6)  The approximate location, dimensions, and area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for park or playground use or other public use, or for the use of property owners in the proposed subdivision. 
(7)  The location of flood hazard areas taken from the HUD (FEMA) maps, if available. 
(8)  Zoning of subject property and adjacent properties. 
(9)  The locations of all general topographical features and the approximate slopes and gradients, both present and proposed. Additionally, any changes to be made affecting soil erosion and sedimentation that will be caused by grading, including information as to the conditions of soil types within the subdivision showing the relationship between soil limitations and dwelling density within the subdivision. 
(10)  Information and data relating to surface water runoff as it effects storm water drainage and impact on adjacent areas. 
(11)  A vicinity map showing streets and other general development of the surrounding area. The sketch plat shall show all school and improvement district lines with the zones properly designated. 
6.  Public hearings. Upon receipt of a formal application for sketch plat approval and all accompanying material, the planning commission shall call a public hearing for the next scheduled meeting of the planning commission to be held at least 30 days after the date of the application. The city clerk shall submit a notice for publication at least 15 days prior to the public hearing and shall maintain file copies of the plat and construction plans when appropriate for public review prior to the hearing. 
    The planning commission shall forward the formal application and a recommendation to the mayor and council for consideration. 
    Upon receipt of a recommendation for sketch plat approval or denial from the planning commission and all accompanying material, the mayor and council shall call a public hearing for the next scheduled meeting of the mayor and council to be held at least 30 days after the date of the application. The city clerk shall submit a notice for publication at least 15 days prior to the public hearing and shall maintain file copies of the plat and construction plans when appropriate for public review prior to the hearing. 
7.  Sketch plat reviews. The planning commission shall review the sketch plat within 60 days from the official submission. If the sketch plat is found to be inadequate, the planning commission shall provide information regarding the required inadequacy to the applicant in writing. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on the copy of the sketch plat, and one copy shall be returned to the applicant. If the planning commission does not take action within 60 days of submittal to the planning commission, the sketch plat shall be considered recommended to the council. However, the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 3.3. - Preliminary plat. 
    No sooner than 30 days after the date of review of the sketch plat, the applicant may apply for preliminary plat approval. If the applicant fails to apply for preliminary plat approval within 120 days of the review of the sketch plat, a new sketch plat must be submitted. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a licensed land surveyor, registered professional engineer or licensed landscape architect. 
1.  Application procedure and requirements. The applicant shall file six copies of the preliminary plat with the city clerk, an application for approval of a preliminary plat if the applicant elects to proceed. Include five paper copies and one Mylar copy of the preliminary plat, and five paper copies of the construction plans to be utilized as follows: 
a.  Building inspector-;hg;Mylar copy of preliminary plat 
Paper copy of construction plans. 
b.  Planning commission-Paper copy. 
c.  County sanitarian-Paper copy. 
d.  City council-Paper copy. 
e.  The fifth paper copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent with a notation of the action taken by the planning commission. 
f.  Post office-Preliminary plat only. 
g.  Include a detail cost estimate of the items to be secured by bond. 
The preliminary plat shall conform substantially with the approved sketch plat. The application shall: 
a.  Be made on any forms furnished by the city clerk together with a fee as determined by mayor and council. 
b.  Include all land which the applicant proposes to subdivide, including possible unit divisions not scheduled for immediate development, and all land immediately adjacent extending 100 feet from the subject property, or of that directly opposite the subject property, extending 100 feet from the street frontage of opposite land, with the names of owners as shown in the files. This information may be shown on a separate current tax map reproduction from the county board of tax assessors' office showing the subdivision superimposed on the tax map. 
c.  Be accompanied by a minimum of six copies of the preliminary plat as described in this ordinance. 
d.  Be accompanied by a minimum of six copies of construction plans as described in this ordinance. 
e.  Comply in all respects with the sketch plat, this ordinance, the city zoning ordinance, and any other applicable regulations, laws, rules and ordinances. 
f.  Be presented to the city clerk at least 30 days prior to a regular planning commission meeting. City council meetings are generally held every third Tuesday night of the month at 6:30 p.m. Planning commission meetings are generally held every fourth Monday night of the month at 6:00 p.m. 
2.  Content of preliminary plat. The preliminary plat, submitted to the planning commission and mayor and council, shall be in ink on a reproducible medium, prepared in accordance with acceptable professional standards. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line prints on a white background, and the submittal shall include such other documents as necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance. If the preliminary plat is prepared by a registered professional engineer, reference must be made to the legal survey of the parcel. A copy of the survey must be included with the preliminary plat if not stamped by a licensed land surveyor. The preliminary plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equal to 100 feet. The recommended maximum dimensions of the sheet size are 24 by 36 inches, provided, however, additional sheets may be used. 
The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
a.  The location of property with respect to surrounding property and streets, the names of all adjoining property owners of record, or the names of adjoining developments, the names of adjoining streets. 
b.  The location and dimensions of all boundary lines of the property to be expressed in feet and decimals of a foot. The boundary lines shall include the entire tract to be subdivided eventually and data as required herein shall apply to the entire tract. 
c.  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the subdivider. 
d.  Contour lines based on sea level datum. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than two feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. 
e.  The location of existing streets, easements, water bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps, railroads, buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches, and bridges. 
f.  The location and width of all existing and proposed streets and easements, alleys, and other public ways, and easement and proposed street rights-of-way and building set-back lines. 
g.  The location and dimensions of all property proposed to be set aside for park or playground use, or other public or private reservation, with designation of the purpose of those set asides, and conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation. 
h.  The name and address of the owner or owners of land to be subdivided, the name and address of the subdivider if other than the owner, and the name of the land surveyor. 
i.  The date of the map, approximate true north point, scale, and title of the subdivision. 
j.  Sufficient data acceptable to the city engineer/consultant to determine readily the location, bearing, and length of all lines, and to reproduce such upon the ground; the location of all proposed monuments. Mathematical closure shall be within a tolerance of one foot in 5,000 feet. 
k.  Name of the subdivision and all new streets as approved by the mayor and council. 
l.  Indication of the use of any lot and all uses other than residential proposed by the subdivider. 
m.  Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively throughout the several additions. Outlets shall be lettered in alphabetical order. If blocks are numbered or lettered, outlets shall be lettered in alphabetical order within each block. 
n.  List of underground utilities. 
o.  Number of units. 
p.  All information required on the sketch plat should also be shown on the preliminary plat, and the following notation shall also be shown: 
Explanation of drainage easements, if any. 
Explanation of site easements, if any. 
Explanation of reservations, if any. 
Endorsement of owner, as follows: 
_____
     Owner       Date      
q.  Form for endorsement by the mayor as follows: 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Social Circle, Georgia, all the requirements of preliminary approval having been fulfilled, this preliminary plat was given preliminary approval by the Mayor and Council. This preliminary approval does not constitute approval of a final plat. This certificate of preliminary approval shall expire and be null and void on one (1) year from preliminary approval. This preliminary approval does not authorize grading of property. 
_____
     Mayor       Date      
r.  Include a detailed cost estimate of items to be secured by bond. 
The lack of any information under any item specified herein, or improper information supplied by the applicant, shall be a cause of disapproval of a preliminary plat. 
3.  Public hearing. Upon receipt of a formal application for preliminary plat approval and all accompanying material, the planning commission shall call a public hearing for the next scheduled meeting of the planning commission to be held at least 30 days after the date of the application. The city clerk shall submit a notice for publication at least 15 days prior to the public hearing and shall maintain file copies of the plat and construction plans when appropriate for public review prior to the hearing. The planning commission shall recommend approval, denial or approval with conditions to the mayor and council. 
Upon receipt of a recommendation of the planning commission for preliminary plat consideration and all accompanying material, the mayor and council shall place the matter on the agenda for public hearing to be held at least 30 days after the date of the application. The city clerk shall submit a notice for publication at least 15 days prior to the public hearing and shall maintain file copies of the plat and construction plans when appropriate for public review prior to the hearing. The mayor and council shall approve, deny or approve with conditions the preliminary plat. 
4.  Preliminary plat approval. No later than 30 days prior to the regular meeting date of the planning commission, the applicant shall submit six copies of a preliminary plat to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the mayor and council. At the meeting, the planning commission shall recommend approval, approval with conditions, table, or disapprove the preliminary plat. 
No later than 30 days prior to the regular meeting date of the mayor and council, the planning commission shall forward to the mayor and council the six copies of a preliminary plat for review. At the meeting, the mayor and council shall approve, approve with conditions, table, or disapprove the preliminary plat. All modifications shall be made on the plat approved by the mayor and city council prior to issuing a grading permit. The action of the mayor and council shall be noted on the copy of the preliminary plat, and one copy shall be returned to the applicant. If the mayor and council does not take action within 30 days of submittal to the mayor and council, the plat shall be considered denied. 
5.  Standards for approval of preliminary plats. No preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision shall be approved by the mayor and council unless the applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence that: 
a.  All requirements of this ordinance and all applicable government laws, rules, regulations and ordinances have been met by the applicant; 
b.  Definite provision has been made for a water supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity, dependability, and quality to provide an appropriate supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed; 
c.  If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate provision has been made for such a system and, if other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that such systems will comply with federal, state, and local laws and ordinances. The plan must also identify any issues with downstream capacity and/or escalating electrical costs associated with the proposed plan. If such costs are to be incurred by the city, the mayor and council must approve or deny these expenses as a condition of approval. 
d.  All areas of the proposed subdivision which may involve soil or topographical conditions presenting hazards or requiring special precautions have been identified by the subdivider and that the proposed uses of these areas are compatible with such conditions; 
e.  The subdivider has the financial ability to complete the proposed subdivision in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, regulations, rules and ordinances; 
f.  There is no other available subdivided land in the jurisdiction of the city that would be suitable of the applicant's proposed uses of the subdivision; 
g.  The proposed subdivision will not result in the scattered subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped parcels of land lacking urban services between developed parcels; 
h.  The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate the impact of the proposed subdivision on public health, safety, and welfare. 
The mayor and council are authorized to disapprove the preliminary plat even though the land proposed for subdivision is zoned for the use to which the proposed subdivision will be put and the proposed use is consistent with the comprehensive plan if the applicant has not satisfied all of the above requirements. 
6.  Public improvements. The mayor and council may require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to the signing of the final subdivision plat by the mayor. If the mayor and council do not require that all public improvements be installed and dedicated prior to signing of the final subdivision plat by the mayor, the mayor and council shall require that the applicant execute a subdivision improvement agreement and provide security for the agreement as provided in subsection 5.1(2) of this ordinance. The mayor and council shall require the applicant to indicate on the plat all roads and public utility improvements which shall be required to be established or extended, and any other special requirements deemed necessary by the mayor and council in order to conform the subdivision plat to the applicable comprehensive plan. 
7.  Effective period of preliminary plat approval. The approval of a preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of one year from the date that the preliminary plat is approved by the mayor and council, at the end of which time the applicant must have submitted a final subdivision plat for approval. If a subdivision plat is not submitted for final approval within the one-year period, the preliminary approval shall be null and void, and the applicant shall be required to submit a new plat for sketch plat review subject to all government laws, rules, regulations and ordinances. 
8.  Zoning and subdivision ordinances. Every preliminary plat shall conform to existing zoning and subdivision ordinances of the city as well as all applicable government laws, rules, and regulations applicable at the time that the proposed preliminary plat is submitted for the approval of the mayor and council. 
9.  Grading of site prior to final approval. Subsequent to preliminary approval, the developer may apply for a topsoil and excavation permit from the building inspector or such other agency or person as the mayor and council shall direct, and upon receipt of the permit, may commence construction to the grades and elevations required by the approved preliminary plat, if construction drawings are provided at this stage. 
10.  Model homes. For the purpose of allowing the early construction of model homes in a subdivision, the mayor and council in their sole discretion may permit a portion of a major subdivision involving no more than two lots to be created in accordance with the procedures for a minor subdivision, provided the portion derives access from an existing city, county, or state highway, and provided no future road or other improvement is anticipated where the lots are proposed. The subdivision plat of the "minor" portion shall be submitted to the mayor and council simultaneously with the preliminary plat of the entire major subdivision. Subsequent to preliminary approval, the model homes may be constructed, subject to such additional requirements as the mayor and council may require. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 3.4. - Amendments to the preliminary plat. 
    An amendment shall be filed no later than 30 days prior to the regular meeting date of the mayor and council. The applicant shall submit six copies of a preliminary plat amendment to the mayor and council for review. The fact that it is a revised plat must be clearly stated thereon. All modifications shall be made on the plat and approved by the mayor and council prior to issuing a grading permit. If the applicant is unwilling to accept the proposed major amendment under the terms and conditions required by the mayor and council the applicant may withdraw the proposed major amendment. A major amendment shall include, but is not limited to, any amendment that results in or has the effect of decreasing open space in the subdivision by ten percent or more or increasing density in the subdivision by ten percent or more. An applicant may not propose more than two amendments, whether major or minor, to any preliminary plat. The mayor and council may, without a public hearing, agree to proposed amendments that are deemed to be minor. If the proposed amendment is major, the mayor and council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed major amendment in accordance with the same requirements for preliminary plat approval found in subsection 3.2(2) of this ordinance. Any public hearing on a proposed major amendment shall be limited to whether the proposed major amendment should or should not be approved. The mayor and council shall, within 30 days of the public hearing, approve or disapprove the proposed major amendment and may require modifications in the terms and conditions of the preliminary plat approval reasonably related to the proposed amendment The action of the mayor and council shall be noted on the copy of the preliminary plat, and one copy shall be returned to the applicant. If the mayor and council do not take action within 30 days of submittal to the mayor and council, the plat shall be considered denied. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 3.5. - Final subdivision plat. 
1.  Application procedure and requirements. Within 12 months following the approval of the sketch plat in the case of a minor subdivision, or the preliminary plat in the case of a major subdivision, the applicant, if he/she wishes to proceed with the subdivision, shall file with the city clerk an application for final approval of a subdivision plat. The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat. It may represent only that portion of the approved preliminary plat, which the subdivider proposed to develop and record at this time. 
    Failure to submit within this time period shall void the plat unless an extension for a period not to exceed six months is granted by the mayor and council. Said extension must be applied for in writing by the subdivider. 
2.  Content. The final plat submitted shall be in ink on a reproducible medium prepared in accordance with accepted professional standards. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background and the submittal shall include such other documents as necessary to meet the requirements of this ordinance. The final plat shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equals 100 or larger. Sheet size shall be 12 inches by 16 inches for a minor subdivision and 17 inches by 21 inches fora major subdivision. If the entire final plat cannot be depicted on one sheet, the plat may be divided and an index provided. The final plat shall be made on forms available from the city clerk, together with a fee as determined by mayor and council and shall include: 
a.  The entire subdivision, or section thereof, which derives access from an existing state, county, or local government highway. 
b.  The name of the subdivision and street names. 
c.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner of record. 
d.  The name, address, and telephone number of the subdivider. 
e.  Date of survey, date of plat drawing, and revision dates, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference or bearings to magnetic, true north or grid north, an indication whether bearings shown are calculated from angles turned or taken from compass readings, the longitude and latitude and state plane coordinates; and the mean sea level datum. 
f.  Location of tract (land district and land lot) and acreage. 
g.  If part or all of the tract is a portion of a former subdivision, reference shall be made to the former plat, with identification of the former lots and block being resubdivided and including the name of the former subdivision. 
h.  Location sketch. 
i.  Index map when more than one sheet is required to present plat. 
j.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street lines, bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments, which shall be accurately described, on the plat. 
k.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by a heavy line, giving distance to the nearest one-hundredth foot and bearings to the nearest second. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field, and shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one foot in 5,000 feet. The bearing and distance from a first order geodetic control point to the property boundary shall also be shown. 
l.  The error of closure, as calculated by latitudes and departures, shall be stated. Surveys shall be coordinated and vertically tied into U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey Elevations. The benchmark used shall be provided. 
m.  Municipal, county or land lot lines accurately tied to the boundary line of the subdivision by distance and angles, when such lines transverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision and boundary line of the subdivision by distance and angles, when such lines transverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
n.  Exact location, right-of-way, widths, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat, and the exact location and widths of all cross angles of intersections, radii, length of tangents, and arcs and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
o.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords, and tangents of radii of rounded corners. 
p.  Building setback lines with dimensions and front yard setback lines with dimension. 
q.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than 90 degrees, the lot width at the building lines shall be shown. 
r.  Blocks lettered alphabetically within each block; lots or sites numbered in numerical order. 
s.  The square footage of all lots and the smallest lot. 
t.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all drainage structures and .any easement, including slope easements, if required, and public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purpose and limitations; and of any areas to reserve by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
u.  Accurate location, material and description of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvements shall be designated as "future." 
v.  The following certification: In addition to any other powers that the city may have, this subdivision is/or is not a special drainage district. See Article 2, Section 2, Paragraph 2, Georgia Constitution, 1983. 
w.  Certification for final plat approval by the mayor. 
x.  Owner's certification: The final plat shall contain, in add ion to a licensed land surveyor's certification, a statement as follows: 
"I (we) hereby certify that I am (we are) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and that I (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish the minimum building restriction lines, dedicate all streets, easements, alleys, walks, parks and other open spaces to provide directly or indirectly for maintenance of all common areas or outlots." 
This statement shall be signed and dated by the owners, proprietors, or trustees, if any, 'prior to the final plat submittal. All deed restrictions shall meet or exceed the requirements contained in this ordinance and the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
y.  Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government uses, utilities, parks, and easements, in a form approved by the city; and the subdivision plat shall be marked with a notation indicating the formal offers of dedication as follows: 
The owner, or his representative, hereby irrevocably offers for dedication to the City of Social Circle all the streets, local government uses, easements, parks, and required utilities shown on the subdivision plat and construction plans in accordance with an irrevocable offer of dedication dated _______, and recorded in the Clerk's Office of Walton County or Newton County Superior Court, as appropriate. 
BY: _____
          (Owner or Representative) 
DATE _____ 
The applicant shall deliver a full covenant and warranty deed to all dedicated lands and improvements in proper form for recording, together with a title policy of the local government in the sum not less than $10,000.00, which sum shall be determined by the city before signing the final subdivision plat. 
aa.  Notation of approval as follows: 
(i)  An engineer's or surveyor's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
"It is hereby certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey of the property by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked 'future' and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Social Circle, Georgia, have been fully complied with." 
BY: _____
       Registered C.E. 
NO: _____ 
BY: _____
       Registered Georgia Land Surveyor 
NO: _____ 
(ii)  An owner's certification, directly on the final plat as follows: 
Owner's Certification: 
State of Georgia, City of Social Circle 
"The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that this plat was made from an actual survey, that all state, county and town taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid." 
DATE: _____ 
AGENT: _____ 
DATE: _____ 
OWNER: _____ 
(iii)  Certification of individual private water and/or sewer system directly on the final plat as follows: 
I hereby certify that the individual private sewerage collection and disposal system and the individual private water supply and distribution systems installed or to be installed and/or the plans for the private sewage meet the requirements of the health department. 
LOT NO(s):  _____
  
_____
Is (are) not approved for private sewage systems. 
DATE: _____ 
HEALTH OFFICER: _____ 
(iv)  Certification of community or public water system, directly on the final plat as follows: 
I hereby certify that the community or public water supply and distribution systems are to be installed, shown in the subdivision plat attached hereto, meet the requirements of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources water supply section. 
LOT NO(s):  _____
  
_____
Is (are) not approved for community or public water systems. 
DATE: _____ 
_____
Georgia Department of Natural Resources Water Supply Section 
(v)  Certification of community or public sewer systems, directly on the final plat as follows: 
I hereby certify that the community or public sewerage collection and disposal system installed or to be installed, shown in the subdivision plat attached hereto, meets the requirements of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources Water Quality Control Section. 
LOT NO(s):  _____
  
_____
Is (are) not approved for community or public water systems. 
DATE: _____ 
_____
Georgia Department of Natural Resources Water Quality Control Section 
(vi)  City certification. 
"Certification of Approval of Streets and Utilities" 
I hereby certify that the proposed streets and utilities in this subdivision meet all the requirements of the City and the Subdivision Ordinance of Social Circle, Georgia 
DATE: _____ 
SIGNATURE _____
      MAYOR OF SOCIAL CIRCLE    
ab.  Be accompanied by the subdivision improvement agreement and security, if required, in a form satisfactory and in an amount established by the mayor and council upon recommendation of the city engineer/consultant and shall include a provision that the subdivider shall comply with all the terms of the resolution of final subdivision plat approval as determined by the mayor and council and shall include, but not be limited to, the performance of all required subdivision and off-site improvements, and that all improvements and land included in the irrevocable offer of dedication shall be dedicated to the local government free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the premises. 
ac.  Be accompanied by a $50.00 fee for each street sign shown in the construction plans, which street signs shall be installed by the city. 
3.  Notice of public meeting. Upon receipt of the formal application for final plat approval and all accompanying materials, the city clerk shall place it on the agenda of the next regular scheduled meeting of the mayor and council to be held at least 30 days after the date of application. The city clerk shall submit a notice for publication to be published at least 15 days prior to the public and shall maintain file copies of the plat and construction plans for public review prior to the meeting. 
4.  Public meeting and determination. No later than 30 days prior to the regular meeting date of the mayor and council, the applicant shall submit six copies of a final plat amendment to the mayor and council for review. At the meeting, the mayor and council shall approve or disapprove the final plat. The action of the mayor and council shall be noted on the copy of the final plat, and one copy shall be returned to the applicant. If the mayor and council do not take action within 30 days of submittal to the mayor and council, the plat shall be considered denied. If there are significant changes from the preliminary to final plat, the mayor and council may require another public hearing to review the plat. 
5.  Recording. Subsequent to the favorable decision by the mayor and council the applicants shall file a copy of the final plat with the clerk of the Walton County Superior Court or the clerk of the Newton County Superior Court, as appropriate, as well as a copy of the final plat and construction plans with the city clerk. An approved final plat shall be filed with the clerk within 30 days after final approval. If the final plat is approved during the court for recordation it shall be filed with the clerk of the superior court recordation no later than midnight on the 31st day of December of the calendar year of approval. Failure to comply with this provision shall void any approved plat. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 3.6. - Construction plans. 
    Prior to installation of any required improvements, the subdivider shall submit two copies of construction plans to the city manager. No improvements shall be installed until the city engineer/consultant formally approves the construction plans. Construction plans shall be prepared only by a registered professional engineer, registered land surveyor, or registered landscape architect. 
1.  Content. All construction plans submitted to the city manager shall be prepared in accordance with acceptable professional standards in ink, on a reproducible medium. The submittal copies shall consist of black-line or blue-line prints on a white background. Construction plans shall be prepared in accordance with the design standards contained in this ordinance and shall be drawn at a scale of not more than one inch equal to 100 feet with a centaur interval not to exceed two feet. Drawing sheets size shall not exceed 24 by 36 inches. Construction plans shall be submitted for all required improvements and amended when necessary. The following shall be depicted: 
a.  Profiles showing existing and proposed elevations along center lines of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the elevation along the center line of the existing road or roads within 100 feet of the intersection, shall be shown approximate radii of all curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all streets shall be shown. 
b.  Where slopes in excess of 20 percent occur on cross slopes, the city engineer/consultant may require that cross sections of all proposed streets at fifth foot stations be shown at five points as follows: 
On a line at right angles to the center line of the street, and said elevation points shall be at the center line of the street, each property line and points 50 feet inside each property line. 
c.  Plans and profiles showing the location and typical cross-section of street pavements including curbs and gutters, sidewalks if provided, drainage easement, right-of-way, manholes, and catch basins; the location, size and invert elevations of existing and proposed storm sewers, drains, and exact location and size of all existing water, gas or underground utilities or structures. All utilities proposed for location underground shall be duly noted. 
d.  Location and size of all existing and proposed drainage structures including retention ponds, catch basins, grates, head walls and any extensions thereof. The acreage of the drainage area and all pipe and ditch sizing calculations shall be provided. 
e.  The engineer preparing the construction plans shall certify the center line of all streets and drainage ways based upon a field run survey. 
f.  Plans for water systems and plans for profiles for sewer system and storm drainage pipes. 
g.  All information required by the city's construction standards and specifications. 
h.  An approved sedimentation and erosion control plan. 
i.  A hydrological study including the drainage plan for the area. 
j.  Title, name, address, stamp, and signature of professional engineer and date, including revision dates. 
k.  Typical street section to include asphalt and base thickness, curb, road width, shoulder slope, and right-of-way. 
2.  Other conditions. 
a.  Remaining land. Whenever a plat covers only a part of the subdivider's contiguous holdings, the applicant shall submit, at a sufficient scale, a map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to the total holding and indication of any future development planned for the remainder of the tract. 
b.  Rejection of documents. The lack of information required by this ordinance of the mayor and council, or improper, erroneous, or fraudulent information supplied by the subdivider or his agent, shall constitute grounds for the disapproval of any plat. 
c.  Overall design. The mayor and council shall follow accepted design practices in reviewing and directing the development of any subdivision, in addition to following the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 3.7. - Suspension and invalidation of final plat. 
    If the mayor and council suspend final plat approval for any subdivision plat under this ordinance, they shall record a document with the superior Court declaring that final approval for the subdivision is suspended and that the further sale, lease, or development of property within the subdivision is prohibited except that this prohibition shall not apply to persons or parties who have acquired property from the subdivider unless the person or party acquiring property meets the definition of "common ownership" in section 2.2 of this ordinance. If any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates final plat approval for any subdivision, the city shall record a document with the superior court declaring that the final plat for the subdivision is no longer valid and that further subdivision activity is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND DESIGN 

Sec. 4.1. - General improvements. 
1.  Conformance to applicable rules and ordinances. In addition to the requirements established in this ordinance, all subdivision plats shall comply with the following laws, rules, and ordinances: 
a.  All applicable statutory provisions. 
b.  The city's zoning ordinance, building and housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the appropriate jurisdictions and/or governments. 
c.  The official map, public utilities plan, and capital improvements program of the city, including all streets, drainage systems, and parks shown on the official map or comprehensive plan as adopted. 
d.  The special requirements of this ordinance and any rules of the health department and/or appropriate state or sub-state agencies. 
e.  The rules of the state highway department if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street. 
f.  The standards and ordinances adopted by the city engineer/consultant and all boards, commission, agencies, and officials of the city. 
g.  Plat approval may be withheld if a subdivision is not in conformity with the above laws, ordinances, guidelines, and policies as well as the purposes of this ordinance established in section 1.3 of this ordinance. 
2.  Adequate public facilities. No preliminary plat shall be approved unless the mayor and council determine that public facilities will be adequate to support and service the area of the proposed subdivision. The applicant shall, at the request of the mayor and council, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities by possible uses of said subdivision. Public facilities and services to be examined for adequacy will include roads and public transportation facilities, sewerage, water service, schools, police stations, and fire stations. 
a.  Periodically the mayor and council will establish by resolution, after public hearing, guidelines for the determination of the adequacy of public facilities and services. To provide the basis for the guidelines, the city engineer/consultant must prepare an analysis of current growth and the amount of additional growth that can be accommodated by future public facilities and services. The mayor and council must require any changes in preliminary plat approval criteria it finds appropriate in light of its experience in administering this ordinance. 
b.  The applicant for a preliminary plat must, at the request of the mayor and council, submit sufficient information and data on the proposed subdivision to demonstrate the expected impact on and use of public facilities and services by possible uses of said subdivision. 
c.  Proposed public improvements shall conform to and be property related to the comprehensive plan and all applicable capital improvement plans. 
d.  All habitable buildings and buildable lots shall be connected to a public water system capable of providing water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
e.  Drainage improvements shall accommodate potential runoff from the entire upstream drainage area and shall be designed to prevent increases in downstream flooding. The city may require the use of control methods such as retention or detention, and/or the construction of offsite drainage improvements to mitigate the impact of the proposed developments. 
f.  Proposed roads shall provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular, pedestrian, and bicycle circulation; shall be properly related to the comprehensive plan; and shall be appropriate for the particular traffic characteristics of each proposed development. 
g.  All public improvements and required easements shall be extended through the parcel on which new development is proposed. Streets, waterlines, wastewater systems, drainage facilities, electric lines, and telecommunications lines shall be constructed through new development to promote the logical extension of public infrastructure. The city may require the applicant of a subdivision to extend offsite improvements to reach the subdivision or oversize required public facilities to serve anticipated future development as a condition of plat approval. 
3.  Self-imposed restrictions. If the owner places restrictions on any of the land contained in the subdivision greater than those required by the zoning ordinance or this ordinance, such restrictions or reference to those restrictions may be required to be indicated on the subdivision plat, or the mayor and council may require that restrictive covenants be recorded with the clerk of the appropriate superior court in a form approved by the city. 
4.  Plat straddling municipal boundaries. Whenever access to the subdivision is required across land in another local government, the mayor and council may request assurance that access is legally established, and from the city engineer/consultant that the access road is adequately improved, or that a guarantee has been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to assure the construction of the access road. In general, lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross municipal boundary lines. 
5.  Monuments. The applicant shall place permanent reference monuments in the subdivision as required in this ordinance and as approved by a registered land surveyor. 
a.  Monuments shall be located on street right-of-way lines, at street intersections, angle points of curve and block corners. They shall be spaced so as to be within sight of each other, the sight lines being contained wholly within the street limits. 
b.  The external boundaries of a subdivision shall be monumented in the field by monuments of stone or concrete, not less than 30 inches in length, not less than four inches square or five inches in diameter, and marked on top with a cross, brass plug, iron rod, or other durable material securely embedded; or by iron rods or pipes at least 30 inches long and two inches in diameter. These monuments shall be placed not more than 1,400 feet apart in any straight line and at all corners, at each end of all curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points in any line, and at all angle points along the meander line, those points to be not less than 20 feet back from the bank of any river or stream, except that when such corners or points fall within a street, or proposed future street, the monuments shall be placed in the side line of the street. 
c.  All internal boundaries and those corners and points not referred to in the preceding paragraph shall be monumented in the field by like monuments as described above. These monuments shall be placed at all block corners, at each end of all curves, at a point where a river changes its radius, and at all angle points in any line. 
d.  The lines of lots that extend to rivers or streams shall be monumented in the field by iron pipes at least 30 inches long and seven-eighths-inch in diameter or by round or square iron bars at least 30 inches long. These monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of the river or stream lot line, with a meander line established not less than 20 feet back from the bank of the river or stream. 
e.  All monuments required by this ordinance shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such a manner that they will not be removed by frost. 
f.  All monuments shall be properly set in the ground and approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time the mayor and council recommend approval of the final plat. 
6.  Character of the land. Land that the mayor and council find to be unsuitable for subdivision or development due to flooding, improper drainage, steep slopes; rock formations, adverse earth formations or topography, utility easements, or other features that will reasonably be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the present or future inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer and approved by the mayor and council, upon recommendation of the city engineer/consultant, to solve the problems created by the unsuitable land conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as shall not involve any danger to public, health, safety, and welfare. 
7.  Large scale development. The requirements of this ordinance may be modified in the case of a large-scale community, commercial or neighborhood development in excess of 15 acres that is not subdivided into customary lots, blocks, and streets. Such modifications shall conform with the purpose and intent of this ordinance, and shall follow the requirements of a planned unit development (PUD) as included in the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.2. - Lot improvements. 
1.  Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits to build on all lots in compliance with the zoning ordinance and health ordinances and in providing driveway access to buildings on the lots from an approved street. 
2.  Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the zoning ordinance. Where lots are more than double the minimum required area of the zoning district, the mayor and council may require that those lots be arranged so as to allow further subdivision and opening of future streets where they would be necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance with the zoning ordinance and this ordinance. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angle to street lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a variation from this rule will give a better street or lot plan. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of building, observing the minimum front-yard setback from both streets. Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development contemplated, as established in the zoning ordinance. 
3.  Lot orientation. The lot line common to the street right-of-way shall be the front line. All lots shall face the front line and a similar line across the street. Wherever feasible, lots shall be arranged so that the rear line does not abut the side line of an adjacent lot. 
4.  Front yard setback lines. A line meeting the front yard setback requirements of the zoning ordinance shall be established on all lots. Any projection beyond the front building line such as uncovered porches, steps, eaves, gutters, and similar fixtures shall be subject to provisions of the zoning ordinance and approved or disapproved by the city manager for each individual application. 
5.  Double frontage lots and access to lots. 
a.  Double frontage lots. Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where necessary to provide separation of residential development from traffic arterials or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. Double frontage lots which are necessary shall be required to have a no-access easement across them, preventing access to arterial or collector streets. 
b.  Access from major and secondary arterials. Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively from a major or secondary street. Where driveway access from a major or secondary street may be necessary for several adjoining lots, the mayor and council may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive in order to limit possible traffic hazards on the street. Where possible, driveways should be designed and arranged so as to avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major and secondary arterials. 
6.  Soil preservation, grading, and seeding. 
a.  Soil preservation and final grading. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until final grading has been completed and the lot precovered with soil with an average depth of at least six inches which shall contain no particles more than two inches in diameter over the entire area of the lot, except that portion covered by buildings or included in streets, or where the grade has not been changed or natural vegetation seriously damaged. Topsoil shall not be removed from residential lots or used as spoil, but shall be redistributed so as to provide as least six inches of cover on the lots and at least four inches of cover between the sidewalks and curbs, and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting. 
b.  Lot drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the general storm drainage pattern for the area. Drainage shall be designed so as to avoid concentration of storm drainage water from each lot to adjacent lots. 
c.  Lawn-grass seed and sod. Sod or any approved grass seed may be used to comply with any requirements of seeding set forth herein. Lawn-grass seed shall be sown at not less than four pounds to each 1,000 square feet of land area. In the spring the seed shall be sown between March 15 and May 15; and in the fall the seed shall be sown between August 15 and September 30. All seed shall have been tested for germination within one year of the date of seeding, and the date of testing shall be on the label containing the seed analysis. All lots all be seeded from the roadside edge of the unpaved right-of-way back to a distance of 25 feet behind the principal residence on the lot except for any portion left in an unaltered state. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until re-spreading of soil and seeding of lawn has been completed; except that between October 1 and March 15, and between May 15 and August 15, the applicant shall submit an agreement in writing signed by the developer and the property owner, with a copy to the building inspector, that re-spreading of soil and seeding of lawn will be done during the immediate following planting season as set for in the ordinance, and leave a cash escrow for performance in an amount determined by the building inspector. 
7.  Debris and waste. No cut trees, timber, debris, earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and removal of those items and materials shall be required prior to issuance of any certificate of occupancy on a subdivision. No items and materials as described in the preceding sentence shall be left or deposited in any area of the subdivision at the time of expiration of any subdivision improvement agreement or dedication of public improvements, whichever is sooner. 
8.  Waterbodies and watercourses. If a tract being subdivided contains a water body, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of the water body among the fees of adjacent lots. The mayor and council may approve an alternative plan whereby the ownership of and responsibility for safe maintenance of the water body is so placed that it will not become a local government responsibility. No more than 25 percent of the minimum area of a lot required under the zoning ordinance may be satisfied by land that is under water. Where a watercourse separates the buildable area of a lot from the street by which it has access, provisions shall be made for installation of a culvert or other structure of design approved by the city engineer/consultant. 
9.  Subdivision improvement agreement and security to include lot improvement. The applicant shall enter into a separate subdivision improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit or cash escrow to guarantee completion of all lot improvement requirements including but not limited to, soil preservation, final grading, lot drainage, lawn, grass seeding, removal of debris and waste, fencing, and all other lot improvements required by the mayor and council. Whether or not a certificate of occupancy has been issued, the city may enforce the provision of the subdivision improvement agreement where the provisions of this section or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation have not been met. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.3. - Roads. 
1.  General requirements. 
a.  Frontage on improved roads. No subdivision shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided shall have frontage on and access from an existing street on the official map, unless such street is: 
i.  An existing state, county, or city highway; or 
ii.  A street shown upon a plat approved by the mayor and council and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court. Such street or highway must be suitably improved as required by the highway rules, regulations, specifications, or orders, or be secured by a performance bond required under this ordinance, with the width and right-of-way required by ordinance or the official map plan. 
Where the area to be subdivided is to utilize existing road frontage, the road shall be suitably improved as provided above. 
b.  Grading and improvement plan. Roads shall be graded and improved and conform to the local government construction standards and specifications and shall be approved as to design and specifications by the city engineer/consultant, in accordance with the construction plans required to be submitted prior to final plat approval. 
c.  Classifications. All roads shall be classified as arterial, collector, subcollector, or access. In classifying roads, the city shall consider projected traffic demands after 20 years of development. 
d.  Topography and arrangement. 
i.  Roads shall be related appropriately to the topography. Local roads shall be curved wherever possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All streets shall be arranged so as to obtain as many building sites as possible at, or above, the grades to the streets. Grades of streets shall conform as closely as possible to the original topography. A combination of steep grades and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are contained in the design standards of this ordinance. 
ii.  All streets shall be properly integrated with the existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and dedicated rights-of-way as established on the official map and/or comprehensive plan. 
iii.  All thoroughfares shall be properly related to special traffic generators such as industries, business districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to population densities; and to the pattern of existing and proposed land uses. 
iv.  Minor or local streets shall be laid out to conform as much as possible to the topography to discourage use by through-traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to require the minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property. 
v.  The rigid rectangular gridiron street pattern need not necessarily be adhered to, and the use of curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac or U-shaped streets shall be encouraged where such use will result in a more desirable layout. 
vi.  Proposed streets shall be extended to the boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless prevented by topography or other physical conditions, or unless in the opinion of the mayor and council such extension is not necessary or desirable for the coordination of the layout of the subdivision with the existing layout or the most advantageous future development of adjacent tracks. 
vii.  In business and industrial developments, the streets and their access ways shall be planned in connection with the grouping of buildings, location of rail facilities, and the provision of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of movement between the various types of traffic, including pedestrian. 
e.  Blocks. 
i.  Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks adjacent to major streets, railroads, or waterways. 
ii.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of development contemplated, but block lengths in residential areas shall not exceed 2,200 feet or 12 times the minimum lot width required in the zoning district, nor be less than 400 feet in length. Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials and collector streets shall be not less than 1,000 feet in length. 
iii.  In long blocks the mayor and council may require the reservation of an easement through the block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or pedestrian traffic. 
iv.  Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, may be required by the mayor and council through the center of blocks more than 800 feet long where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or other community facilities. Blocks designed for industrial uses shall be of such length and width as may be determined suitable by the mayor and council for prospective use. 
f.  Access to primary arterials. Where a subdivision borders on or contains an existing or proposed primary arterial, the mayor and council may require that access to such streets be limited by one of the following means: 
i.  The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street; no access shall be provided from the primary arterial, and screening shall be provided in a strip of land along the rear property line of such lots. 
ii.  A series of culs-de-sac, U-shaped streets, or short loops entered from and designed generally at right angles to such a parallel streets, with the rear lines of their terminal lots backing onto the primary arterial. 
iii.  A marginal access or service road (separated from the primary arterial by a planning or grass strip and having access at suitable points). 
g.  Road names. The sketch plat as submitted shall indicate any names for proposed streets. The city clerk may consult the local postmaster prior to the mayor and council determination. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and spelling from other road names in the city so as not to cause confusion. A road, which is, or is planned as a continuation of an existing road, shall bear the same name. 
h.  Road regulatory signs. The applicant shall deposit with the city at the time of final subdivision approval the sum of $50.00 for each road sign required by the city manager at all road intersections. The city shall install all road signs before issuance of certificates of occupancy for any residence on the streets approved. Street name signs are to be placed at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which to be approved by the city manager. 
i.  Reserve strips. The creation of reserve strips shall not be permitted adjacent to a proposed street in such a manner as to deny access from adjacent property to the street. 
j.  Construction of roads and dead-end roads. 
i.  Construction of roads. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties when the continuation is necessary for convenient movement of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient provision of utilities, and where the continuation is in accordance with the city's traffic plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a dead-end street, the right-of-way shall be extended to the property line. A temporary T-or L-shaped turnabout shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets, with the notation on the subdivision plat that land outside the normal street right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the street is continued. The mayor and council may limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in accordance with the design standards of this ordinance. 
ii.  Dead-end roads (permanent). Where a road does not extend beyond the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the mayor and council for access to adjoining property, its terminus shall normally not be nearer to such boundary than 50 feet. However, the mayor and council may require the reservation of an appropriate easement to accommodate drainage facilities, pedestrian traffic, or utilities. A cul-de-sac turnaround shall be provided at the end of a permanent dead-end street in accordance with city construction standards and specifications. For greater convenience to traffic and more effective police and fire protection, permanent dead-end streets shall, in general, be limited in length in accordance with the design standards of this ordinance. 
k.  Substandard roads/streets. In the event that a development has access to a substandard street (i.e. is dirt or gravel road), the following improvements shall be required: 
i.  Improvements to primary access roads. If a development has road frontage on a substandard street, the street shall be paved from the end of the existing pavement to the primary access point into the subject development. Said improvements shall meet the specifications required in subsection k.ii. below and be at developer's expense. 
ii.  Specifications. Offsite improvements required under subsection k.i. above shall, at a minimum, result in full section roadway meeting a standard of 20 feet edge of pavement, with drainage swale ditches as needed. Responsibilities shall be as follows. 
a)  The developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment, and materials required for roadway improvements and necessary drainage improvements. 
b)  If the city desires the roadway to be improved to a standard greater than that as specified herein, the city shall provide or pay the cost of the additional materials and labor. 
c)  All rights-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired by the city at the expense of the developer. 
d)  The use of "California" or "rollback curve" shall be forbidden. 
2.  Design standards. 
a.  General. In order to provide for roads of suitable location, width, and improvement to accommodate prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to police, firefighting. sanitation, and road- maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads so as to compose a convenient system and avoid undue hardships to adjoining properties, the following design standards for roads are hereby required and shall be planned for and provided by the subdivider, prior to the approval of the final plat. Road classifications may be indicated in the comprehensive plan; otherwise, they shall be determined by the mayor and council. 
b.  Rights-of-way. 
i.  Minimum street rights-of-way. Minimum street right-of-way width, if curb and gutter is provided, shall be as follows: 
Arterial ..... 100 feet 
Collector ..... 64 feet 
Subcollector ..... 64 feet 
Access: 
Residential ..... 50 feet 
Commercial ..... 50 feet 
Industrial ..... 70 feet 
Lane ..... 60 feet 
Alley ..... 24 feet 
If curb and gutter is not provided, minimum street right-of-way width must be increased to a minimum of 60 feet. 
ii.  Additional right-of-way. Right-of-way widths in excess of the standards, designated in this ordinance shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate cut slopes. Such slopes shall not be in excess of two-to-one. 
c.  Street pavement widths. Street pavement widths shall be as follows: 
Arterial ..... 26 feet 
Collector ..... 26 feet 
Subcollector ..... 24 feet 
Access: 
Residential ..... 20 feet 
Commercial ..... 20 feet 
Industrial ..... 30 feet 
Lane ..... 20 feet 
Alley: 
Residential ..... 18 feet 
Commercial ..... 20 feet 
If pavement width exceeds 20 feet, then right-of-way width must be increased proportionally. Cul-de sac turn around right-of way radius shall be outside of pavement radius plus 15 feet with curb and gutter and 20 feet without curb and gutter. 
d.  Paving requirements. 
i.  Clearing and grubbing right-of-way. This work shall consist of removing and disposing of all vegetation and debris within five feet of the pavement edge to a depth of at least three feet below finished subgrade. All stump holes shall be back filled below finished subgrade. All stump holes shall be back filled with a suitable material, Class I or II soil. 
ii.  Subgrade. This work shall consists of placing, mixing, compacting and shaping the top six inches of soil. This work also includes subgrade stabilization. 
iii.  Compaction. The entire surface shall be plowed, harrowed and mixed to a depth of at least six inches. After the material has been thoroughly mixed, the subgrade shall be compacted at 95 percent standard proctor of maximum density. Sheepfoot rollers are required. Compaction test shall be at 500 feet intervals and at every two feet of fill material. Any areas that do not meet with the specified compaction shall be excavated and replaced with suitable material. Test results shall be submitted to the city manager as conducted. All costs for compaction tests shall be incurred by the developer. 
iv.  Subgrade material. The material shall consist of Class I or II soil. If such material is not available on site, it shall be furnished by the developer. 
v.  Base. All residential streets shall have a six-inch graded aggregate base or a four-inch compacted asphaltic concrete base, if approved by city engineering. 
vi.  Paving. All residential streets shall have one and one-half inch binder and a one inch Plant Mix asphalt Type "E" or "F" top weaving surface applied to a properly prepared base. 
vii.  Curb and gutter. A curb and gutter section is required on all residential streets. 
e.  Shoulder requirements. The street right-of-way shall be graded 12 feet or if sidewalks are installed then one foot behind the outer edge of the sidewalk, measured from the back of curb or edge of pavement on both sides of the street. Utilities and water lines shall not be installed between curve and outside of drainage ditch, to prevent the encroachment of driveways into the street surface, and to provide walk-ways off the paved vehicular surface; provided, however, the mayor and council may waive this requirement in cases where the subdivider can demonstrate that the topography of the land being subdivided is such that compliance with this provision would be impractical. Topsoil, striped and stock piled before paving, shall be spread at a minimum depth of four inches in preparation of the seedbed. The soil shall be thoroughly broken, well pulverized, smoothed and firm before planting. Shoulder shall be seeded with Bermuda applied at a rate of two pounds per 1,000 square feet or fescue applied at a rate of five pounds per 1,000 square feet. Mulch shall be used on all seeded areas. 
f.  Culverts. Pipe size shall be determined by standard engineering practices. All pipes shall be bituminous coated. A flared-end-section shall be attached to all pipe openings. 
g.  Railroads and limited access highways. Railroad rights-of-way and limned access highways where so located as to affect the subdivision of adjoining lands shall be treated as follows: 
i.  In residential districts a buffer strip at least 25 feet in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot required in the district shall be provided adjacent to the railroad right-of-way or limited access highway. This strip shall be part of the platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: "This strip is reserved for screening. The placement of structures on this land is prohibited." 
ii.  In districts zoned for business, commercial, or industrial uses the nearest street extending parallel or approximately parallel to the railroad right-of-way shall wherever practicable, be at a sufficient distance from the railroad right-of-way to ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial sites. 
iii.  When streets parallel to the railroad right-of-way intersect a street which crosses the railroad right-of-way at grade, they shall, to the extent practicable, be at a distance of a least 150 feet from the railroad right-of-way. Such distance shall be determined with due consideration of the minimum distance required for future separation of grades by means of appropriate approach gradient. 
h.  Intersections. 
i.  Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less than 75 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point unless specifically approved by the mayor and council. 
ii.  Proposed new intersections along one side of an existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the intersected street has separated dual drives without median breaks at either intersection. Where streets intersect arterials, their alignments shall be continuous. Intersection of arterials shall be at least 800 feet apart. All other street intersections must be separated from each other by at least 125 feet. 
iii.  Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall be at least 20 feet; and minimum curb radius at an intersection involving a collector street shall be at least 25 feet and 30 feet maximum of alley intersections and abrupt changes in alignment within a block shall have the corners cut off in accordance with standard engineering practice to permit safe vehicular movement. 
iv.  Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever practical. In hilly or rolling areas, at the approach to an intersection, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater than a two percent rate at a distance of 60 feet, measured from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street. 
v.  Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation, inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation (including trees) in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to provide an adequate sight distance. 
vi.  The cross-slopes on all streets, including intersections, shall be three percent or less. 
i.  Linear street grades. Maximum and minimum linear street grades shall be as follows: 
Arterial street-Not more than six percent. 
Collector street-Not more than eight percent. 
Subcollector street, access streets, and alleys-Not more than ten percent. 
No linear street grade shall be less than two percent. 
j.  Horizontal curvature. The radii of center line road curvature shall be as follows: 
Arterial ..... 300 feet 
Collector ..... 200 feet 
Subcollector ..... 200 feet 
Access ..... 100 feet 
Lane ..... 100 feet 
Alley: To be determined by M&C 
k.  Vertical alignment. There shall be horizontal sight distance at all street intersections, when measured from a height of six feet according to the following: 
Arterial ..... 400 feet 
Collector ..... 300 feet 
Subcollector ..... 200 feet 
Access ..... 150 feet 
Lane ..... 200 feet 
Alley ..... 150 feet 
Where two or more streets of different classifications intersect, the sight distance requirement for the highest classification shall be used. 
l.  Culs-de-sac. The length of all culs-de-sac shall not exceed 12 times the minimum required lot width or 1,200 feet, whichever is less. Large culs-de-sac may be approved by the mayor and council if topographic conditions pose development constraints or unusual platting exists. Such approvals must be with the consent of the fire marshal. For a residential subdivision, the minimum radius for the paved area of a circular turnaround is 50 feet. An off-center turnaround is preferred as it creates visual variety and improves turning ease for the driver. For a non-residential subdivision, the minimum radius for the paved area of a circular turnaround is 50 feet. 
m.  Private access drives. Private access drives shall be permitted to serve no more than two land-locked residential lots where, due to special problems created as a result of necessary unusual platting configuration, or as a result of special physical features, the property could not otherwise be developed. No more than one such drive shall be approved per subdivision development and must be approved as part of the sketch plat. Private access drives shall have the same right-of-way as is required for local streets. 
n.  Alleys. Alleys serving residential lots or dwellings may be required for loading at the rear of all lots designated for business and industrial use. Dead-end alleys are prohibited. 
o.  Slope maintenance easement. A slope maintenance easement shall be required whenever, due to topography, additional width is necessary to provide adequate earth slopes. 
p.  Primary highway system. Whenever a proposed subdivision abuts an arterial road or major collector, an access road or lane with curbing extending the full length of the subdivision along such highway and providing limited access thereto may be required at a distance suitable for the use of the land between such access road or lane highway. 
q.  Visibility. Where any street intersection will involve earth banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility, the developer shall cut such ground or vegetation in connection with the grading of the public right-of-way to the extent deemed necessary to comply with the sight distance required of these regulations. 
r.  Driveways. Driveways shall have a slope of not more than a positive or negative 12 percent for a distance of ten feet measured along the driveway center line from the right-of-way line, and must be a minimum of six inches above the elevation of the gutter line. 
s.  Sidewalks. The inclusion of sidewalks within major subdivisions is required. Sidewalks shall be on both sides of the road and within the dedicated non-paved right-of-way of all roads within the subdivision. Concrete curbs are required for all roads where sidewalks are to be installed. The minimum paved width of sidewalks shall be four feet and a median strip of grasses or landscaped areas at least two feet wide shall separate all sidewalks from adjacent curbs unless the mayor and council make an exception. 
3.  Slopes. 
a.  General requirements. Development of subdivisions is to be accomplished with minimal earth moving and disruption to the natural topography of the site. It is the intent of this ordinance that existing or man-made slopes be modified or designed in such a way as to minimize potential for erosion and to minimize ease of maintenance. Subdivision development shall conform to provisions of the city's erosion and sediment control ordinance and Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
b.  Design standards. 
i.  No existing or proposed cut or fill slope shall exceed three horizontal units to one vertical unit within 14 feet of the edge of pavement of back of curb. If the distance is greater than 14 feet, the slope may be greater than three-to-one (3:1) up to a maximum to one vertical unit, provided that all cut and fill shall be within the prescribed right-of-way of the road or slope easements. All grading as provided within this section shall be completed and approved by the city engineer/consultant prior to the installation of any utilities. 
ii.  All fill slopes created for the purpose of street construction shall have a compaction of not less than 95 percent as determined by established engineering practices. 
iii.  Slopes flatter than those set forth in the foregoing paragraphs may be required when, in the opinion of the city engineer/consultant, the general nature of the soil involved warrants a flatter slope. To control surface drainage on existing and proposed slopes, berm ditches may be required at the top and the intersection of the slope and ground line. 
iv.  All slopes created or existing within the subdivision or as a result of the subdivision development shall be planted or otherwise protected from erosion and failure. Such planting and other protection from erosion and failure shall be completed and shall be undertaken immediately upon creation of any slope steeper than two horizontal feet to one vertical foot and completed without delay in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city engineer/consultant. In addition, the subdivider may be required to provide a fence, hedge, guardrail or other protective device, specified by the city engineer/consultant along ridges in excess of 20 vertical feet in height and with slopes in excess of 1.5:1 (horizontal:vertical) to prevent dangerous falls for children and other residents of the subdivision. At the option of the city engineer/consultant, the developer shall provide certified test results of compaction and any material provided at the location and frequency determined necessary by the city engineer/consultant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.4. - Drainage and storm sewers. 
1.  Drainage. 
a.  General requirements. The storm water drainage system and easements shall be separate and independent of any sanitary sewer system and easement. The mayor and council shall not recommend for approval any plat of a subdivision which does not make adequate provision for storm or flood water runoff channels or basins. Storm water runoff and storm sewer or channel design shall be designed by a method as approved by the city engineer/consultant, and a copy of design computations shall be submitted along with the construction plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried for a distance of more than 600 feet in the gutter. When calculations indicate that curb capacities are exceeded at a point, no further allowance shall be made for flow at that point. Natural drainage channels existing within a subdivision shall be improved by the subdivider to specifications approved by the city engineer/consultant (if erosion, flooding, or hazard will be created by the continued existence thereof, as determined by the city engineer/consultant). 
b.  Nature of storm water facilities. 
i.  Location. The applicant may be required by the city engineer/consultant to carry away by pipe or open ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either previously to, or as a result of the subdivision. Such drainage facilities shall be located in the road right-of-way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer/consultant. 
ii.  Accessibility to public storm sewers. When a public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are within a reasonable distance, adequate provisions shall be made for the disposal of storm water, subject to the specifications of the city engineer/consultant. If a connection to a public storm sewer will be provided eventually, as determined by the city engineer/consultant, the developer shall make arrangements for further storm water disposal by a public utility system at the time the final plat receives final approval. 
iii.  Accommodation of upstream drainage areas. A culvert or other drainage facility shall in each case be large enough to accommodate potential runoff from its entire upstream drainage area whether inside or outside the subdivision. The city engineer/consultant shall approve the necessary size of the facility which has been designed by a registered professional engineer, based on 110 percent of the current storm runoff for the 100-year storm for culverts under streets, and the 25-year storm for all other culverts. Minimum pipe size shall be 18 inches. 
iv.  Effect of downstream drainage areas. The developer shall study and the city engineer/consultant shall review and approve the effect of each subdivision on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Drainage studies, together with such other studies as shall be appropriate shall serve as a guide to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing downstream drainage facility, the mayor and council shall withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for other improvement of said condition. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage is provided to an adequate watercourse or facility. 
v.  Dedication of drainage easements. 
(a)  General requirements. Where a subdivision is transversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel, or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of such width and construction or both as will be adequate for the purpose. Whenever possible, it is desirable that drainage be maintained by appropriate means of adequate width for maximum potential volume or flow. 
(b)  Drainage easement. Where topography or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of drainage facilities within road right-of-way, perpetual unobstructed easements at least 20 feet in width for such drainage facilities shall be provided across to the road. Easement shall be indicated on the plat. Drainage easements shall be carried from the road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage facilities. Easements less than 20 feet may be approved by the city engineer/consultant. When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside this subdivision and outside a natural drain, appropriate drainage rights must be secured and indicated on the plat. The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee sample or by drainage easement, land on both sides of existing watercourses, for a distance to be determined by the city engineer/consultant. Low-lying land along watercourses suspect to flooding or overflowing during storm periods, whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall be preserved and retained in their natural state as drainage ways. Final plats for all subdivisions shall show (or include by note) a ten-foot wide drainage easement along every property line whether the developer intends to channel water in these easements or not. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.5. - Water facilities. 
1.  General requirements. 
a.  Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant to extend or create a water-supply district for the purpose of providing domestic water use and fire protection. 
b.  Where a public water main is accessible, the subdivider shall install adequate water facilities (including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications of the state and city authorities. 
c.  All water mains shall be at least eight inches in diameter for fire protection. Water main extensions shall be approved by the city, city engineer/consultant and the Environmental Protection Division (EPD), when appropriate. 
d.  To facilitate the above, the location of all fire hydrants, all water supply improvements, and the boundary lines of proposed districts, indicating all improvements proposed to be served, shall be shown on the preliminary plat and the cost of installing same shall be included in the improvement guarantee to be furnished by the developer. 
e.  A copy of the as-built water plans shall be submitted to the city and the city engineer/consultant before a certificate of occupancy is issued. 
2.  Individual wells and central water systems. At the discretion of the city engineer/consultant, if a public water system is not available, individual wells may be used or a central water system provided in such a manner that an adequate supply of potable water will be available to every lot in the subdivision. Water samples shall be submitted to the health department for its approval and individual wells and central water systems shall be approved by the appropriate health authorities and EPD. Orders of approval shall be submitted to the city engineer/consultant. 
3.  Fire hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be required for all subdivisions except those served by individual wells or central water systems. Fire hydrants shall be located no more than 800 feet apart and within 500 feet of any structure and shall be approved by the fire chief. To eliminate future street openings, all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together with fire hydrants themselves and all other water supply improvements shall be installed before any final paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat. All fire hydrants shall be set plumb with outlets 18 inches above finished grade or 12 inches above a finished concrete surface. All fire hydrants shall have at least two two and one-half-inch discharge outlets and one four and one-half-inch discharge outlet. All threads shall comply with local and state firefighting equipment standards. All four and one-half-inch discharges shall face the street. All fire hydrants shall be equipped with isolation valves from main to provide for service. All hydrants shall be painted silver when installed. 
4.  Individual disposal system requirements. If public sewer facilities are not available and individual disposal systems are proposed, minimum lot areas shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and percolation test and test holes shall be made as directed by the county sanitarian and the results submitted to the health department. The individual disposal system, including the size of the septic tanks and size of the tile fields or other secondary treatment device, shall also be approved by the county sanitarian. All plans shall be designed in accordance with the rules, ordinances, and standards of the health department and other appropriate agencies. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.6. - Utilities. 
1.  Location. All utility facilities, including but not limited to gas, electric power, telephone, CATV cables, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision. Whenever existing utility facilities are located above ground, except when existing on public roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and placed underground. All utility facilities existing and proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown on the preliminary plat. Underground service connections to the street property line of each platted lot shall be installed at the subdivider's expense. At the discretion of the mayor and council, the requirement for service connections to each lot may be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained in single ownership and intended to be developed for the same primary use (one dwelling). 
    The facilities for underground utilities or conduits for their construction shall be in place prior to final surfacing of streets. All facilities for utilities shall, where possible, be placed in easements provided for that purpose in the subdivision or located as approved by the city engineer/consultant. No subdivision street shall be cut for underground utilities. 
2.  Easements. Utility easements for electric and telephone service lines, sewerage lines, water lines, or other such utilities located along rear lot lines or side lot lines or passing through a lot shall be at least ten feet wide, five feet on each lot, and more if determined by the city engineer/consultant where topographical or other conditions are such as to make impractical the inclusion of utilities within the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed easements at least ten feet in width shall be provided alongside lot lines with satisfactory access to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be indicated on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.7. - Preservation of natural features and amenities. 
    Significant trees with a diameter of six inches or over and located in buffer or setback areas shall be shown on development and/or building site plans. It shall be the intent of this section to retain as many trees as possible for the visual attractiveness, natural preservation and energy conservation benefit gained by doing so. Each lot shall have two ornamental trees in the front yard and two in the back yard and said trees being a minimum of six feet in height. This provision shall not apply to individual owner-occupied parcels of land. 
    Existing features that would add value to residential development or to the local government as a whole, such as trees, as herein defined, watercourses and beaches, historic spots, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land affected until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. All trees on the plat required to be retained shall be preserved, and all trees where required shall be welled and protected against change of grade. The sketch plat shall show the number and location of existing trees as required by this ordinance and shall further indicate all those marked for retention. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 4.8. - Nonresidential subdivisions. 
1.  General. If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision with respect to the land shall make provision as the mayor and council may require. A nonresidential subdivision shall also be subject to all the requirements of site plan approval set forth in the zoning ordinance. Site plan approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the mayor and council. A nonresidential subdivision shall be subject to all the requirements of this ordinance, as well as such additional standards required by the mayor and council, and shall conform to the proposed land use and standards established in the comprehensive plan, official map, and zoning ordinance. 
2.  Standards. In addition to the principles and standards in this ordinance, which are appropriate to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the mayor and council that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and standards shall be observed: 
a.  Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in area and dimensions to the types of industrial development anticipated. 
b.  Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon. 
c.  Special requirements may be imposed by the local government with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk design and construction. 
d.  Special requirements may be imposed by the city with respect to the installation of public utilities, including water, sewer, and storm water drainage (see "back flow prevention"). 
e.  Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial subdivision, including the provision of extra depth in parcels backing up on existing or potential residential development and provisions for a permanently landscaped buffer strip when necessary. 
f.  Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the boundaries of adjacent existing or potential areas. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE V. - ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 5.1. - Improvements and subdivision improvement agreement. 
1.  Completion of improvements. Before the final subdivision plat is signed by the mayor and council, all applicants shall be required to complete, in accordance with the mayor and council's decision and to the satisfaction of the city's engineer/consultant, all the street, sanitary and other public improvements, including lot improvements on the individual lots of the subdivision, as required in this ordinance, specified in the final subdivision plat and as approved by the mayor and council, and to dedicate those public improvements to the local government, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the dedicated property and public improvements. 
2.  Subdivision improvement agreement and guarantee. 
a.  Agreement. The mayor and council in their sole discretion may waive the requirement that the applicant complete and dedicate all public improvements prior to approval of the final subdivision plat and, as an alternative, permit the applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement by which the subdivider covenants to complete all required public improvements no later than two years following the date on which the mayor signs the final subdivision plat. The applicant shall covenant to maintain each required public improvement for a period of one year following the acceptance by the governing body of the dedication of that completed public improvement and also shall warrant that all required public improvements will be free from defect for a period of two years following the acceptance by the governing body of the dedication of the last completed public improvement. The subdivision improvement agreement shall contain such other terms and conditions agreed to by the applicant and the mayor and council. 
b.  Covenants to run. The subdivision improvement agreement shall provide that the covenants contained in the agreement shall run with the land and bind all successors, heirs, and assignees of the subdivider. The subdivision improvement agreement will be adopted by the mayor and council, and when necessary, the governing body, pursuant to applicable state and local laws, rules, regulations and ordinances. 
c.  Security. Whenever the mayor and council permit an applicant to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement, it shall require the applicant to provide a letter of credit or cash escrow as security for the promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement. Either security shall be in an amount equal to 120 percent of the estimated cost of completion of the required public improvements, including lot improvements. The issuer of the letter of credit or the escrow agent, as applicable, shall be acceptable to the mayor and council. 
i.  Letter of credit. If the applicant posts a letter of credit as security for the promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the credit shall (1) be irrevocable; (2) be for a term sufficient to cover the completion, maintenance and warranty periods. 
ii.  Cash escrow. If the applicant posts a cash escrow as security for its promises contained in the subdivision improvement agreement, the escrow instructions shall provide: (1) that the subdivider will have no right to return of any of the funds except as provided in subsection 5.2(2)(b) of this ordinance, and (2) that the escrow agent shall have a legal duty to deliver the funds to the city whenever the city presents an affidavit to the agent attesting to the city's right to receive funds whether or not the subdivider protests that right. 
If and when the city accepts the offer of dedication for the last completed required public improvement, the city shall execute a waiver of its right to receive all but 25 percent of the funds represented by the letter of credit or cash escrow if the subdivider is not in breach of the subdivision improvement agreement. The residual funds shall be security for the subdivider's covenant to maintain the required public improvements and its warranty that the improvements are free from defect. 
3.  Costs of improvements. All required improvements shall be made by the developer, at its expense, without reimbursement by the local government 
4.  Failure to complete improvement. Where a subdivision improvement agreement has been executed and security has been posted and required public improvements have not been installed within the terms of the agreement, the local government may then: (1) declare the agreement to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed regardless of the extent of the building development at the time the agreement is declared to be in default; (2) suspend final subdivision plat approval until the improvements are completed and record a document to that effect for the purpose of public notice; (3) obtain funds under the security and complete improvements itself or through a third party; (4) assign its right to receive funds under the security to any third party, including a subsequent owner of the subdivision for which improvements were not constructed, in whole or in part, in exchange for that subsequent owners promise to complete improvements in the subdivision; (5) exercise any other rights available under the law. 
5.  Acceptance of dedication offers. Acceptance of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas, easements, and parks shall be by ordinance of the governing body. The approval of a subdivision plat by the mayor and council, whether sketch, preliminary or final, shall not be deemed to constitute or imply the acceptance by the city of any street, easement, or park shown on the plat. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 5.2. - Inspection of improvements. 
1.  General procedure and fees. The mayor and council shall provide for inspection of required improvements during construction. The applicant shall pay to the city an inspection fee based on the estimated cost of inspection, and where the improvements are completed prior to final plat approval, the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the mayor unless the inspection fee has been paid at the time of application and all requirements have been fully met by the applicant These fees shall be due and payable upon demand of the city and no building permits or certificates of occupancy shall be issued with all fees are paid. If the building inspector finds upon inspection that any one or more of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the city's construction standards and specifications, the applicant shall be responsible for properly completing the improvements. 
2.  Release or reduction of security. 
a.  Certificate of satisfactory completion. The governing body will not accept dedication of required improvements, nor release nor reduce the amount of any security posted by the subdivider until the city engineer/consultant has submitted a certificate stating that all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed and until (1) the applicant's engineer or surveyor has certified to the city engineer/consultant, through submission of a detailed "as built" survey of the subdivision, indicating location, dimension, materials, and other information required by the mayor and council or city engineer/consultant, that the layout of the line and grade of all public improvements is in accordance with construction plans for the subdivision, and (2) a title insurance policy has been furnished to and approved by the city indicating that the improvements have been completed, are ready for dedication to the local government and are free and clear of any and all liens and encumbrances. Upon such approval and recommendation by the city and city engineer/consultant, the mayor and council shall thereafter accept the improvements for dedication in accordance with the established procedure. 
b.  Reduction of escrowed funds and security. If the security posted by the subdivider was a cash escrow, the amount of the escrow shall be reduced upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public improvements. and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall a cash escrow be reduced below 25 percent of the principal amount. Funds held in escrow account shall not be released to the subdivider, in whole or in part, except upon express written instruction of the city. At the end of the maintenance and warranty periods, all escrowed funds, if any, shall be released to the subdivider. If the security provided by the subdivider was a letter of credit, the city shall execute waivers of the city's right to draw funds under the credit upon actual acceptance of the dedication of public improvements and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public improvement for which dedication was accepted bears to the total cost of public improvements for the subdivision. In no event shall waivers be executed that would reduce the security below 25 percent of its original amount. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 5.3. - Escrow deposits for lot improvements. 
1.  Acceptance of escrow funds. Whenever, by reason of the season of the year, any lot improvement required by the subdivision ordinance cannot be performed, the building inspector may issue a certificate of occupancy, provided there is no danger to health, safety, or general welfare upon accepting a cash escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the city engineer/consultant for the cost of the lot improvements. The subdivision improvement agreement and security covering the lot improvements shall remain in full force and effect. 
2.  Procedures on escrow fund. All required improvements for which escrow monies have been accepted by the city clerk at the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall be installed by the subdivider within a period of nine months from the date of deposit and issuance of the certificate of occupancy. If the improvements have not been properly installed at the end of the time period, the building inspector shall give two weeks written notice to the developer requiring him/her to install the improvements and if they are not then installed properly, the building inspector may request the city manager to proceed to contract out the work for the installation of the necessary improvements in a sum not to exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. At the time of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for which escrow monies are being deposited with the city clerk, the developer shall obtain and file with the building inspector prior to obtaining the certificate of occupancy a notarized statement from the purchaser or purchasers of the premises authorizing the city manager to install the improvements at the end of the nine-month period if the improvements have not been duly installed by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 5.4. - Maintenance of improvements. 
    The developer shall be required to maintain all required public improvements on the individual subdivided lots until acceptance of the improvements by the mayor and council. If there are any certificates of occupancy on a street not dedicated to the city, the city may effect emergency repairs and charge those costs to the developer. Following the acceptance of the dedication of any public improvement by the city, the mayor and council may, in its sole discretion require the subdivider to maintain the improvement for a period of one year form the date of acceptance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 5.5. - Deferral of waiver of required improvements. 
1.  The mayor and council may defer or waive at the time of final approval, subject to appropriate condition, the prevision of any or all public improvements as, in its judgment, not requisite in the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare, or which are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or in existence of connecting facilities. Any determination to defer or waive the provision of any public improvement must be made on the record and the reasons for the deferral or" waiver also shall be expressly made on the record. 
2.  Whenever it is deemed necessary by the mayor and council to defer the construction of any improvement required under this ordinance because of incompatible grades, future planning, inadequate or nonexistent connecting facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall pay his share of the costs of the future improvements to the local government prior to signing of the final subdivision plat by the mayor, or the developer may execute a separate subdivision improvement agreement secured by a letter of credit guaranteeing completion of the deferred improvements upon demand of the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 5.6. - Issuance of building permits and certificates of occupancy. 
1.  When a subdivision improvement agreement and security have been required for a subdivision, no certificate of occupancy for any building in the subdivision shall be issued prior to the completion of the required public improvements and the acceptance of the dedication of those improvements by the city, as required in the mayor and council's approval of the final subdivision plat. 
2.  The extent of street improvements shall be adequate for vehicular access by the prospective occupant(s) and by police and fire equipment prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. The developer shall, at the time of the offer of dedication, submit monies in escrow to the city in a sum determined by the city engineer/consultant of the necessary final improvement of the street. 
3.  No building permit shall be issued for the final ten percent of lots in a subdivision, or if ten percent is less than two, for the final two lots of a subdivision, until all public improvements required by the mayor and council for the subdivision have been fully completed and the local government has accepted the developer's offers to dedicate the improvements. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE VI. - CONSTRUCTION SCHEDULE 

Sec. 6.1. - Prior approval. 
    No construction activity of any kind including finished grading, installation of improvement, or building shall begin on any land subject to this ordinance without prior approval of the preliminary plat and construction plans. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 6.2. - Grading. 
    Grading operations limited to clearing and grubbing may commence once approval of the preliminary plat is granted. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 6.3. - Utilities. 
    Utility installation shall not occur until the city engineer/consultant has received the certification that the streets were graded as designed by the design engineer and has approved the rough grade of the street and shoulder preparation. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 6.4. - Inspections. 
    Periodic inspection during the installation of the required improvements in a subdivision shall be made by the city engineer/consultant to insure conformity with the approved plans and specifications. The subdivider shall notify the city engineer/consultant when each phase of the installation is completed and ready for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 6.5. - Sale and transfer. 
    No lot or parcel of land shall be sold or transferred or a building permit issued until the final plat, of which said lot or parcel is a part, shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 6.6. - Building permits. 
    The building inspector shall not issue any permit for the construction of any building or structure to be located in any subdivision, a plat whereof is required to be recorded pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, until such plat shall have been approved and recorded as provided for in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 6.7. - Occupancy. 
    Within each phase of development, no building may be occupied for dwelling or other purposes, nor shall an occupancy permit be issued for any building until required utility installations, including the water supply, sanitary sewer systems, and storm water detention facilities have been completed and approved by the city engineer/consultant. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
ARTICLE VII. - LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS AND ADOPTION 

Sec. 7.1. - Appeals of administrative decisions. 
    Appeals to the city council may be taken by any person aggrieved by any official of the city affected by any decision of the city manager when it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the city manager in the enforcement of this ordinance. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision or interpretation has been either made in writing or by statements made at a public hearing of which a record will be provided in the minutes of the hearing by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The city clerk shall forthwith transmit to the city council all papers constituting the record on which the action appealed was taken. 
    An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the city manager certifies to the city council that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by the city council or by restraining order granted by the court of record on application, and notice to the city manager for good cause. 
    Upon making a decision upon the consideration of an appeal, the city council may, in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance, reverse decisions or determinations from which the appeal is taken and, to revoke or direct the issuance or revocation of a building or other permit. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.2. - Appeals of actions of the mayor and council. 
    Any person or persons severally or jointly aggrieved by any decision of the mayor and council may present an appeal to the superior court. Such an appeal to the superior court shall be the same as the appeal to the superior court except from any decision made by the probate court and as specified in the Official Code of Georgia except the appeal shall be filed within 30 days from the date of the decision of the mayor and council. Upon failure to file within 30 days, the decision of the mayor and council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.3. - Conflict with other laws. 
    Whether the regulations of this ordinance require lot width or depth or size of yards, or impose other more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statute or covenants require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the provisions of such statute or covenants shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.4. - Severability. 
    In the event any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the article, section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. The mayor and council hereby declare that it would have adopted the remaining parts of this ordinance it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.5. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.6. - No prejudice to pending applications. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, this ordinance shall not in any way prejudice or affect any pending application for rezoning before the planning commission or the mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.7. - No legality to nonconforming uses. 
    Nothing contained in this ordinance shall be considered to approve or give legality to any non-conforming use which has been discontinued more than one year within the city. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.8. - Effective date for Social Circle, Georgia. 
    This ordinance shall take effect, and shall be in force from and after the date of its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
Sec. 7.9. - Effective date. 
    This ordinance shall take effect and be in force from and after its adoption, the public welfare demanding it. 
(Ord. No. 2017-13, Exh. A, 6-20-2017) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - PRIOR CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the Code prior to the 2018 Republication as updated through November 2016, which are included herein. Sections of the prior Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Prior Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-001 1-1, 1-2 1-002 1-6 1-003 1-3, 1-4 1-004 1-5 2-001, 2-002 2-1, 2-2 2-003-2-008 2-26-2-31 2-009-2-011 2-51-2-53 2-012-2-018 2-76-2-82 2-019, 2-020 2-101, 2-102 3-001 3-1 3-002(a)-(f) 3-76-3-81 3-002(g) 3-87 3-002(h)-(l) 3-82-3-86 3-003-3-010 3-26-3-33 3-011-3-013 3-111-3-113 3-014, 3-015 3-34, 3-35 3-016 3-114 3-017-3-020 3-36-3-39 3-021 3-115 4-001-4-014 4-26-4-39 5-001-5-017 5-1-5-17 6-001(1.)-(3.) 6-26-6-28 6-002 6-29 6-003 6-1 6-004(1.)-(4.) 6-51-6-54 6-005-6-007 6-2-6-4 6-008(1.)-(24.) 6-76-6-99 7-001, 7-002 7-1, 7-2 7-003(1.) 7-26 7-003(3.)-(10.) 7-27-7-34 7-003A 7-3 7-003B(1.)-(16.) 7-51-7-66 7-003C, Art. 1(A.)-(D.) 7-91-7-94 7-003C, Art. 2(A.)-(H.) 7-111-7-118 7-003C, Art. 3(A.)-(C.) 7-136-7-138 7-003C, Art. 4(A.)-(G.) 7-156-7-162 7-003C, Art. 5 7-181 7-003C, Art. 6 7-95 7-004-7-006 7-4-7-6 7-007(1.)-(16.) 7-201-7-216 7-008, 7-009 7-7, 7-8 7-010(1.)-(7.) 7-231-7-237 7-011(1.)-(16.) 7-261-7-276 7-012(1.)-(11.) 7-301-7-311 7-013-7-015 7-9-7-11 8-001-8-004 8-1-8-4 9-001(1.)-(4.) 9-26-9-29 9-002-1-9-002-21 9-51-9-71 9-002-51-9-002-61 9-101-9-111 9-004-9-006 9-1-9-3 9-007(1.)-(7.) 9-126-9-132 9-008-9-010 9-4-9-6 10-001(1.)-(9.) 10-26-10-34 10-002(1.)-(41.) 10-51-10-91 10-003(1.)-(17.) 10-176-10-192 10-004(1.)-(43.) 10-111-10-153 11-001(1.1)-(1.8) 11-26-11-33 11-001(2.) 11-34 11-002(1.)-(10.) 11-51-11-60 11-003-11-005 11-1-11-3 12-001 12-1 12-002(1.)-(8.) 12-26-12-33 12-003-12-005 12-2-12-4 12-006(a.)-(d.) 12-51-12-54 12-007 12-5 14-001-14-014 14-1-14-14 15-001(1.1) 15-1 15-001(2.1)-(2.7) 15-2-15-8 15-001(3.1) 15-9 15-002 15-10 15-003(1.)-(30.) 15-26-15-55 ch. 17 17-1  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
    This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ord. No. Date Section Section 
this Code Amd. of 12-20-2016 1 App. A, Art. III Amd. of  1-17-2017 1       Rpld App. A, § 706B 6.A.(3), (6) 2017-1  1-17-2017 1(Exh. A) 8-4 2017-2  1-17-2017       Added 3-2 2017-3  2-21-2017 1-5       Added 3-116 2017-4  4-18-2017 1       Added 12-6 2017-6  4-18-2017 1       Added 7-12 2017-7  4-18-2017 1       Rpld 6-54 2       Added 6-5 2017-8  4-18-2017 1       Added Ch. 6, Art. V, §§ 6-126-6-132 2017-9  5-16-2017 2 9-51 3 App. A, Art. III 4       Added 9-72 2017-10  5-16-2017 1       Added Ch. 11, Art. IV, §§ 11-76-11-84 2017-11  6-20-2017 Exh. A App. A, Arts. I-XVII 2017-12  6-20-2017       Added Adopting Ord. 2017 2017-13  6-20-2017 Exh. A       Added App. B, Arts. I-VII 2017-14  7-18-2017 1       Rpld Ch. 3, Art. III, §§ 3-76-3-87 2017-15  8-15-2017 1 3-112(8) 2 3-33 2017-16  9-19-2017 1 App. A, Art. III 2-4       Added App. A, § 900 B.13.-15. 2017-17  9-19-2017 1 App. A, § 910 E.1. 2       Added App. A, § 910 D.17. 2017-18  9-19-2017 1, 2 App. A, § 911 B.31. 2017-19  9-19-2017 3 App. A, § 706A 1., 2.c.(1) App. A, § 706B 4.A.(3) 4 App. A, § 706 A.4. 2017-20  9-19-2017 1       Added App. A, § 1315 2017-21  9-19-2017 1-8       Added Ch. 3, Art. V, §§ 3-131-3-138 2017-22 11-21-2017 1 App. A, § 403 2017-23 11-21-2017 1 App. A, Art. III 2       Added App. A, § 900 C.14. 2018-1  2-20-2018 1       Added 12-7 2018-2  2-20-2018 1, 2 App. A, § 1107 2018-3  8-21-2018 1 App. A, § 900 C.14.d. 2018-4 10-16-2018 1 App. A, Art. III 2       Added App. A, § 907 C.7. 3 App. A, § 2.2 2018-5 10-16-2018       Added Adopting Ord. 2018 2018-6 10-16-2018 1 App. A, Art. III 3       Added App. A, § 900 C.15. 2018-7 12-18-2018 2 9-51  
